SOURCE: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/1911_Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica/Jerome,_St



1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Jerome, St - Wikisource, the free online library

Jump to content

Main menu

Main menu
	move to sidebar
	hide

		Navigation

Main Page
Community portal
Central discussion
Recent changes
Subject index
Authors
Random work
Random author
Random transcription
Help
Special pages

		Display Options

Search

				Search

Appearance

Donate

Create account

Log in

Personal tools

Donate

Create account

Log in

1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Jerome, St

Add languages

Add links

Page

Source

Discussion

	English

Read

Edit

View history

Tools

Tools
	move to sidebar
	hide

		Actions

Read

Edit

View history

		General

What links here
Related changes
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL

		Print/export

Printable version
Download EPUB
Download MOBI
Download PDF
Other formats

		In other projects

Wikidata item

Appearance
	move to sidebar
	hide

Download

From Wikisource

< 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica

 |  |  |  |  |  |

←
Jeroboam
1911 Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 15
Jerome, St

Jerome, Jerome Klapka
→

sister projects: Wikipedia article, quotes, Wikidata item

See also Jerome on Wikipedia; and our 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica disclaimer.

21883851911 Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 15 — Jerome, St

​JEROME, ST (Hieronymus, in full Eusebius Sophronius Hieronymus)
(c. 340–420), was born at Strido (modern
Strigau ?), a town on the border of Dalmatia fronting Pannonia,
destroyed by the Goths in A.D. 377. What is known of Jerome
has mostly been recovered from his own writings. He appears to
have been born about 340; his parents were Christians, orthodox
though living among people mostly Arians and wealthy.
He was at first educated at home, Bonosus, a life-long friend,
sharing his youthful studies, and was afterwards sent to Rome.
Donatus taught him grammar and explained the Latin poets.
Victorinus taught him rhetoric. He attended the law-courts,
and listened to the Roman advocates pleading in the Forum.
He went to the schools of philosophy, and heard lectures on
Plato, Diogenes, Clitomachus and Carneades; the conjunction
of names show how philosophy had become a dead tradition.

​His Sundays were spent in the catacombs in discovering graves
of the martyrs and deciphering inscriptions. Pope Liberius
baptized him in 360; three years later the news of the death of
the emperor Julian came to Rome, and Christians felt relieved
from a great dread.

When his student days were over Jerome returned to Strido,
but did not stay there long. His character was formed. He was
a scholar, with a scholar’s tastes and cravings for knowledge,
easily excited, bent on scholarly discoveries. From Strido he
went to Aquileia, where he formed some friendships among
the monks of the large monastery, notably with Rufinus, with
whom he was destined to quarrel bitterly over the question of
Origen’s orthodoxy and worth as a commentator; for Jerome was
a man who always sacrificed a friend to an opinion, and when he
changed sides in a controversy expected his acquaintances to
follow him. From Aquileia he went to Gaul (366–370), visiting
in turn the principal places in that country, from Narbonne
and Toulouse in the south to Treves on the north-east frontier.
He stayed some time at Treves studying and observing, and it
was there that he first began to think seriously upon sacred
things. From Treves he returned to Strido, and from Strido
to Aquileia. He settled down to literary work in Aquileia
(370–373) and composed there his first original tract, De muliere
septies percussa, in the form of a letter to his friend Innocentius.
Some dispute caused him to leave Aquileia suddenly; and with a
few companions, Innocentius, Evagrius, and Heliodorus being
among them, he started for a long tour in the East. The epistle
to Rufinus (3rd in Vallarsi’s enumeration) tells us the route.
They went through Thrace, visiting Athens, Bithynia, Galatia,
Pontus, Cappadocia and Cilicia, to Antioch, Jerome observing
and making notes as they went. He was interested in the
theological disputes and schisms in Galatia, in the two languages
spoken in Cilicia, &c. At Antioch the party remained
some time. Innocentius died of a fever, and Jerome was
dangerously ill. This illness induced a spiritual change, and he
resolved to renounce whatever kept him back from God. His
greatest temptation was the study of the literature of pagan
Rome. In a dream Christ reproached him with caring more
to be a Ciceronian than a Christian. He disliked the uncouth
style of the Scriptures. “O Lord,” he prayed, “thou knowest
that whenever I have and study secular MSS. I deny thee,”
and he made a resolve henceforth to devote his scholarship to
the Holy Scripture. “David was to be henceforth his Simonides,
Pindar and Alcaeus, his Flaccus, Catullus and Severus.”
Fortified by these resolves he betook himself to a hermit life in
the wastes of Chalcis, S.E. from Antioch (373–379). Chalcis
was the Thebaid of Syria. Great numbers of monks, each in
solitary cell, spent lonely lives, scorched by the sun, ill-clad and
scantily fed, pondering on portions of Scripture or copying MSS.
to serve as objects of meditation. Jerome at once set himself
to such scholarly work as the place afforded. He discovered and
copied MSS., and began to study Hebrew. There also he wrote
the life of St Paul of Thebes, probably an imaginary tale embodying
the facts of the monkish life around him. Just then the
Meletian schism, which arose over the relation of the orthodox
to Arian bishops and to those baptized by Arians, distressed
the church at Antioch (see Meletius of Antioch), and Jerome as
usual eagerly joined the fray. Here as elsewhere he had but one
rule to guide him in matters of doctrine and discipline—the
practice of Rome and the West; for it is singular to see how
Jerome, who is daringly original in points of scholarly criticism,
was a ruthless partisan in all other matters; and, having discovered
what was the Western practice, he set tongue and pen
to work with his usual bitterness (Altercatio luciferiani et
orthodoxi).

At Antioch in 379 he was ordained presbyter. From there he
went to Constantinople, where he met with the great Eastern
scholar and theologian Gregory of Nazianzus, and with his aid
tried to perfect himself in Greek. The result of his studies there
was the translation of the Chronicon of Eusebius, with a continuation[1]
of twenty-eight homilies of Origen on Jeremiah and
Ezekiel, and of nine homilies of Origen on the visions of
Isaiah.

In 381 Meletius died, and Pope Damasus interfered in the
dispute at Antioch, hoping to end it. Jerome was called to
Rome in 382 to give help in the matter, and was made secretary
during the investigation. His work brought him into intercourse
with this great pontiff, who soon saw what he could best
do, and how his vast scholarship might be made of use to the
church. Damasus suggested to him to revise the “Old Latin”
translation of the Bible; and to this task he henceforth devoted
his great abilities. At Rome were published the Gospels (with
a dedication to Pope Damasus, an explanatory introduction,
and the canons of Eusebius), the rest of the New Testament
and the version of the Psalms from the Septuagint known as the
Psalterium romanum, which was followed (c. 388) by the Psalterium
gallicanum, based on the Hexaplar Greek text. These
scholarly labours, however, did not take up his whole time, and
it was almost impossible for Jerome to be long anywhere without
getting into a dispute. He was a zealous defender of that
monastic life which was beginning to take such a large place
in the church of the 4th century, and he found enthusiastic
disciples among the Roman ladies. A number of widows and
maidens met together in the house of Marcella to study the
Scriptures with him; he taught them Hebrew, and preached the
virtues of the celibate life. His arguments and exhortations may
be gathered from many of his epistles and from his tract Adversus
Helvidium, in which he defends the perpetual virginity of Mary
against Helvidius, who maintained that she bore children to
Joseph. His influence over these ladies alarmed their relatives
and excited the suspicions of the regular priesthood and of the
populace, but while Pope Damasus lived Jerome remained secure.
Damasus died, however, in 384, and was succeeded by Siricius,
who did not show much friendship for Jerome. He found it
expedient to leave Rome, and set out for the East in 385. His
letters (especially Ep. 45) are full of outcries against his enemies
and of indignant protestations that he had done nothing unbecoming
a Christian, that he had taken no money, nor gifts
great nor small, that he had no delight in silken attire, sparkling
gems or gold ornaments, that no matron moved him unless by
penitence and fasting, &c. His route is given in the third book In
Rufinum; he went by Rhegium and Cyprus, where he was entertained
by Bishop Epiphanius, to Antioch. There he was joined
by two wealthy Roman ladies, Paula, a widow, and Eustochium,
her daughter, one of Jerome’s Hebrew students. They came
accompanied by a band of Roman maidens vowed to live a
celibate life in a nunnery in Palestine. Accompanied by these
ladies Jerome made the tour of Palestine, carefully noting with
a scholar’s keenness the various places mentioned in Holy
Scripture. The results of this journey may be traced in his
translation with emendations of the book of Eusebius on the
situation and names of Hebrew places, written probably three
years afterwards, when he had settled down at Bethlehem.
From Palestine Jerome and his companions went to Egypt,
remaining some time in Alexandria, and they visited the convents
of the Nitrian desert. Jerome’s mind was evidently full
of anxiety about his translation of the Old Testament, for we find
him in his letters recording the conversations he had with learned
men about disputed readings and doubtful renderings; the blind
Didymus of Alexandria, whom he heard interpreting Hosea,
appears to have been most useful. When they returned to
Palestine they all settled at Bethlehem, where Paula built four
monasteries, three for nuns and one for monks. She was at the
head of the nunneries until her death in 404, when Eustochium
succeeded her; Jerome presided over the fourth monastery.
Here he did most of his literary work and, throwing aside his
unfinished plan of a translation from Origen’s Hexaplar text,
translated the Old Testament directly from the Hebrew, with
the aid of Jewish scholars. He mentions a rabbi from Lydda,
a rabbi from Tiberias, and above all rabbi Ben Anina, who
came to him by night secretly for fear of the Jews. Jerome
was not familiar enough with Hebrew to be able to dispense with
such assistance, and he makes the synagogue responsible for the

​accuracy of his version: “Let him who would challenge aught
in this translation,” he says, “ask the Jews.” The result of all
this labour was the Latin translation of the Scriptures which,
in spite of much opposition from the more conservative party in
the church, afterwards became the Vulgate or authorized version;
but the Vulgate as we have it now is not exactly Jerome’s
Vulgate, for it suffered a good deal from changes made under the
influence of the older translations; the text became very corrupt
during the middle ages, and in particular all the Apocrypha,
except Tobit and Judith, which Jerome translated from the
Chaldee, were added from the older versions. (See Bible:
O.T. Versions.)

Notwithstanding the labour involved in translating the
Scriptures, Jerome found time to do a great deal of literary work,
and also to indulge in violent controversy. Earlier in life he
had a great admiration for Origen, and translated many of his
works, and this lasted after he had settled at Bethlehem, for in
389 he translated Origen’s homilies on Luke; but he came to
change his opinion and wrote violently against two admirers of
the great Alexandrian scholar, John, bishop of Jerusalem, and
his own former friend Rufinus.

At Bethlehem also he found time to finish Didymi de spiritu
sancto liber, a translation begun at Rome at the request of Pope
Damasus, to denounce the revival of Gnostic heresies by Jovinianus
and Vigilantius (Adv. Jovinianum lib. II. and Contra
Vigilantium liber), and to repeat his admiration of the hermit
life in his Vita S. Hilarionis eremitae, in his Vita Malchi monachi
captivi, in his translations of the Rule of St Pachomius (the
Benedict of Egypt), and in his S. Pachomii et S. Theodorici
epistolae et verba mystica. He also wrote at Bethlehem De viris
illustribus sive de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis, a church history in
biographies, ending with the life of the author; De nominibus
Hebraicis, compiled from Philo and Origen; and De situ et nominibus
locorum Hebraicorum.[2] At the same place, too, he wrote
Quaestiones Hebraicae on Genesis,[3] and a series of commentaries
on Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, the Twelve Minor Prophets,
Matthew and the Epistles of St Paul. About 394 Jerome came
to know Augustine, for whom he held a high regard. He
engaged in the Pelagian controversy with more than even his
usual bitterness (Dialogi contra pelagianos); and it is said that
the violence of his invective so provoked his opponents that an
armed mob attacked the monastery, and that Jerome was forced
to flee and to remain in concealment for nearly two years. He
returned to Bethlehem in 418, and after a lingering illness died
on the 30th of September 420.

Jerome “is one of the few Fathers to whom the title of Saint
appears to have been given in recognition of services rendered to
the Church rather than for eminent sanctity. He is the great
Christian scholar of his age, rather than the profound theologian
or the wise guide of souls.” His great work was the Vulgate,
but his achievements in other fields would have sufficed to distinguish
him. His commentaries are valuable because of his
knowledge of Greek and Hebrew, his varied interests, and his
comparative freedom from allegory. To him we owe the distinction
between canonical and apocryphal writings; in the
Prologus Galeatus prefixed to his version of Samuel and Kings, he
says that the church reads the Apocrypha “for the edification of
the people, not for confirming the authority of ecclesiastical doctrines.”
He was a pioneer in the fields of patrology and of biblical
archaeology. In controversy he was too fond of mingling
personal abuse with legitimate argument, and this weakness
mars his letters, which were held in high admiration in the early
middle ages, and are valuable for their history of the man and
his times. Luther in his Table Talk condemns them as dealing
only with fasting, meats, virginity, &c. “If he only had insisted
upon the works of faith and performed them! But he teaches
nothing either about faith, or love, or hope, or the works of
faith.”

Editions of the complete works: Erasmus (9 vols., Basel, 1516–1520);
Mar. Victorius, bishop of Rieti (9 vols., Rome, 1565–1572);
F. Calixtus and A. Tribbechovius (12 vols., Frankfort and Leipzig,
1684–1690); J. Martianay (5 vols., incomplete Benedictine ed.,
Paris, 1693–1706); D. Vallarsi (11 vols., Verona, 1734–1742), the
best; Migne, Patrol. Ser. Lat. (xxii.–xxix.). The De viris illust. was
edited by Herding in 1879. A selection is given in translation by
W. H. Fremantle, “Select Library of Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers,”
2nd series, vol. vi. (New York, 1893). Biographies are prefixed to
most of the above editions. See also lives by F. Z. Collombet (Paris
and Lyons, 1844); O. Zöckler (Gotha, 1865); E. L. Cutts (London,
1878); C. Martin (London, 1888); P. Largent (Paris, 1898); F. W.
Farrar, Lives of the Fathers, ii. 150–297 (Edinburgh, 1889).
Additional literature is cited in Hauck-Herzog’s Realencyk. für
prot. Theol. viii. 42.

↑ Cf. Schoene’s critical edition (Berlin, 1866, 1875).

↑
Compare the critical edition of these two works in Lagarde’s
Onomastica sacra (Götting. 1870).

↑
See Lagarde’s edition appended to his Genesis Graece (Leipzig,
1868).

Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=1911_Encyclopædia_Britannica/Jerome,_St&oldid=12469017"

Categories:
EB1911:People:Ancient
1911 Encyclopædia Britannica articles about religion
Hidden categories:
Subpages
Headers applying DefaultSort key
Pages using smallrefs with font-size

 This page was last edited on 8 July 2022, at 12:15.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Privacy policy

About Wikisource

Disclaimers

Legal & safety contacts

Code of Conduct

Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement

Mobile view

Search

						Search

1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Jerome, St

Add languages

Add topic

