SOURCE: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/1911_Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica/Josephus,_Flavius



1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Josephus, Flavius - Wikisource, the free online library

Jump to content

Main menu

Main menu
	move to sidebar
	hide

		Navigation

Main Page
Community portal
Central discussion
Recent changes
Subject index
Authors
Random work
Random author
Random transcription
Help
Special pages

		Display Options

Search

				Search

Appearance

Donate

Create account

Log in

Personal tools

Donate

Create account

Log in

1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Josephus, Flavius

Add languages

Add links

Page

Source

Discussion

	English

Read

Edit

View history

Tools

Tools
	move to sidebar
	hide

		Actions

Read

Edit

View history

		General

What links here
Related changes
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL

		Print/export

Printable version
Download EPUB
Download MOBI
Download PDF
Other formats

		In other projects

Wikidata item

Appearance
	move to sidebar
	hide

Download

From Wikisource

< 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica

 |  |  |  |  |  |

←
Josephine
1911 Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 15
Josephus, Flavius by John Henry Arthur Hart

Joshekan
→

sister projects: Wikipedia article, quotes, Wikidata item

See also Josephus on Wikipedia; and our 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica disclaimer.

21906811911 Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 15 — Josephus, FlaviusJohn Henry Arthur Hart

​JOSEPHUS, FLAVIUS (c. 37–c. 95?), Jewish historian and
military commander, was born in the first year of Caligula
(37-38). His father belonged to one of the noblest priestly
families, and through his mother he claimed descent from the
Asmonaean high priest Jonathan. A precocious student of the
Law, he made trial of the three sects of Judaism—Pharisees,
Sadducees and Essenes—before he reached the age of nineteen.
Then, having spent three years in the desert with the hermit
Banus, who was presumably an Essene, he became a Pharisee.
In 64 he went to Rome to intercede on behalf of some priests,
his friends, whom the procurator Felix had sent to render account
to Caesar for some insignificant offence. Making friends with
Alityrus, a Jewish actor, who was a favourite of Nero, Josephus
obtained an introduction to the empress Poppaea and effected
his purpose by her help. His visit to Rome enabled him to
speak from personal experience of the power of the Empire,
when he expostulated with the revolutionary Jews on his return
to Palestine. But they refused to listen; and he, with all the
Jews who did not fly the country, was dragged into the great
rebellion of 66. In company with two other priests, Josephus
was sent to Galilee under orders (he says) to persuade the ill-affected to lay down their arms and return to the Roman allegiance, which the Jewish aristocracy had not yet renounced.
Having sent his two companions back to Jerusalem, he organized
the forces at his disposal, and made arrangements for the government of his province. His obvious desire to preserve law and order excited the hostility of John of Giscala, who endeavoured vainly to remove him as a traitor to the national ​cause by inciting the Galileans to kill him and by persuading
the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem to recall him.

In the spring of 67 the Jewish troops, whom Josephus had
drilled so sedulously, fled before the Roman forces of Vespasian
and Titus. He sent to Jerusalem for reinforcements, but none
came. With the stragglers who remained, he held a stronghold
against the Romans by dint of his native cunning, and finally,
when the place was taken, persuaded forty men, who shared
his hiding-place, to kill one another in turn rather than commit
suicide. They agreed to cast lots, on the understanding that the
second should kill the first and so on. Josephus providentially
drew the last lot and prevailed upon his destined victim to live.
Their companions were all dead in accordance with the compact;
but Josephus at any rate survived and surrendered. Being led
before Vespasian, he was inspired to prophesy that Vespasian
would become emperor. In consequence of the prophecy his
life was spared, but he was kept close prisoner for two years.
When his prophecy was fulfilled he was liberated, assumed the
name of Flavius, the family name of Vespasian, and accompanied
his patron to Alexandria. There he took another wife,
as the Jewess allotted him by Vespasian after the fall of Caesarea
had forsaken him, and returned to attend Titus and to act as
intermediary between him and the Jews who still held Jerusalem.
His efforts in this capacity failed; but when the city was
stormed (70) Titus granted him whatever boon he might ask.
So he secured the lives of some free men who had been taken
and (by the gift of Titus) certain sacred books. After this he
repaired to Rome and received one of the pensions, which
Vespasian (according to Suetonius) was the first to bestow upon
Latin and Greek writers. He was also made a Roman citizen
and received an estate in Judaea. Thenceforward he devoted
himself to literary work under the patronage of Vespasian, Titus
and Domitian. As he mentions the death of Agrippa II. it is
probable that he lived into the 2nd century; but the date of
Agrippa’s death has been challenged and, if his patron Epaphroditus
may be identified with Nero’s freedman, it is possible that
Josephus may have been involved in his fall and perished under
Domitian in 95.

Works.—1. The Jewish War (Περὶ τοῦ Ἰουδαϊκοῦ πολέμου), the oldest
of Josephus’ extant writings, was written towards the end of Vespasian’s
reign (69–79). The Aramaic original has not been preserved;
but the Greek version was prepared by Josephus himself in conjunction
with competent Greek scholars. Its purpose in all probability
was, in the first instance, to exhibit to the Babylonian Jews the
overwhelming power of Rome and so to deter them from repeating
the futile revolt of the Jews of Palestine. Of its seven books, the
first two survey the history of the Jews from the capture of Jerusalem
by Antiochus Epiphanes to the outbreak of war in 67, and
here Josephus relies upon some such general history as that of
Nicolaus of Damascus. The rest deals with the events of the war
(67–73) which fell more or less within his own knowledge. Vespasian,
Titus and Agrippa II. testified (he tells us) to his accuracy. Representatives
of the Zealots would probably have protested against his
pro-Roman prejudices.

2. The Jewish Antiquities (Ἰουδαϊκὴ Ἀρχαιολογία) covers in twenty
books the history of the Jews from the creation of the world to the
outbreak of the war with Rome. It was finished in the thirteenth
year of Domitian (93). Its purpose was to glorify the Jewish nation
in the eyes of the Roman world. In the part covered by the books
of the Bible Josephus follows them, and that mainly, if not entirely
as they are translated into Greek by the Seventy (the Septuagint
version). Being a Pharisee, he sometimes introduces traditions
of the Elders, which are either inferences from, or embroideries of,
the biblical narrative. Sometimes, also, he gives proof of some
knowledge of Hebrew and supplements his scriptural authorities,
which include 1 Esdras, from general Greek histories. For the later
period he uses the Greek Esther, with its additions, 1 Maccabees,
Polybius, Strabo and Nicolaus of Damascus. But towards the end
he confesses that he has grown weary of his task, and his history
becomes meagre. The work contains accounts of John the Baptist
and Jesus, which may account for the fact that Josephus’ writings
were rescued from oblivion by the Christians. But the description
of Jesus as “a wise man, if indeed one should call him a man,” can
hardly be genuine, and the assertion “this was the Christ” is equally
doubtful, unless it be assumed that the Greek word Christos had become
technical in the sense of false-Christ or false-prophet among
non-Christian Jews.

3. Josephus wrote a narrative of his own Life in order to defend
himself against the accusation brought by his enemy Justus of
Tiberias to the effect that he had really been the cause of the Jewish
rebellion. In his defence Josephus departs from the facts as narrated
in the Jewish War and represents himself as a partisan of Rome
and, therefore, as a traitor to his own people from the beginning.

4. The two books Against Apion are a defence or apology directed
against current misrepresentations of the Jews. Earlier titles are
Concerning the Antiquity of the Jews or Against the Greeks. Apion was
the leader of the Alexandrine embassy which opposed Philo and his
companions when they appeared in behalf of the Alexandrine Jews
before Caligula. The defence which Josephus puts forward has a
permanent value and shows him at his best.

The Greek text of Josephus’ works has been edited with full collection of different readings by B. Niese (Berlin, 1887–1895). The Teubner text by Naber is based on this. The translation into English of W. Whiston has been (superficially) revised by A. R. Shilleto (1889–1890). Schürer (History of the Jewish People) gives a full bibliography.
 (J. H. A. H.)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=1911_Encyclopædia_Britannica/Josephus,_Flavius&oldid=11602188"

Hidden categories:
Subpages
Pages with contributor
Headers applying DefaultSort key

 This page was last edited on 17 August 2021, at 13:55.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Privacy policy

About Wikisource

Disclaimers

Legal & safety contacts

Code of Conduct

Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement

Mobile view

Search

						Search

1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Josephus, Flavius

Add languages

Add topic

