SOURCE: https://www.hadashot-esi.org.il/Report_Detail_Eng.aspx?id=25981
EXCERPTS ONLY (מקור מוגן; רק קטעים סביב: earthquake; 363; skeleton; basilica; collapse)

66 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: The Flowers Mausoleum (5.5 × 5.5 m; previously termed Mausoleum B) was fully excavated in 2020. The excavations revealed the foundations of the four walls of the mausoleum, preserved up to two courses, made of well-cut basalt ashlars placed directly on the nari bedrock. The mausoleum’s floor and its above-ground structure were not preserved, but many of the building stones were found fallen to the sides of the walls. Additional architectural fragments that belonged to the mausoleum were scattered on the slope east of the mausoleum, towards Nahal No‘a. Many of these fragments were recovered with the aid of a mechanical excavator and a winch operated by an ATV. Altogether over 50 architectural fragments that belonged to the Flowers Mausoleum were recovered, including four frieze fragments with metopes decorated with carved basalt flowers, which gave the name to the mausoleum. The excavation inside the foundations of the mausoleum, in soil with large natural basalt stones, produced only a small amount of pottery. The preliminary reading dated the finds mainly to the first century CE. This dating is suggested also by the finely sculpted architectural fragments and the mason’s marks identified on some of them.
67 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
68 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: Sarcophagi and Burial Cave. In 2020, seven sarcophagi were excavated in NSD, either free-standing or placed in cavities cut in the bedrock. One sarcophagus was made of basalt; the others of limestone, probably the local nari. Two of the limestone sarcophagi were decorated, the decorations suggesting a date in the second–third centuries CE. No indicative artifacts were recovered from the sarcophagi. Additional fragments of sarcophagi were found within the debris of the funerary podia: one made of basalt, and at least four made of limestone. It is not possible to determine whether or not these sarcophagi originally stood on the podia.
69 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
70 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: The excavation of the first rock-cut burial cave within NSD was initiated at the end of 2020: the entrance to the cave was cleared, part of the collapsed bedrock ceiling was removed, but no floor has yet been reached.
71 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
72 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: The Northern IDF Building (NIDF)
73 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
74 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: This area has never been investigated by the Hippos Excavation Project, but limited work were carried out in 1949–1951, during the construction of the IDF building. The Department of Antiquities and Museums conducted salvage excavations that exposed the eastern part of a church that stood to the southeast of the modern building (Fig. 3). Three apses were revealed and backfilled almost completely. The area surrounding the church was recognized as a Byzantine neighborhood but was not excavated. The excavations of the church have not been published, except for a brief mention in 1950 (Bulletin 1950).
[...]
78 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: The excavation revealed three bell-shaped cisterns, Byzantine and Umayyad-period floors, and three walls dated to the late Hellenistic or Early Roman period. These features and the small finds indicate that the area was a domestic area in the Byzantine and the Umayyad periods, constructed possibly in the second half of the fourth century CE on top of remains of Hellenistic and Early Roman houses. A few pottery sherds of Neolithic and Chalcolithic date point to activity at the site in those periods.
79 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
80 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: The Forum (FRM)
81 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
82 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: A probe (1 × 2 m; Fig. 4) was sunk along the northern side of the wall of the forum’s northern portico (W356), in line with the basilica’s western entrance. The objective was to investigate the construction of the portico wall down to its foundations, prior to the partial reconstruction of the portico colonnade. The probe reached bedrock 1.6 m below the latest identified plaster floor, dating from the late Byzantine–Umayyad periods. The probe cut through multiple plaster and packed-earth floors, the lowest of which contained Hellenistic-period pottery. The exposed bedrock was not leveled or cut in antiquity. Wall 356 was constructed adjacent to the exposed bedrock, with only a few centimeters of foundation trench fill between them. The foundations of W356 were dry constructed of unworked basalt stones (Fig. 5).
83 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
84 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: The Southwest Church (SWC)
85 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
86 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: In 2020, only conservation work was conducted in the Southwest Church. Work concentrated on the mosaic carpet and wall plaster in the western part of the church, which was exposed in 2019. The mosaic is mostly well-preserved, and the cleaning brought to light two previously unknown inscriptions in tabulae ansatae in front of the main church entrance, with additional information on the church benefactions (for three inscriptions identified in previous years, see Staab and Eisenberg 2020).
87 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
88 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: The 2020 excavations at Hippos revealed a wealth of additional information about the Graeco-Roman city and its fortunes from Hellenistic beginnings to the earthquake of 749 CE. The most important finds were made on the saddle (NSD), where funerary structures and sarcophagi were investigated, and unexpected information on the city’s water supply system was revealed. For the first time, there is evidence of the Hellenistic-period pressure pipe water supply system, and the history of the Early Roman basalt pressure pipe is better known. In addition to the two richly decorated mausolea that stood within the Saddle Necropolis, a series of podia that displayed sarcophagi along the saddle road towards the city’s eastern gate is now revealed.
89 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
90 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: Bulletin 1950: Sussita. BDASI 2:15 (Hebrew).
91 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: 
92 [עמ׳ PDF 1]: Eisenberg M. 2020. The Lion’s Mausoleum of Hippos of the Decapolis. PEQ.