SOURCE: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Brown-University-Library/iip-texts/master/epidoc-files/zoor0024.xml



            Inscriptions of Israel/Palestine

               Prinicipal Investigator
               Michael Satlow

ERROR-could not find publication information which should appear in this space.

            zoor0024

                  Zoor 0024

Zoora, May 18, 363 CE. Tombstone. Epitaph.

                              56
                              38
                              7

White-yellowish sandstone

Almost rectangular in shape, broken at the lower left corner and
                              mended from two fragments

Smoothed surface with some scratches. Round alphabet with well cut
                              letters

                     Monday May 18, 363 CE

                        Negev
                        Zoora
                        An Naq
                        cemetery

Found by local inhabitants in the northwest corner of the Bronze Age,
                        Byzantine and Islamic cemetery in the An Naq neighborhood south of the Wadi
                        al-Hasa, probably in secondary use in later graves.

                     Department of Antiquities of Jordan

ERROR: could not find taxonomies file, which should appear in this space.

         Creation
         Adding Pleiades IDs to origin/placenames
         Edited metadata; corrected encoding

                adding period attribute to date element, with Periodo value.

Μνημῖονμνημεῖον Σαμάκωνος ἀρχιδιακόνου ἀπογενομένουἀπογενόμενος

               Μνημῖονμνημεῖον Σαμάκωνος Ζάβδα ἀρχιδιακόνου ἀπογενόμενος
               ἐτῶν μʹ ἐν τῷ
               εισζμῷσεισμῷ
               ἔτους
               μνηʹ
               μηνὶμηνὸς Ἀρτεμισίου
               ηκʹ
               θάρσιθάρσει
               οὐδὶςοὐδείς ἀθάνατος
               ἡμέρᾳ Σελήνης

Monument of Samakon, (the) archdeacon, who died... Monument of Samakon, (son) of
                    Zabdas, (the) archdeacon, who died (at the age) of 40 years during the
                    earthquake, in (the) year 258, on (the) 28th (day) of (the) month Artemisios. Be
                    of good cheer, no one (is) immortal. (He died) on the day of (the) Moon
                    (Monday).

Μνημῖονμνημεῖον Σαμάκωνος ἀρχιδιακόνου ἀπογενόμενος Μνημῖονμνημεῖον Σαμάκωνος Ζάβδα ἀρχιδιακόνου ἀπογενόμενος ἐτῶν μʹ ἐν τῷ εισζμῷσεισμῷ ἔτους μνηʹ μηνὶμηνὸς Ἀρτεμισίου ηκʹ θάρσιθάρσει οὐδὶςοὐδείς ἀθάνατος ἡμέρᾳ Σελήνης

The inscription provides the date as the 28th day of the month Artemisios on the day
               of the Moon in the year 258 according to the Era of the Province of Arabia, that is,
               Monday May 18, 363 CE. The tombstone is one of about 700 discovered in Byzantine
               Zoora, and was discovered in two fragments. The majority of the Greek tombstones from
               this location have been identified as Christian. The inscription contains spelling
               and grammatical errors, and is recorded in a round alphabet. The author indicates
               that the letter cutter seems to have begun the inscription only to realize during the
               second line that he left out the patronymic. The tombstone was then (it seems)
               rotated 180 degress, at which point the lettercutter began again. The first text is
               engraved only, while the second text is engraved and painted red. The age, year and
               month day numneral are all indicated with a horizontal bar above them. The word ἡμέρᾳ
               is abbreviated with the initial eta and a ligature of the consonents mu and rho. In
               this epitaph, as well as in zoor0022 and zoor0023, the cause of death is indicated to
               have been the earthquake, recorded by many ancient writers, which took place on May
               18th, 363 CE. These three inscriptions are, so far as we know, the only epigraphical
               records of the date and occurrence of an earthquake in this region. The earthquake
               seems to have caused damage throughout most of Transjordan and Palestine, and in many
               accounts is seen to have been divine retribution for the Emperor Julian's attempt to
               rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem. The author indicates that archdeacon was an
               important role, the title indicating that Samakon was the senior deacon of his
               bishopric. The author notes that the deceased named in Zoor00023, Obbe, may be the
               daughter of Samakon. This is based upon the patronymic found in Zoor0023 as well as
               the relative ages of the two figures.

                  24

