Mashriq & Mahjar 10, no. 2 (2023), 95–121
ISSN 2169-4435

Sarah Irving


“INDIAN LADY TOURISTS KILLED AT JERICHO”:
TOURISM, PILGRIMAGE, AND SOUTH-SOUTH RELATIONS
IN INTERWAR PALESTINE

Abstract
In press coverage of the 1927 earthquake in Palestine, frequent mention is
made of the deaths of three women at the Winter Palace Hotel in Jericho. That
the three were from British-occupied India apparently rendered them unusual
enough to be noted by a journalist, whose observation was reproduced around
the world. This article draws on newspapers, official documents, and
secondary literature on the hajj, tourism, and the British Empire to consider
the history of South Asian travelers to Palestine and relationships between
colonialism and travel in the interwar period.
         One of the three women was Lady Abdul Rauf, the wife of a retired
high court judge and veteran Indian Muslim nationalist campaigner, Sir Syed
Abdul Rauf. The couple had departed Bombay in April 1927 for the hajj to
Mecca and Medina but extended their trip to include Jericho. This was not
unusual; the Indian Hospice in the Old City of Jerusalem in fact attests to a
long history of Indian visitors to Palestine. This paper, however, locates the ill-
fated presence of Lady Abdul Rauf and her companions in the changing
nature of Indian travel in the region, as religious pilgrimage to Jerusalem
combined with politics and tourism, and as changing infrastructures of
capitalism and colonialism shifted how Indian visitors experienced Palestine.



                                                                        ‫خالصة‬
‫ تم تكرار ذكر وفاة ثالث‬،‫ في فلسطين‬1927 ‫في التغطية الصحفية لزلزال عام‬
،‫ ومن الواضح أن كون الثالثة من الهند‬.‫نساء في فندق وينتر باالس في أريحا‬
‫ّزهن عن غيرهن بالنسبة ألحد‬ ّ ‫ مي‬،‫التي كانت في وقتها تحت االحتالل البريطاني‬
‫ تعتمد هذه المقالة‬.‫ وبالتالي تم نشر مالحظته في جميع أنحاء العالم‬.‫الصحفيين‬
‫على الص حف والوثائق الرسمية واألدبيات الثانوية حول الحج والسياحة‬
‫واإلمبراطورية البريطانية للنظر في تاريخ المسافرين من جنوب آسيا إلى‬
  .‫فلسطين والعالقات بين االستعمار والسفر في فترة ما بين الحربين العالميتين‬
‫ زوجة قاضي‬،‫كانت إحدى النساء الثالث هي السيدة عبد الرؤوف‬
‫ السير سيد‬،‫المحكمة العليا المتقاعد والناشط القومي اإلسالمي الهندي المخضرم‬
‫ ألداء‬1927 ‫ كان الزوجان قد غادرا بومباي في أبريل نيسان‬.‫عبد الرؤوف‬
‫ لم يكن هذا‬.‫ لكنهما مددا رحلتهما لتشمل أريحا‬،‫فريضة الحج في مكة والمدينة‬

Sarah Irving is Lecturer in International History and a Leverhulme Early
Career Fellow at Staffordshire University. Email: sarah.irving@staffs.ac.uk
96 Sarah Irving


‫ وفي الواقع تشهد التكية الهندية في البلدة القديمة بالقدس على تاريخ‬.‫غير عادي‬
‫ تموضع هذه الورقة الوجود‬،‫ ومع ذلك‬.‫طويل من الزوار الهنود إلى فلسطين‬
‫المشؤوم للسيدة عبد الرؤوف ورفاقها في الطبيعة المتغيرة للسفر الهندي في‬
‫ وحيث أدت‬،‫ حيث اقترن الحج الديني إلى القدس بالسياسة والسياحة‬،‫المنطقة‬
‫البنية التحتية المتغيرة للرأسمالية واالستعمار إلى تغيير تجربة الزوار الهنود مع‬
                                                                    .‫فلسطين‬




INTRODUCTION
When news of the earthquake, which had hit Palestine and Transjordan
on the afternoon of 11 July 1927, flashed around the world, one story
received unusual amounts of newspaper coverage. Although the
majority of the 287 killed in the quake were in Nablus, Jerusalem, and
al-Salt, many international newspapers reported the deaths of several
women at the Winter Palace Hotel in Jericho. What seems to have
attracted attention was the fact that the women were Indian; they
remain unnamed in all the reports, but the most complete identification
describes them as “Three women from India . . . . The wife of Sir Said
Abdul Raouf, her companion and the wife of Mohamed Massaan.”1 It
is striking that this description, from a newspaper published in New
York, appeared only two days after the earthquake, suggesting that the
story must have been present in some of the first newswires to spread
information on the disaster. Heading in the opposite direction around
the world, an edition of the Times of India, bearing the same date stamp
of 13 July, carried the same story: “The hotel at Jericho collapsed and
three Indian lady tourists were killed.”2
        Why should the deaths of Lady Abdul Rauf and her fellow
travelers have attracted such apparently disproportionate coverage?3
This article takes this question as a starting point to consider the
assumptions often made in Anglophone histories about the nature of
travel in Ottoman and British Mandate-ruled Palestine and the wider
Levant. By challenging these preconceptions, it attempts to inscribe
travel by South Asians—in this instance, primarily subjects of British-
ruled India during the colonial period—as an important but
understudied aspect of travel to and in Palestine, and as a quotidian
presence in Levantine life. To do so, I sketch examples of the kinds of
                              “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 97


experiences and journeys that brought Indians to Palestine,4 and
identify some broad themes, with particular reference to colonialism,
the rise of tourism, and the sociotechnical changes which are often seen
as inherently bound up with modernity. Specifically, I argue that
Indian examples are useful in unsettling the dichotomy between tourist
and pilgrim. These terms are often used to denote travelers in Palestine
in ways which are weighted with assumptions and prejudices about
modernity, religion, and race. In his examination of colonial discourses
on the hajj, Michael Christopher Low makes a similar point when he
notes: “As opposed to the European tourist, trader, or soldier, pilgrims,
migrants, the poor, and non-Europeans were classified as
dangerous”5—or, as Lady Abdul Rauf’s example highlights, strange
and out-of-place.
        In fact, far from being anomalous, the Abdul Raufs’ presence in
Jericho was, as I argue, part of a continuous, if varying, presence of
people from South Asia in the Levant, but one which was undergoing
significant changes at the time of their fatal visit. South Asian Muslims
had been traveling and trading to the Arabic-speaking world for
centuries before 1927; this has been demonstrated in the current
burgeoning research on those cultural circuits of the Indian Ocean
which linked East Africa, southern Arabia, and South and Southeast
Asia via the transportation of ideas, beliefs, and knowledge as well as
objects. It is also evident in literature on the hajj pilgrimage and the
ways in which Islamic religious travel to the Arabian Peninsula was
entangled with questions of colonialism, power, health, and race. Much
of this work, however, focuses on areas bordering directly on the
Indian Ocean, or on Mecca and Medina as the main destinations for hajj
pilgrims, although it was not uncommon for such visitors to visit
Levantine cities such as Jerusalem, Aleppo, or Damascus. Travelers to
Jerusalem are more prominent in histories of Sufi networks and
zawiyas, which brought pilgrims from Central and South Asia to the
Mamluk and Ottoman Levant. Traces of these visitors remain in the
forms of lodges and hostels which still maintain their regional
associations into the present day; the zāwiyat al-Hunūd (Indian
Hospice) is discussed below, while other examples include the Uzbek
and Afghan lodges.6 Much of this scholarship, however, focuses on the
medieval, early modern, and Ottoman periods, when most (or all) of
the regions involved were under some form of Islamic rule. This article,
on the other hand, considers some of the impacts of the changing
mechanics of such journeys, and the shifting composition of South
Asian visitors, that followed occupation by European colonial
98 Sarah Irving


powers—not only of India during the nineteenth century but, more
specifically, of the Levant after World War I and the imposition of
British and French Mandatory rule over Greater Syria by the League of
Nations. The nature of long-distance travel had been changing since
the introduction of steamships between India and the Mediterranean
in the nineteenth century, stopping in ports such as Aden and Jedda
before transiting the Suez Canal for destinations including Alexandria.
The political significance of such travel is highlighted by the fact that
Indian Muslim nationalists in the years immediately before World War
I considered setting up a steamship line to carry hajj pilgrims and break
the British shipping monopoly between India and Arabia.7 Palestine
also gained rail connections from the Hijaz under the Ottomans, via
spurs from the main Hijaz railway to Haifa, and from Egypt to Jaffa
and then Jerusalem under British rule. But the end of the Ottoman
Empire and the advent of European colonialism also brought about
new forms of colonial mobility for Muslim South Asian subjects of the
British, including military service and manual work for the imperial
armies and establishing transnational business networks, while
Zionism also began attracting Indian Jews to Palestine. Even
anticolonial movements in both South Asia and the Arab world created
paths along which Indians—both living and dead—found their way to
Palestine. The archival record for the Indian presence in Mandatory
Palestine is necessarily fragmentary and widespread; in addition, this
article is part of a wider project that was heavily impacted by the
Covid-19 pandemic and a discussion of the sources used thus provides
an opportunity to consider the challenges of transnational historical
research and the pros and cons of document digitization. The
Palestinian archive itself has been—as many scholars have explored—
shattered, dispersed, and sometimes destroyed by the impacts of
British and then Israeli colonialism.8 Records from the British
administration in Palestine used for this article are divided between the
British National Archives at Kew and the Israel National Archive,
which has digitized substantial numbers of documents over recent
years making research for this article possible during the Covid-19
pandemic. As colonial archives, both collections are partial and
distorted; the British holdings often lack documents deemed by
officials at the end of the Mandate unworthy of being shipped to the
metropole, and subject to both restriction and destruction by colonial
regimes protecting themselves.9 The National Archives of India were
also accessed via the major digitization project Abhilekh-Patal but are
similarly subject to the sorting, preservation, and disclosure issues
presented by the records of any nation state. 10 There are undoubtedly
                                “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 99


additional sources to be found in a variety of South Asian languages,
including travelogues by Muslim visitors to the Levant, that are
beyond the linguistic skills of this author.
         Other sources included Palestinian (Arabic) and international
newspapers, alongside memoirs and personal accounts written by
Palestinians and other residents during the Mandate period, primarily
in Arabic and English. However, the sparse presence of South Asians
in life-writings by Palestinians and in the Arabic press is, at first glance,
striking, but on further consideration perhaps not so surprising. It is
also rare to find explicit mentions of communities that we know to be
present in Jerusalem and other parts of Ottoman Palestine, such as
African Palestinians or the North Africans of the Maghrebi Quarter,
destroyed by Israeli troops in June 1967. Like members of these groups,
South Asian visitors were likely subsumed under categories such as
pilgrim and Muslim, or considered by their profession or where and
with whom they stayed, rather than in terms of race and nationality.
Like these communities, their presence might sometimes be more
accurately traced through personal and place names such as Hindi and
Maghrebi, and through local microhistories, reflecting the fact that
Palestinians encountering people from India likely had a different way
of “seeing” them than through the categories applied in colonial
documentation.


SOUTH ASIAN TRAVEL IN THE LEVANT UNDER ISLAMIC RULE
A substantial body of literature already exists on travel from South
Asia to the Arabic-speaking world in the early modern and modern
periods. The most prominent subsection of this field are the many
works that have emerged in recent years on hajj pilgrimages to the
Arabian Peninsula. These intersect with the growing literature on the
Indian Ocean as a place of cultural interactions and cross-fertilization,
via circuits of trade, religious knowledge, and other forms of mobility
between South and Southeast Asia, the Arabian Peninsula, and East
Africa. The former has given rise to rich discussions of the changes
which the hajj process underwent in interaction with colonialism.
These focus especially on the British Empire in India, and on regimes
of hygiene and disease control, which combined with colonial fears of
Islamic extremism and the possibility that hajj travelers would be
infected or carry infection, either literally as cases of cholera and other
“tropical” diseases, or metaphorically as radical or insurrectionary
ideas.11 The second body of literature focuses on the Indian Ocean as a
space of cultural and economic circulation which predated European
100 Sarah Irving


colonialism and, indeed, incorporated and helped to shape the early
stages of imperial enterprises such as Portuguese settlements in India.
Much of this literature focuses on complexity and richness, with
Middle Eastern travelers—Arabs, Jews, Armenians, or Persians—
appearing in nodes and networks stretching from Singapore to
Zanzibar, and vice versa.12 In a very small way, this article is inspired
by the call from some authors within this literature to pay closer
attention to the hinterlands of the Indian Ocean world—the inland
regions linked to the sea by routes of trade and pilgrimage.13
        From these two perspectives, the Levant as a travel destination
appears very different—both conceptually and geographically—from
much of the literature on tourism in Palestine. The Levant area is
framed not as the eastern end of a Mediterranean world with its
movements and exchanges, but as the westernmost point of a vast and
diverse space of mobile people for which Jerusalem and the other holy
places of Palestine maintained the lure of sacredness despite also being
al-Aqsa (the furthest). Throughout the medieval and early modern
periods, occasional Indian Muslim travelers did extend their journeys
as far as Palestine, generally in addition to visiting Mecca and Medina.
These journeys appear in travel accounts, mainly by South Asian
Muslim writers, while Indian individuals are noted in accounts penned
by Levantine chroniclers; in the nineteenth century travelogues by
South Asian Muslims, written in Urdu and other regional languages,
start to appear in significant numbers,14 similar to the parallel
emergence of “Holy Land” travel texts by European and North
American authors.
        The most concrete illustration of Indian arrivals, however, is the
existence of an Islamic pilgrim hospice, not dissimilar to the better-
known Christian hostels for Armenian, Austrian, and other
communities or to the Islamic pilgrim establishments associated with
specific communities and regions, such as the Uzbek and Afghan
lodges, and which were part of networks across the Islamic world.15
While the hospice’s origins are unclear, it appears to be linked to Indian
Sufi zawiyas established as early as the thirteenth century, and to have
coalesced into a single base for Indian travelers by the mid-nineteenth
century.16 After World War I, however, the hospice took on an
implicitly political turn, when leaders of the All-India Muslim League
decided that maintaining an Indian presence in Jerusalem was an
important part of their project.17 This was partly in response to pressure
from the Palestinian Supreme Muslim Council, which believed that the
hospice represented a useful piece of propaganda against the Zionist
                             “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 101


position enshrined in the British Mandate.18 A member of the Khilafat
movement,19 Nazir Ansari, was dispatched to Palestine in 1924 as
caretaker of the hospice and remained there for the rest of his life,
passing on the role to his son and grandsons.20 Under Ansari, the
hospice provided a focal point for Indians in Palestine—including
Commonwealth troops serving there as well as civilian residents and
visitors—and a headquarters for the Palestine Indian Association. At
the same time, the hospice was also embedded in the wider
communities and networks, including its local neighborhood in the
Old City of Jerusalem and the local Red Cross Society.21 The Indian
Hospice thus highlights the way in which a longstanding South Asian
presence in Palestine underwent changes in nature and meaning with
the arrival of formal British colonialism in the region after World War
I.
        Another example of the way in which South Asian travelers
during the Ottoman period became established features of the
Levantine landscape can be found in the Indian community of the
village of Beit Sawa, now a suburb of Damascus. It is not clear when
they came to Syria or how they coalesced into an identified settlement,
although it seems likely that some, or even most, arrived in connection
to the hajj. It was not uncommon, before solvency regulations were
introduced by the British, for Indian pilgrims to run out of funds on the
hajj and be unable to return;22 although most of these pilgrims either
found work or became destitute in the Arabian Peninsula, Damascus’
status as a major node on the route between Istanbul and the
Haramayn (Mecca and Medina, the main cities of the hajj) perhaps
drew some north. Indeed, reports from the British consulate mention
the presence in the 1870s of women in Damascus who stated that they
originated from the Punjab but had been sold into slavery and traded
along the hajj routes. 23 Another possibility is that some of these
villagers—although not, presumably, those seeking British consular
help—were amongst those Indian Muslims who fell foul of colonial
authorities at home and fled to the Ottoman Empire.24
       Under Ottoman rule, disputes arose over whether and how
many of these Beit Sawa Indians were British subjects and thus exempt
under the capitulations from Ottoman legal jurisdiction;25 legal
wrangles over their status continued into the Mandate period, when
consulate staff complained that regular calls by the Indians to protect
them from the French authorities—whether in quotidian legal matters
or from government bombardment in the 1925–27 Syrian Uprising—
was causing tensions between the British representatives and their
102 Sarah Irving


fellow Mandatory power.26 One British solution to a reported rise in
poverty amongst the Beit Sawa Indian community was to pressure
them to “return” to India, despite the fact that consular officials
themselves admitted that they had been “established in Syria for
several generations . . . . To a very great extent they have lost touch with
their homes in India, and many of them speak only Arabic.” 27 Taking
matters into their own hands, some of the community, presumably
using their British Indian subject status, moved to Iraq and Palestine,
especially those who had been dependent on the irrigation canals in
Ghouta for their farming; much of this agricultural infrastructure had
been destroyed by the French during the uprising, leaving the area’s
inhabitants unable to grow their accustomed crops. 28 Whatever their
origins, the Beit Sawa Indians came from a very different class of
traveler than Sir Syed Abdul Rauf and his wife, who occupied a senior
position in colonial society and were sufficiently affluent to stay in a
new hotel like the Winter Palace, clearly aimed at European tourists or
the elite of Mandate Palestinian society.
        With the radically reduced travel times that came with
steamships and railways in the second half of the nineteenth century,
the number of South Asians who came to the Arabic-speaking world
and who could add more destinations to their itineraries greatly
increased, and as more settled—and established themselves in
businesses such as shipping—the denser the networks in which new
arrivals could embed themselves.29 Again, the main focus of existing
scholarship has been the hajj, for which estimated numbers show
massive increases from the 1890s onwards. Figures quoted by Michael
Christopher Low, for instance, show pilgrims from South Asia rising
from approximately 5–7,000 in the mid-1800s, to 10,000 in the 1880s,
20,000 by 1893, and perhaps exceeding 100,000 in the years
immediately preceding World War I. In addition to technological
developments, the infrastructures of empire also changed and, in some
cases, forced, inspired, or facilitated movement by people acting as
political exiles, refugees, or labor migrants. However, the majority of
existing literature on travel and travelers in Palestine in the later
decades of the Ottoman Empire and the period of British Mandatory
rule in Palestine focuses on European or North American—largely
Christian or Jewish—individuals. There are solid reasons for this.
Firstly, the overlapping politics of European imperialism and Zionist
immigration mean that travelers from these two areas are unavoidably
bound up with issues such as Orientalized and biblified images of
Palestinian people, questions of power and empire, and the present-
                             “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 103


day political situation. Secondly, technological developments such as
steamships and railways, and social changes such as the rise in
capitalist settings of the ideas of vacations and tourism, resulted in
massive increases in the numbers of Christian and Jewish pilgrims and
tourists which had significant implications for European, especially
British, culture, society, and politics. The academic literature
surrounding this latter phenomenon has thus addressed issues such as
the nature of and difference between tourism and pilgrimage, and the
growth of infrastructures deemed necessary for mass Euro-American
tourism such as hotels, tourist agencies, and a guidebook industry. 30
        Implicit, and sometime explicit, in this literature is the
assumption that these developments are somehow separate from non-
Western, non-Christian, or non-Jewish travel to Palestine, particularly
Islamic pilgrimage and visitors from Africa and Asia.31 I would suggest
that underlying many of the discussions is a tacit assumption that the
visitors being talked about are white and that they exist in a category
associated with modernity and thus differentiated from religious
pilgrimage (Russian pilgrims, it must be said, occupy a somewhat
liminal space in this schema, in common with Orientalist attitudes to
peoples from Eastern Europe and further afield from Northwestern
Europe or North America). Furthermore, travelers from Asia and
Africa, if they are mentioned, are often implicitly or explicitly classed
as pilgrims, and their activities in and connections with Palestine are
confined to Islamic religious circuits and institutions. In terms of
numerical weight, some of these assumptions may well be true. But
relying solely on numbers is, I argue, an error which obscures a long
history of South Asian travel to Palestine which, while often consisting
of or intimately linked to pilgrimage, is over-simplified and, indeed,
exoticized and Orientalized by relegation to this single term.
Steamships and railways had immense impacts on South Asian as well
as European and North American people and experiences, and the
other trappings of travel that came with them—such as guidebooks
and phrasebooks—were not the exclusive preserve of European
languages. Guidebooks to a range of destinations (although not, to the
best of my knowledge, Palestine) were issued by Indian publishing
houses,32 while the commercial potential of travelers to Arabic-
speaking countries is reflected in the existence of colloquial Arabic
phrasebooks in languages such as Bengali, Hindi, and Urdu.33


INDIANS IN THE MANDATORY LEVANT
Despite the surprise with which papers around the world met the news
104 Sarah Irving


of Indian tourists in Jericho, by the 1920s it is possible to detect an array
of Indian presence across the Levant which both builds on and differs
from those of the Ottoman and earlier periods. These represented a
broad range of social classes, motives for travel, and relationships to
colonialism, and the signs they have left in the historical record include
colonial archives, the media, and the built environment. These signs
rarely, however, include the voices of Indian travelers themselves,
whose subjective experiences are absent from the official
correspondence, policy documents, and border regulations that helped
to shape their encounter with the Levant.
         Amongst the most poignant markers of Indian presence are the
sections of the Commonwealth War Cemeteries in Gaza, Deir al-Balah,
Ramla, Jerusalem, Tulkarem, and Haifa dedicated to South Asian
soldiers killed in World War I. As noted on the individual web pages
for each cemetery, Indian soldiers were originally commemorated
collectively with nameless monuments, in contrast to the individual
gravestones or lists of names on memorials to the British dead. New
monuments, bearing the names of South Asians known to have been
buried at the sites, have been added between 2001 and 2014. 34 It is
perhaps more widely known that huge numbers of soldiers from what
was then British-ruled India (now both India and Pakistan, with many
soldiers coming from regions of the latter) fought in Iraq, where the
campaign was initially commanded from Delhi, but substantial
numbers also served in the Palestine campaign and were stationed in
Palestine during the Mandate period.35 For Palestinians themselves in
the wake of World War I, South Asian soldiers must have been a
regular sight, especially in the neighborhood of military bases such as
Sarafand, or around government buildings in Jerusalem and regional
governorates; in 1922, for example, British military correspondence
discusses the stationing of “2 Indian Infantry Battalions, 1 Indian
Cavalry Regiment [and] 1 Indian Pack Battery” in Palestine, which
could have amounted to over 4,000 men.36 That the conditions for
Indian recruits were different—presumably poorer—than those for
white soldiers is, however, apparent from correspondence over leisure
facilities for Indian troops. That this provision was separate from
existing leisure space suggests that Indian soldiers were segregated
from white troops, while the existence of letters refusing funds but
mentioning grants for other troops seems to show that South Asians
were expected to put up with sparser facilities.37
        For Indian soldiers, a posting in Palestine may have had many
different meanings. Most were recruited from among Sikh and Islamic
                            “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 105


communities in the regions such as the Punjab, whose inhabitants were
viewed by the British authorities through the lens of “martial races,”
peoples who were deemed to be fitted for warfare by both their
physical (“racial”) and cultural backgrounds.38 For Muslim soldiers,
being in Bayt al-Maqdis must have had spiritual resonance, although—
especially in the early years of the Mandate—this may have been
complicated by mixed feelings towards the defeat of the Ottoman
caliph by Britain and its allies during World War I.
        But fighting men were not the only Indians to be found in the
imperial army in Palestine: throughout the Mandate period, Indians
were also employed as laborers (possibly replacing the Egyptian
Labour Corps in the wake of the Egyptian revolution in 1919 and the
nominal independence that followed it). Applications for work visas
and other documents, now in the Israeli national archives, show that a
significant number of South Asians applied, via contractors who were
usually themselves also Indian, to come to Palestine to work for the
British army, mainly at Sarafand. Some of these apparently settled in
the region, judging by the request for a visa from Hamida Begum
Abdul Rashid, who applied for permission to join her husband who
was based at the British army camp at Sarafand,39 and it seems likely
that at least some married locally and remained, or took Palestinian
spouses back to India with them.


TRAVELING TO PALESTINE
The documents submitted by subjects of British India seeking entry
into Palestine for shorter periods of work and travel than those in
military employment present an image of a broad range of interests
and incentives as well as social classes and backgrounds. As is evident
from British records now in the Israeli national archives, Indian Jews
also applied to come to Palestine, encouraged by the Zionist message
or drawn by family, work, or religion. There is a rich and
underexamined history to be written of the relationship between
Indian Jews and Palestine,40 but the specificity of their position—in
both India and Palestine—often makes their trajectories and
experiences very different from those of Hindu and Muslim South
Asians; therefore, I will not examine them as a specific group in this
article.
         Indian Jews, Punjabi soldiers, and military laborers, however,
belong to the categories of travelers to Palestine who were seeking to
settle in the country for a longer term or permanently. Those who, like
106 Sarah Irving


Syed Abdul Rauf and his party, were planning only short visits by
traveling around well-known sites, seem to have been less common,
but they did exist. At the grandest end of the scale are figures such as
the Nawab of Rampur, who spent a couple of days in Jerusalem in 1934.
Rumored by the Anglophone press to be one of the richest rulers of a
semi-independent princely state in India, the itinerary of the Nawab
and his wife, the Begum of Rampur, graced the society column of the
Palestine Post. The couple, as well as senior members of their substantial
entourage, were guests at a lunch hosted by Sir John Hathorn Hall,41
the chief secretary of the Mandate administration, along with Ruhi Bey
Abdul-Hadi, chief Arab officer to the British government and one of
the less politically activist members of his well-known family.42 The
Nawab’s involvement with the Islamic networks of the Indian national
movement did not prevent him from using the luxurious King David
Hotel rather than the struggling Palace Hotel, owned by the Supreme
Muslim Council,43 as a base during his sojourn in Jerusalem and
excursion to the shrine of Nabi Musa, the Dead Sea, and Jericho.44
Despite not opting for their hospitality, during the visit, the Nawab did
announce a donation of 15,000 rupees (around $5,680 at the time, or
over $120,000 today) to the Supreme Muslim Council for the upkeep of
the al-Aqsa Mosque “and other waqf properties.”45
        On a more practical level, long-extant merchant networks,
especially involving the Armenian, Jewish, and Parsee communities in
India, and evolving markets for luxury products in the twentieth
century, combined to draw Indian commercial travelers to Palestine.
These travelers arrived on business visas and were primarily there to
engage in trade, but they must have stayed in hotels alongside other
travelers and perhaps took in tourist sites in between commercial
dealings. In June 1947, for instance, we find Mazur and Paldico Ltd., a
diamond trading company based in Jaffa,46 in correspondence with the
Department of Migration over a visa application for a Mr. Shantilal
Motilal Mehta of Bombay. In contrast with the often-scant paperwork
associated with individual entry applications, this commercial process
accrued an archive folder of telegrams (for which the Mandate
administration charged applicants extra) and letters stressing the
“extreme urgency” and need to hasten the permit. Mazur and Paldico
added extra evidence to their application form, stressing the value of
the diamond industry to Palestine, especially “following the
resumption of the pre-war Belgian diamond industry with which the
Palestine diamond industry is keenly endeavouring to compete,” and
the comments of government officials on the documents in the folder
                             “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 107


back up their claims.47 The three-month visa allocated to Mehta, and
the anticipated month-long stay mentioned in the paperwork, suggest
ample time for business purposes, so it might be supposed that he also
did some sightseeing. Mehta’s firm is reported by Mazur and Paldico
as having already traded with them for several years, so we might build
on this case to imagine a small number of Indian businessmen with
strong links in Palestine, perhaps originally brokered via Jewish
Indians but later making repeat visits and establishing personal
relationships with residents of Mandatory Palestine.
        Mehta was not an isolated case; indeed, in the same month,
another Tel Aviv diamond polisher, Albert Alcalay, applied for a visa
for Ratilal Jasani of a well-known firm, Anandlal Becharlal, whose case
he pressed in similar terms to Mazur and Paldico’s expressions of
urgency for Shantilal Mehta’s visa. Jasani was said to have been “in
constant commercial relations with Palestine . . . for many years” and
Alcalay presented letters of recommendation from two banks and two
diamond export associations in support of their request.48 A month
later, Ratilal Jasani’s brother, Raman, also wrote to Alcalay, informing
him that they had opened a branch of the company in Burma, asking if
Tel Aviv could supply polished diamonds of certain qualities, and
again asking him to arrange an urgent visa from the Palestine
government, to be cabled to the British Embassy at Antwerp, another
major node in the global diamond trade.49 Such relations were not
always fruitful for all concerned; the colonial archive also contains
complaints from merchants and corporations in both countries, in the
diamond trade and other industries from incidents when deals went
sour or misunderstandings occurred. But Indian commercial travelers,
and successful commercial relations with the Palestinian economy,
were certainly a feature of the business landscape of Mandate Palestine.


SHARED STRUGGLES AND ELITE NETWORKS
While many Indian travelers to Palestine were following routes bound
up with colonialism—such as soldiers, laborers, or more high-status
workers—links between the two segments of the British Empire were
also forged by resistance, including delegations such as that mentioned
above, sent by the Supreme Muslim Council in 1923 to solicit funds and
support from Indian Muslims and campaigners for liberation from
British colonialism, or Indian delegates to the World Islamic Congress
held in Jerusalem in 1931. In some respects, these relationships built
upon Ottoman-era links between Palestine and India, hinted at by the
continuity of the Indian Hospice. But, as Omar Khalidi notes, during
108 Sarah Irving


the Mandate period, wealthy Indian princes and aristocrats who
historically “were always conscious of their membership in trans-
Indian, pan-Islamic world”50 endowed numerous new awqaf in
Jerusalem, acts which took on new political weight in the new political
circumstances of British rule in the Levant and critiques of British
colonialism which were now shared between India and Palestine.51 On
a more clandestine level, the circulation of Islamic activist tracts written
in India and distributed in Palestine and in French-ruled Syria was a
cause of concern to the British government, with discussions on
curbing it from reaching cabinet level.52 While it is important to note
that the significance of Palestine and Jerusalem as religious and
anticolonial causes varied considerably according to the priorities of
individual Muslims, and that events in India often took precedence
over those in Palestine, the idea that Jerusalem should remain under
Islamic rule was among the core beliefs of many Muslim Indian
nationalists and pan-Islamists.53 Equally, not all Indian Muslim
nationalists were opposed to the British Empire, and thus, for some,
Jerusalem may have remained a purely religious symbol. 54
        Thinking about this relationship in terms of a physical Indian
presence in Palestine, a corporeal example of the entanglement of
Indian Muslim nationalists into the networks and narratives of
Palestinian politics was the burial on the Haram al-Sharif of
Muhammed Ali Jouhar, a leading figure in the Khilafat movement
during World War I and in the establishment of the All-India Muslim
League (Jouhar was also well known to Syed Abdul Rauf, in these and
other capacities, as we shall shortly see). Muhammad Ali, whose health
had been seriously damaged by the denial of medical treatment for his
diabetes when he was imprisoned by the British in India, died in
London in January 1931. Within a week of his death, the announcement
was made that Muhammad Ali would be buried in Jerusalem, as the
result of a flurry of telegrams between Amin al-Husayni and
Muhammad’s brother Shaukat Ali. The initiative seemingly came from
Hajj Amin, who had been cultivating links with Indian Muslim
nationalists since just after the First World War, both for their financial
clout and in order to focus the attention of India’s huge Islamic
population on Jerusalem as both a sacred site and a victim of British
occupation.55 Despite their role in the opposition to colonial rule in
India, which saw them interned without trial in 1918, the Ali brothers
had a close relationship to the British state, which cultivated separate
Islamic groups as a means of splitting resistance to colonialism in India.
Sir John Chancellor, High Commissioner in Palestine in early 1931, was
                             “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 109


thus ordered by London to facilitate the burial, 56 which saw crowds of
over 20,000 Palestinians (assumed by journalists to be Muslims) lining
the route and following the coffin.57 The main beneficiary of this
display of funerary pageantry was certainly Amin al-Husayni in his
competition with rival nationalist groups in Palestine, as well as the
British in their quest to divert attention from colonial misrule, but the
material presence of the grave of a widely popular Indian Muslim
leader also helped to inscribe the relationship on the soil of Palestine,
as well as in the more ethereal realms of words and ideas. Like the
hundreds, if not thousands, of Indian war graves spread across
present-day Israel and Palestine, and the hospice in Jerusalem’s Old
City, Muhammad Ali’s grave created a concrete link between the
countries which could be read in multiple ways by Indians and
Palestinians of different persuasions.
        Such links also emerge in more everyday and private ways. In
1945–46 the Indian scholar M. L. Roy Choudhury spent a year as a
lecturer in the Faculty of Oriental Studies at Cairo University, funded
by a travel fellowship endowed by the lawyer and politician Sir
Rashbehari Ghosh (1845–1921). During his sojourn in Egypt,
Choudhury undertook a journey through Syria, Palestine, Lebanon,
and the Arabian Peninsula during which he visited the Palestinian
doctor, ethnographer, and nationalist Tawfik Canaan.58 Choudhury
was a historian of Mughal India and of Persian cultural and religious
influences in India (amongst others, he authored a volume on the
“Golden Age” Islamic scientist Abu Rayhan al-Biruni), and the volume
in which he recounts his meeting with Canaan and their conversation
on the hardships imposed by British rule in both Palestine and India is
a modern-day continuation of his historical studies—namely, an
attempt to inform Indians about wider Arab politics, culture, and
society in contemporary Egypt. The book, partly authored by
Choudhury and with contributions from Jawaharlal Nehru alongside
former Wafd prime minister of Egypt Mustafa Nahas Pasha, leading
Egyptian feminist Huda Sha’arawi, and a range of local scholars, is
explicitly billed as an effort to build bridges between the Middle East
and India in the interests both of anti-imperial struggle and of wider
knowledge and understanding independent of European powers.59 So,
while earlier Indian Muslim visitors to Palestine had Mecca and Jeddah
as their main aims and were inspired by religious devotion,
Choudhury embarked on his travels in the Levant from a Cairene base
and was impelled by a combined thirst for knowledge and to build
understanding and networks across peoples linked not just by Islamic
110 Sarah Irving


culture and history, but also by their shared experiences of British
colonialism and their struggles against it.


THE MANY DEATHS OF LADY ABDUL RAUF
The sad death of Lady Abdul Rauf and her companion in the ruins of
the Winter Palace in the earthquake of July 1927 draws together many
of the themes sketched above. On the one hand, she and her husband
were visiting Palestine as an extension of their hajj, as many Indians
had done before them. Like hundreds of thousands of others, they had
embarked by sea from Bombay, although their berths on the SS Dara
were no doubt much more comfortable than those occupied by many
of their compatriots. Indeed, there were 1,432 pilgrims on the Dara on
26 April 1927, “consisting of 1,169 males, 241 females, 9 boys and 6
girls,”60 and conditions on hajj ships were a recurrent source of scandal
in British-ruled India. The Abdul Raufs were described by the Indian
press as traveling in a “party of nineteen” which included another
“high official from northern India” and was seen off at from the
disinfection shed at Bombay by well-known figures from the Islamic
wing of the Indian nationalist movement, including Khilafat veterans
Shaukat Ali (brother of Muhammad Ali Jouhar, whose burial within
the Haram al-Sharif is mentioned above) and Shoaib Qureshi.61 That
the Abdul Raufs and several others—presumably members of the
group of nineteen—then chose to travel from the Haramayn to
Palestine was less usual, but the voyage still placed them in a long
tradition of Indian pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Jericho, however, has very
little religious significance for Muslims (unless we extend the borders
to include the Maqam of Nabi Musa around seven miles away); this
part of their tour departs from the long-standing religious practices
with which most literature on South Asian travel to the Arabic-
speaking world is concerned and appears instead to have entered the
realms of that most modern of activities—tourism. They went to a site
of historical and scenic interest, and they stayed in a very new and
“modern” hotel aimed squarely at European and elite Palestinian
guests.
        Like Muhammad Ali, the Khilafat leader discussed above, Syed
Abdul Rauf, his career, and his political convictions embodied many of
the contradictions of elite nationalism and of Indian Muslim relations
with the British authorities. In 1927, he was a recently retired judge of
the high court in Lahore,62 having spent a long career working with or
in the Indian legal system, mainly in Allahabad,63 under British rule.
He had considerable social and professional status within the Raj, as
                              “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 111


seen in the prominent place his departure for the hajj took in the Times
of India but also, for many years prior, in the regularity with which his
name and activities appear in newspaper reports on Indian politics and
society, often alongside the likes of Gandhi, Jinnah, and Motilal, and
later Jawaharlal Nehru.64 As well as a judge and thus member of the
national establishment, he was also a longstanding member of the
Indian national and Islamic movements. He had been drawn into
politics via his senior colleagues on the Allahabad bar in the 1880s,65 in
his early years flirted with the Congress Party, and in the first two
decades of the twentieth century engaged in a range of political
activities which included some that focused on India’s Muslims and
others which explicitly or implicitly crossed religious lines. The latter
included attendance, especially prior to World War I, at several high-
profile independence conferences and the vice presidency of a United
Provinces Political Association which also brought together Hindus
and Muslims.66 He also, however, worked with and helped to found
organizations resistant to cooperation with Hindus or specific to the
Muslim community, including a boarding house for Muslim students
in Allahabad, the Aligarh university project, the Khilafat movement,
the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental Defence Association, and the
Muslim League,67 and he remained embedded in elite Muslim
nationalist circles which linked urban professionals with rural
landowners.68 In 1906, he was also one of the thirty-five members of the
Minto Deputation, a delegation to the viceroy, Lord Minto, asking for
greater political representation for Muslims in India.69 And yet in 1918,
he courted widespread controversy—and hostility from fellow Indian
nationalists—when along with fellow Allahabad lawyer Benjamin
Lindsay he accepted the role of reporting to the government on the
legality and conditions of the internment of Khilafat leaders Shaukat
and Muhammad Ali.70 Not unlike many of the elite men of the
Palestinian national movement, Syed Abdul Rauf’s personal and
political life story is one in which commitment to self-determination
and indigenous rights exists closely bound up with the colonial state
and its structures of power and domination.
        The most detailed account of the collapse of the Winter Palace
and the deaths of Lady Abdul Rauf, her maid, and her friend highlights
the complex colonial and cultural place that the couple inhabited.
Douglas Duff, an officer in the Palestine police, claimed in his 1953
memoir of his years in Palestine to have been dispatched to Jericho on
the afternoon of the earthquake due to reports that “some eminent
visitors” had been trapped in a damaged hotel.71 Duff reports that he
112 Sarah Irving


reached the Winter Palace to find “a deeply distressed Indian, a retired
Justice of the Supreme Court, a K.C.I.E.” surrounded by men from
Jericho who were refusing to help remove the remains of the collapsed
hotel until paid from the “leather shoulder-satchel, literally stuffed
with gold sovereigns,” which the “Muslim Indian knight” was offering
to those who might help to save his wife from the ruins. In this version
of events, which places heavy emphasis on the class differences
between Abdul Rauf and the Palestinian men surrounding him, and
ignores any notion of commonalities such as religion, Duff started to
attack the local men with a hide whip to force them to start digging
and, if they stopped for any reason, compelled them to resume with
further blows of the whip and his fists.72 Eventually the bodies of the
two women are uncovered and, according to Duff:


       [Abdul Rauf] ran towards me as I freed her from the dust and
       the fallen masonry. He fell prone beside her, his eyes streaming
       with tears.
       “Please carry her yourself, British officer,” he begged, looking
       at me. “Carry her, sir, for I do not want her to be touched by any
       of these common men. Cover her face. She would be grieved if
       she knew that her features were exposed to the mob when she
       could no longer protect herself.” I have seen many tragedies
       before and since that afternoon in Jericho, but I have never felt
       worse than I did while I carried that poor, dusty, crumpled,
       shattered body of an old Indian woman to the shelter of the
       bougainvillaea-covered summer-house in the hotel garden.73


To the best of my knowledge, no other account exists to confirm or
deny Duff’s details. His predilection for purple prose and self-
aggrandizement means that we can assume some level of exaggeration;
certainly, Syed Abdul Rauf was not a “Supreme Court” judge and Duff
upgrades his honorific from Knight Bachelor to Knight Commander of
the Indian Empire (“K.C.I.E.”). It is also highly unlikely that Abdul
Rauf would have been carrying a satchel of gold sovereigns, at lunch
or any other time (but, like many of Duff’s other descriptions of Arabs
and other people not from northwest Europe, it does fit neatly into
Orientalist stereotypes). Some contemporary news stories back up the
idea that Abdul Rauf and his friend were indeed in a separate location
from their wives because the latter practiced strict veiling, so he may
have wished her face not to be on public display even after death, but
                             “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 113


the attitude to “common men” attributed to him by Duff, writing a
quarter-century later, looks suspiciously similar to Duff’s own
abundantly expressed class attitudes from elsewhere in the book.74
        Thinking about the death of Lady Abdul Rauf, it is hard not be
reminded of Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak’s famous account of what she
terms “widow sacrifice,” in which she suggests the complete obscuring
of the subjectivities of Indian women by multiple layers of colonial and
patriarchal silencing.75 At the moment of her death, Lady Abdul Rauf
is rendered nameless in news reports that flash around the world. A
day or two later, like Spivak’s “grotesquely mistranscribed” widows’
names,76 she appears again, in various spellings but always as “Sir
Abdul Raouf’s” Lady.77 Indeed, after months of searching, I still do not
know her own name. And, at the moment of her death, she and her
husband—who despite the obsequious references to markers of social
status is rendered equally nameless in Duff’s account—become signs
by which a violent, prejudiced former police officer can shore up his
racist imaginaries of working-class and peasant Palestinians. Duff’s
description of the weeping judge asking the white policeman to take
his wife out of the sight of the massed Palestinian men clearing the
rubble of the hotel is the ultimate expression of the colonial fantasy
“white men saving brown women from brown men,”78 whilst
simultaneously rendering Abdul Rauf, the other “brown man” of the
triangle, weak, emasculated, and dependent on white colonial power.
Would Duff have been so keen to aid the bereaved husband if he had
known of the latter’s decades of activity in the Indian nationalist
movement? Or would he have relished the opportunity to show off the
colonizer’s strength over that of the colonized, however much of an
elite social and professional status the latter may have attained?


THE INDIAN TRAVELER IN MANDATORY PALESTINE
In the end, almost all we know for sure of Lady Abdul Rauf is that she
died when part of the newly constructed Winter Palace Hotel in Jericho
collapsed in an earthquake on the afternoon of 11 July 1927. Beyond
that, like many women of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
of whatever nationality, her archival presence solely exists as the
shadow of a politically active, professionally successful husband. But
the provocations raised by the circumstances of her death open up a
range of questions and draw together a number of threads, which force
us to confront assumptions and stereotypes about the presence of
people from British-colonized India in British-colonized Palestine. This
article is just a starting point, a selection of examples, and possible
114 Sarah Irving


strands for future investigation. But, as the many types and trajectories
of Indian travelers to and in Palestine show, there is scope for a wide
range of investigations, whether of economic relations, south-south
solidarity in the face of British colonialism, extensions to the main hajj
which take in the Levant (with implications for understandings of the
role of Jerusalem and Palestine in Islamic thought), or the expansion of
studies of pilgrimage in Palestine to include Muslims alongside the
more commonly treated Christians and Jews.
         Furthermore, I argue that considering the place and experiences
of Indian travelers in Palestine pushes us to rethink some of the
entrenched narratives of the growing literature on tourism in the
Levant, with its Eurocentric foci. Yes, the huge growth in the numbers
of visitors to Palestine from the late nineteenth century on and after the
First World War was bound up with sociotechnical changes such as
steamships, railways, guidebooks, and travel agents. However, these
developments did not apply solely to European and North American
travelers; these new infrastructures and sources of knowledge and
encounter also applied to other peoples and other parts of the world,
albeit often intimately bound up with structures of colonialism.


NOTES

1 “Over One Hundred Dead in Palestine Earthquake,” Jewish Daily Bulletin,

13 July 1927, 4.
2 “Earthquake in Jerusalem—Numerous Deaths—Indian Lady Tourists

Killed at Jericho,” Times of India, 13 July 1927, 9.
3 Sir Syed Abdul Rauf’s name is transliterated in multiple ways in the Indian

press, government documents, and the secondary literature (mainly
Syed/Saiyid/Sayyid Abdul/Abdur Rauf/Raouf/Raoof). I have opted for the
version which appears used most frequently in documents closely related to
him and, thus, over which he may have had some influence regarding the
spelling.
4 In this article, Indians are defined broadly as inhabitants of British-ruled

South Asia, all of which was designated as India in travel documents, as well
as in press coverage. This definition thus includes individuals coming from
what, after 1947, would be considered Pakistan and East Pakistan, later
Bangladesh.
5 Michael Christopher Low, Imperial Mecca: Ottoman Arabia and the Indian

Ocean Hajj (New York: Columbia University Press, 2020), 153.
6 Thierry Zarcone, Sufi Pilgrims from Central Asia and India in Jerusalem (Kyoto:

Center for Islamic Area Studies at Kyoto University, 2009).
                                 “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 115



7 Gail Minault, The Khilafat Movement: Religious Symbolism and Political

Mobilization in India (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1982), 36.
8 The daughter of Palestine doctor and ethnographer Tawfik Canaan wrote,

for instance, that “Mother and father would go daily to the top of the Wall of
Jerusalem to look at their home. They witnessed it being ransacked, together
with the wonderful priceless library and manuscripts, which mother
guarded jealously and with great pride.” Quoted in Khaled Nashef, “Tawfik
Canaan: His Life and Works,” Jerusalem Quarterly 16 (2002): 24. Broader
discussions of the acquisition of both personal and institutional archives by
Israel in 1948 and after, as well as its impact, can be found in Gish Amit,
“Salvage or Plunder? Israel’s ‘Collection’ of Private Palestinian Libraries in
West Jerusalem,” Journal of Palestine Studies 40, no. 4 (Summer 2011): 6–23;
Ariella Azoulay, “Photographic Conditions: Looting, Archives, and the
Figure of the ‘Infiltrator,’” Jerusalem Quarterly 61 (Winter 2015): 6–22; Hannah
Mermelstein, “Overdue Books: Returning Palestine's ‘Abandoned Property’
of 1948,” Jerusalem Quarterly 47 (Autumn 2011): 46–64.
9 Displaced Archives, edited by James Lowry, contains several useful case

studies and comparative chapters on the damage or removal of archives by
colonial states. Lowry, ed., Displaced Archives (Abingdon: Routledge, 2017).
One of the most high-profile discussions of the removal and destruction of
colonial archives in recent years has been admission by the British
government in 2011 that it was illegally holding large numbers of documents
that had been removed from thirty-seven former colonies at the time they
became independent, between the late 1940s and the 1970s. This fact
emerged as a result of research conducted by historians, including David
Anderson and Caroline Elkins, for a legal case which resulted in a £20
million payment to former Mau Mau detainees who had been tortured by
British officials. David M. Anderson, “Guilty Secrets: Deceit, Denial, and the
Discovery of Kenya’s ‘Migrated Archive,’” History Workshop Journal 80
(Autumn 2015): 142–60; Caroline Elkins, Imperial Reckoning: The Untold Story
of Britain’s Gulag in Kenya (New York: Henry Holt, 2005).
10 Abilekh-Patal: Portal for Access to Archives and Learning,

https://www.abhilekh-patal.in/jspui/
11 See, for example, Umar Ryad, ed., The Hajj and Europe in the Age of Empire

(Leiden: Brill, 2017); Low, Imperial Mecca; John Slight, The British Empire and
the Hajj: 1865–1956 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015).
12 See, for example, Sebouh Aslanian, From the Indian Ocean to the

Mediterranean: The Global Trade Networks of Armenian Merchants from New Julfa
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2014); Sugata Bose and Ayesha
Jalal, eds., Oceanic Islam: Muslim Universalism and European Imperialism
(London: Bloomsbury, 2020); Sugata Bose, A Hundred Horizons: the Indian
Ocean in the Age of Global Empire (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
2006); Sara Keller, Knowledge and the Indian Ocean: Intangible Networks of
Western India and Beyond (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018); Linda
116 Sarah Irving



Boxberger, On the Edge of Empire: Hadhramawt, Emigration, and the Indian
Ocean, 1880s–1930s (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2002); Laila
Fawaz and Christopher Bayly, eds., Modernity and Culture from the
Mediterranean to the Indian Ocean (New York: Columbia University Press,
2002); Scott Kugle, Hajj to the Heart: Sufi Journeys across the Indian Ocean
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2021).
13 See, for example, Philip Gooding, On the Frontiers of the Indian Ocean World:

A History of Lake Tanganyika, c.1830–1890 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2022), 3–23; Beatrice Nicolini and Shihan de Silva Jayasuriya, Land and
Maritime Empires in the Indian Ocean (Milan: Educatt, 2017).
14 Ayesha Jalal, “Muslim Universalist Aspirations: Intimacies between the

Indus-Gangetic Plain and the Indian Ocean,” in Oceanic Islam: Muslim
Universalism and European Imperialism, eds. Ayesha Jalal and Sugata Bose
(London: Bloomsbury, 2020), 28.
15 Zarcone, Sufi Pilgrims from Central Asia; Alexandre Papas, Thomas

Welsford, and Thierry Zarcone, eds., Central Asian Pilgrims: Hajj Routes and
Pious Visits between Central Asia and the Hijaz (Berlin: Klaus Schwarz Verlag,
2012), 14, 35, 48–50, 110, 113.
16 Omar Khalidi, “Indian Muslims and Palestinian Awqaf,” Jerusalem

Quarterly 40 (2009): 53–54.
17 Established in 1906, the All-India Muslim League was intended to provide

a political voice to India’s large Islamic minority, after Muslims involved in
nationalist groups such as the Congress Party objected to Hindu domination
in terms of both personnel and agenda.
18 Navtej Sarna, Indians at Herod’s Gate: A Jerusalem Tale (New Delhi: Rupa

Publications, 2014), 38.
19 The Khilafat movement emerged in British-ruled India due to fears at the

beginning of World War I that Indian soldiers would be expected to fight the
Ottoman Empire, the sultan of which was still also regarded as the caliph of
all Sunni Muslims. The movement saw itself as an expression of solidarity
with fellow Muslims, but also as sign of cooperation with Indian Hindus in
campaigning for Indian independence.
20 Khalidi, “Indian Muslims,” 53–54.

21 Secretary of the Palestine Indian Association to the High Commissioner, 23

March 1941, “Palestine Indian Association,” D65 109/11, Israel State
Archives (ISA).
22 Low, Imperial Mecca, 209–16.

23 I am indebted to Till Grallert for sharing this example with me, found

during his research in the British National Archives at Kew.
24 Seemi Alavi, “‘Fugitive Mullahs and Outlawed Fanatics’: Indian Muslims

in Nineteenth Century Trans-Asiatic Imperial Rivalries,” Modern Asian
Studies 45, no. 6 (2011): 1337–82.
                                 “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 117



25 Alavi, “‘Fugitive Mullahs and Outlawed Fanatics.’”

26 “Protection: Beit Sawa Indians: French Attitudes towards Village,” 1926–

27, FO 684.4, British National Archives, Kew (BNA).
27 Damascus to Secretary of State for Persian Affairs, London, 27 June 1927,

FO 684/4, BNA.
28 Louis Allday, “Destitute Indian Women in 1930s Damascus,” Untold Lives

(blog), British Library, 8 June 2018,
https://blogs.bl.uk/untoldlives/2018/06/destitute-indian-women-in-1930s-
damascus.html.
29 Ulrike Freitag notes, for example, that by the mid-nineteenth century,

steamships traveling into and out of Jedda were run by Indian entrepreneurs
as well as Europeans, and that both were resented by local boatmen. Freitag,
A History of Jeddah: The Gate to Mecca in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020), 58.
30 See, e.g. Kobi Cohen-Hattab and Noam Shoval, Tourism, Religion and

Pilgrimage in Jerusalem (Abingdon: Routledge, 2015) and a plethora of other
works by Cohen-Hattab; Jasmin Daam, “Palestinian Past, Zionist Future:
Vocabularies of Tourism in Mandate Palestine,” Contemporary Levant,
published ahead of print (June 2023); Sarah Irving, “‘This is Palestine’:
History and Modernity in Guidebooks to Mandate Palestine,” Contemporary
Levant 4,1 (2019): 64-74; Daniella Ohad Smith, “Hotel Design in British
Mandate Palestine: Modernism and the Zionist Vision,” Journal of Israeli
History 29,1 (2010): 99-123.
31 The main way in which assumptions about visitors to Palestine emerge is

that of omission; despite encompassing titles, the actual subjects of many
articles are almost entirely of European origins, whether Christian or Jewish.
For example, see Cohen-Hattab and Shoval, Tourism, Religion and Pilgrimage
in Jerusalem; Serena Di Napi and Arturo Marzano, eds., “Travels to the ‘Holy
Land’: Perceptions, Representations and Narratives,” special issue, Quest:
Issues in Contemporary Jewish History 6 (2013); Thomas Wright, ed., Early
Travels in Palestine (Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias Press, 2008).
32 Aparajita Mukhopadhyay, “Colonised Gaze?: Guidebooks and Journeying

in Colonial India,” South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies 37, no. 4 (2014):
656–69.
33 Rachel Mairs, “Singara Devi Chenapa – Mersha Chinnappa: Investigating a

Female Author of a Military Arabic Phrasebook,” in Women in the History of
Language Learning and Teaching, eds. Sabine Doff, Giovanni Iamartino, and
Rachel Mairs (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, forthcoming).
34 “Deir El Belah War Cemetery,” Commonwealth War Graves Commission

(CWGC), website, accessed 31 May 2022, https://www.cwgc.org/visit-
us/find-cemeteries-memorials/cemetery-details/71200/deir-el-belah-war-
cemetery/; “Jerusalem Indian War Cemetery,” CWGC,
https://www.cwgc.org/visit-us/find-cemeteries-memorials/cemetery-
118 Sarah Irving



details/72111/jerusalem-indian-war-cemetery/; “Haifa Indian Cemetery,”
CWGC, https://www.cwgc.org/visit-us/find-cemeteries-
memorials/cemetery-details/72107/haifa-indian-cemetery/; “Tul Karm War
Cemetery,” CWGC, https://www.cwgc.org/visit-us/find-cemeteries-
memorials/cemetery-details/4007282/tul-karm-war-cemetery/; “Gaza War
Cemetery,” CWGC, https://www.cwgc.org/visit-us/find-cemeteries-
memorials/cemetery-details/71701/gaza-war-cemetery/.
35 Alan Axelrod and Michael Dubowe, Mercenaries: A Guide to Private Armies

and Private Military Companies (Thousand Oaks, CA: CQ Press, 2014), 70.
36 Under-Secretary of State, India Office to Air Ministry, 25 January 1922,

Palestine–India Correspondence, CO 733/32, p. 45, BNA.
37 “Grants for Recreational Purposes to Indian Troops,” series Palestine 1922,

vol. 12, CO 733/29, fol. 374–89, bound volume, BNA.
38 Omar Khalidi, “Ethnic Group Recruitment in the Indian Army: The

Contrasting Cases of Sikhs, Muslims, Gurkhas and Others,” Pacific Affairs 74,
no. 4 (2001–2002): 530; Kate Imy, Faithful Fighters: Identity and Power in the
British Indian Army (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).
39 “Famida [sic] Begum and Mohemed [sic] Shamim, wife/son of Abdul

Rashid,” 1945–47, 2282/020, ISA.
40 Existing work includes Joan G. Roland, Jews in British India: Identity in a

Colonial Era (Waltham, MA: Tauber Institute for the Study of European
Jewry, 1989); selections of Sarah Abrevaya Stein’s copious work on the
Sephardic diaspora, including “Protected Persons?: The Baghdadi Jewish
Diaspora, the British State, and the Persistence of Empire,” American
Historical Review 116, no. 1 (2011): 80–108; and specialized studies such as
Suparna Bhattacharya, “Women in Sport: The Parsis and Jews in Twentieth‐
Century India,” International Journal of the History of Sport 21, no. 3–4 (2004):
502–29.
41 “Social and Personal: Chief Secretary’s House,” Palestine Post, 24 October

1934, 5.
42 Bernard Wasserstein, “Clipping the Claws of the Colonisers: Arab Officials

in the Government of Palestine, 1917–48,” Middle Eastern Studies 13, no. 2
(1977): 186–87.
43 Daam, “Palestinian Past, Zionist Future”: 1–2

https://doi.org/10.1080/20581831.2023.2221086.
44 “Moslem Indian Prince Here,” Palestine Post, 22 October 1934, 5.

45 “Social and Personal,” Palestine Post, 28 October 1934, 5.

46 David De Vries, Diamonds and War: State, Capital, and Labor in British-Ruled

Palestine (New York: Berghahn Books, 2010), 259, 261.
47 “Shantilal Motilal Mehta,” 2317/137, ISA.

48 “Jasani, Ratilal B.,” 2318/086, ISA.
                                 “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 119



49 “Raman N. Jasani,” 2321/053, ISA.

50 Khalidi, “Indian Muslims,” 52.

51 Ibid., 56.

52 “Indian Islamic Propaganda in Palestine and Syria,” Palestine 1921, vol. 12,

CO 733/12, pp. 83–87, bound volume, BNA.
53 Ian Henderson Douglas, Abul Kalam Azad: An Intellectual and Religious

Biography (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1988), 178.
54 Minault, The Khilafat Movement, 10, 14.

55 Maoz Azaryahu and Yitzhak Reiter, “The Geopolitics of Interment: An

Inquiry into the Burial of Muhammad Ali in Jerusalem, 1931,” Israel Studies
20, no. 1 (Spring 2015): 33–37.
56 Azaryahu and Reiter, “The Geopolitics of Interment,” 37.

57 “21,000 at Funeral of Muhammad Ali,” New York Times, 24 January 1931, 9.

58 Canaan is named as “Dr. Canon” in the book but can clearly be identified

from his description as “an Arab by birth, a Christian by religion, a German
by education, and cosmopolitan by conviction,” as well as from Choudhury’s
observations of his interlocutor as a leader amongst Palestinian nationalists,
recently released from British prison, well-informed on the many problems
of British rule in India, and as a talented pianist who resorted to the
instrument to hide his tears at Choudhury’s accounts of Indian women and
children starving to death during the recent Bengal famine. M. L. Roy
Choudhury, Egypt in 1945 (Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press, 1946), xv–
xvii.
59 Despite its imperial associations, Choudhury’s book uses English as a

lingua franca, highlighting the complex ways in which imposed
infrastructures (whether of travel, bureaucracy or language) were subverted
by colonized peoples.
60 “Pilgrims for Jeddah,” Times of India, 27 April 1927, 5.

61 “Pilgrims for Jeddah.”

62 “Retirement of the Hon`ble Mr. Justice Abdur Rauf of the Lahore High

Court, and the appointment of Mr. A. Campbell, I.C.S. in the Resultant
Vacancy. Appointment of Kunwar Kalip Singh, Bar-at-Law as an Additional
Judge of the Lahore High Court,” PR_000001179817, National Archives of
India (NAI), accessible online, last updated 24 August 2023,
https://www.abhilekh-patal.in/; “Appointment of Mr. Saiyid Muhammad
Abdur Rauf, Khan Bahadur, Barrister-at-Law, to Act as a Judge of the
Allahabad High Court, Vice the Hon`ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Rafiq,
Granted Furlough,” PR_000001171039, NAI; “Local and Provincial,” Tribune,
14 March 1919, 6.
63 High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, “List of Former Hon’ble Judges,

Arranged According to Date of Appointment, 1900–1990,” Allahabad High
120 Sarah Irving



Court, website, accessed 1 June 2022,
https://www.allahabadhighcourt.in/Judges/ex-judges/ex-judge1900-
1990.htm; “Meeting of Ghazipur Mahomedans,” Leader, 8 March 1918, 4;
“Welcome from Bar and Vakils’ Association,” Leader, 6 March 1918, 5.
64 “Joint Khilafat Conference,” Amrita Bazar Patrika, 7 June 1920, page

illegible; “City and Provinces,” Indian People, 7 February 1907, 2; “The
Kayasth Pathshala,” Indian People, 8 April 1909, 3; “The Hindu-Mahomedan
Conference at Allahabad,” Leader, 3 January 1911, 6; “Mahomedan Boarding
House, M.C. College, Allahabad,” Leader, 2 May 1911, 2; “Sanatana Dharm
College,” Tribune, 11 November 1922, 3.
65 C. A. Bayly, The Local Roots of Indian Politics: Allahabad 1880–1920 (Oxford:

Clarendon Press, 1975), 133.
66 Bayly, Local Roots, 139, 172; “The Hindu Mahomedan Conference,” Amrita

Bazar Patrika, 2 January 1911, page illegible.
67 “All-India Moslem League: Resolutions and Amendments,” Amrita Bazar

Patrika, 1 January 1914, 5; “Local and Provincial,” Indian People, 1 April 1909,
3; “The Moslem League Meeting at Lucknow,” Tribune, 28 July 1909, 6;
“Mahomedan Students,” Pioneer, 11 November 1890, 7.
68 Bayly, Local Roots, 173, 221.

69 Muzaffar Husain, Anil Kumar, B. D. Usmani, and Pramod Gupta, History

of Indian Nation: Post-Independence India (New Delhi: KK Publications, 2014),
43; “The Mahomedan Deputation to the Viceroy,” Indian People, 4 October
1906, 4.
70 “Case against Ali Brothers,” Amrita Bazar Patrika, 20 December 1918, page

illegible; “The Case of the Ali Brothers,” Amrita Bazar Patrika, 22 October
1922, 2.
71 Douglas Duff, Bailing with a Teaspoon (London: John Long, 1953), 154.

72 Duff, Bailing with a Teaspoon, 154–56. Duff’s book is replete with repellently

gleeful descriptions of meting out violence to both Arabs and Jews; these are
probably to some extent exaggerated. See Seán William Gannon, “Black-and-
Tan Tendencies: Policing Insurgency in the Palestine Mandate, 1922–1948,”
in Unconventional Warfare from Antiquity to the Present Day, eds. Brian Hughes
and Fergus Robson (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017), 71. Other
firsthand accounts of forcing reluctant Palestinians to dig earthquake rubble
also exist. British soldiers and police were quick to attribute this to idleness
and lack of care for their fellows, but we might question whether an
appreciation of the dangers of unprepared, unplanned disturbance of
collapsed buildings might also have played a part.
73 Duff, Bailing with a Teaspoon, 156.

74 Duff’s ideas of class, race and gender are, at times, surprisingly complex,

but it is possible to make some generalizations, including a respect for titles
(sir, knight, etc.) which borders on the obsequious, versus descriptions of
                               “Indian Lady Tourists Killed at Jericho” 121



working-class men, sex workers, and other subaltern groups as dirty,
corrupt, unwashed, and unintelligent.
75 Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Can the Subaltern Speak?,” in Colonial

Discourse and Post-Colonial Theory: A Reader, eds. Patrick Williams and Laura
Chrisman (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 66–111.
76 Spivak, “Can the Subaltern Speak?,” 93.

77 “Wife of Sir Abdul Raouf Dead,” Bombay Chronicle, 14 July 1927, 7.

78 Spivak, “Can the Subaltern Speak?,” 93.
