SOURCE: https://archive.org/download/palestinephysica00kitt/palestinephysica00kitt_djvu.txt

victoria  R'S"

COLLECTION

OF    VICTORIAN    BOOKS

AT

BRIGHAM    YOUNG

f

SKCOC

UNIVERSITY

Victorian
915.69
K65p
1841

-.as,..**::    «r«er<

J-  c  <  <■  *c<•:«.  «£  <-<

<_

■«^<  *     ^Sr*'!:*  *«:

<«*■  ■<

£<:f"r  A.&   read   $.[3

,,  ccclxxxiii  is  erroneously  numbered  ccclxxxii.

,,  ccccv,  foot-note  A,for  phaenicopteru9  read  phcenicopterus.

„  ccccvi,       ,,        P,  for  Rallas  read  Rallus.

,,  ccccxii,     „        c,  for  cuprimulgus  read  caprimulgus.

PHYSICAL

HISTORY    OF    PALESTINE.

CHAPTER  I.

SOURCES    OF     INFORMATION.

[Bringing  First  Fruits  to  Jerusalem.]

In  commencing  this  portion  of  our  undertaking,  we  feel  it  to  be  one  of  much  interest  and  very
considerable  difficulty.  Its  peculiar  interest  arises  chiefly  from  the  frequent  allusions  which
are  made  by  the  sacred  writers  to  the  physical  characteristics  and  natural  products  of  Palestine.
These  allusions  do  not,  in  general,  so  much  afford  information,  as  require  information  in
the  reader — such  information  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  possessed,  and  the  want  of
which  renders  many  of  the  passages  which  afford  such  references  difficult  to  understand,  or
particularly  liable  to  be  misunderstood.  For,  first,  the  amount  of  the  practical  information
which  might  be  obtained  from  the  Bible  itself  is  very  considerably  lessened  by  the  uncertainty
which  often  attends  the  results  of  the  most  laborious  or  ingenious  attempts  to  determine  the
species  of  plants  or  animals  which  the  Hebrew  names  denote;  and  then,  our  information
concerning  the  natural  history  of  Modern  Palestine  is  meagre  and  unsatisfactory,  to  a  degree
which  seems  astonishing,  when  we  consider  that  there  is  no  Asiatic  country  to  which  there  has

b  2

iv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

been  such  large  resort  of  travellers,  in  all  ages,  from  all  parts  of  Christendom ;  and  that  there
is  not  a  country  on  earth  concerning  which  so  many  books  have  been  written.  But  those
travellers  have  been,  for  the  most  part,  guided  by  such  religious  or  historical  associations  as
led  them  to  fill  their  books  with  descriptions  of  ruined  towns  and  remarkable  places,  unmindful
that,  properly  understood,  the  physical  condition  of  the  country,  its  animal  inhabitants,  and  its
vegetable  products,  furnish  a  class  of  Scriptural  associations  not  less  interesting  than  any  which
even  Palestine  can  offer.  But  to  enjoy  these  associations,  and  to  be  animated  by  them,  re-
quired a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  than  most  ancient  pilgrims  and  modern
travellers  have  possessed.  The  utmost  that  can  be  obtained  from  these  sources  are  rare  and
incidental  intimations  that  such  an  animal  was  seen  in  some  particular  locality,  or  that  such
a  plant  was  found  in  another.  The  collection  of  all  such  notices  that  exist  might  furnish  a
mass  of  valuable  contributions  towards  a  natural  history  of  Palestine.  But  to  wade  through
innumerable  volumes,  in  many  different  languages,  to  be  rarely  rewarded  with  a  contributory
fact,  is  a  work  of  such  time  and  labour  as  none  have  been  willing  to  undertake ;  and  therefore
no  such  history  is  yet  in  existence.

There  are  indeed  many  Natural  Histories  of  the  Bible,  the  value  of  which  cannot  be  too
highly  estimated.  They  notice  all  the  various  natural  products,  or  particular  classes  of  the
products,  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  :  but,  since  it  cannot  be  imagined  that  the  allusions  of
the  sacred  writers  refer  to  all,  or  to  more  than  a  considerable  proportion,  of  the  natural
products  of  their  countries,  such  works  cannot  be  regarded  as  natural  histories  of  Palestine,
nor  do  they  indeed  profess  to  be  such.  The  Natural  Histories  of  the  Bible  form,  indeed,  a
class  by  themselves,  having  less  connection  than  any  other  with  the  science  of  nature.  They
are  rather  works  of  criticism  than  of  natural  history — rather  the  productions  of  philologists
than  of  natural  historians.  Whatever  learning  could  do  on  such  subjects  has  been  done ;  and
whatever  might  be  done  by  science,  observation,  and  well-directed  research  has  been  left
undone.  The  process  usually  taken,  in  works  of  this  class,  has  been  to  exhaust  the  resources
of  philology  and  conjecture,  in  the  attempt  to  discover  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  name,  and
the  object  denoted  by  it.  We  have  already  stated  that,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  thing,
the  conclusion  arrived  at  is  often  unsatisfactory  or  uncertain.  But,  a  conclusion  being  taken,
the  ancient  writers  of  Greece  and  Rome  are  ransacked  to  supply  the  history  and  description
of  the  object;  and,  in  particular,  to  furnish  such  intimations  as  might  coincide  with  or
illustrate  those  of  the  sacred  writers.  All  this  was  very  proper ;  but  the  value  of  the  inform-
ation thus  collected,  as  contributory  to  a  Natural  History  of  Palestine,  might  have  been  very
greatly  enhanced  had  corroborations  and  elucidations  been  sought  in  the  actual  condition  of
the  country,  and  the  character  of  its  products  in  the  various  departments  of  nature.  But
this,  as  we  have  already  shown,  would  have  been  a  most  arduous  labour,  attended  with  many
disappointments,  and  has  not  been  executed.

At  the  very  head  of  the  class  of  writers  whose  works  we  have  endeavoured  to  characterise,
and,  perhaps,  the  sole  original  writer  on  the  zoology  of  the  Scriptures  which  that  class  con-
tains, stands  the  eminent  name  of  Samuel  Bochart,  whose  profound  learning  and  prodigious
reading  enabled  him,  in  his  great  work,  the  '  Hierozoiconf*  at  once  to  originate  and  exhaust
his  subject,  under  the  mode  of  treatment  which  we  have  described.  To  this  work  all  sub-
sequent writers  on  the  subject,  in  their  various  languages,  have  been  deeply  indebted;  and
most  of  them  have  been  satisfied  to  repeat  its  conclusions  and  statements,  under  forms
variously  modified  and  condensed.  The  immense  erudition  which  Bochart  brought  to  bear
on  every  subject  he  touched  made  it  appear  presumptuous  to  inquire  where  he  had  decided  ;
and  hence  the  mere  fancies  and  conjectures,  with  which  he  too  often  supplied  the  absence  of
facts,  and  his  forced  etymologies  and  doubtful  conclusions,  have  been  as  implicitly  adopted
by  later  writers  as  any  other  parts  of  his  extraordinary  performance.  It  thus  remains  that
Bochart  is  the  only  great  name  connected  with  the  zoology  of  the  Bible.  (')b

a  Samuelis  Bocharti  Hierozoicon,  sive  de  Animalibus  S.  Scripturae  :  recensuit  suis  Notis  adjectis  E.  F.  C.  Rosenmiiller.  Lips.
1793.     3  torais,  4to.

•>  We  take  this  opportunity  of  explaining  that  where  a  small  figure  is  thus  iutroduced  in  the  text,  it  refers  to  a  note  or  sup-
plementary explanation  or  statement  to  be  found  at  the  end  of  the  chapter.  References,  and  such  small  notes  and  elucidations
as  the  text  may  require,  will  be  disposed  of  in  the  usual  way,  at  the  foot  of  the  page.

Chap.  I.]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  v

But  the  botany  of  the  Scriptures  has  offered  a  subject  to  more  than  one  original  writer  •
yet  not  one  of  them  has  in  this  branch  of  inquiry  attained  an  eminence  comparable  to  that
which  Bochart  reached  in  another.  Their  works  are  comparatively  of  small  extent ;  nor  did
any  of  them,  like  the  author  of  the  '  Hierozoicon?  so  exhaust  their  subject  as  to  preclude  suc-
cessors and  competitors.  The  principle  on  which  they  proceeded  was  essentially  the  same  as
his;  but  while  none  excelled  and  scarcely  any  equalled  him  in  learning,  not  one,  except
Celsius,  approached  him  in  that  vast  and  ready  erudition  which  enabled  him  so  profusely
and  variously  to  support  his  views  by  facts  and  illustrations  from  the  classical  and  oriental
writers.  Another  disadvantage  under  which  Biblical  botanists  have  laboured  has  been,  that  it
is  still  more  difficult  to  identify  the  plants  than  even  the  animals  mentioned  in  Scripture  :  so
that  in  this  department,  even  more  than  in  the  zoology  of  the  Bible,  the  reader  is  perplexed
or  left  unsatisfied  by  abundance  of  unsupported  conjecture,  and  by  conclusions  unwarranted
by  the  premises  on  which  they  are  founded.

Although  the  botany  of  the  Bible  had  not  been  previously  overlooked  entirely,  the  first
name  of  any  note  in  this  line  of  inquiry  is  that  of  John  Henry  Ursinus,  whose  '  Arboretum
Biblicum  'a  appeared  the  year  before  (1663)  the  first  edition  of  the  '  Hierozoicon '  of  Bochart.
Under  the  reservation  we  have  stated  in  reference  to  the  class,  this  is  a  learned  and  useful
work ;  which  character  applies  also,  though  in  a  less  degree,  to  the  botanical  tracts  which
form  about  one-half  of  a  second  volume  in  the  edition  of  1685.  These  are,  '  Sacra  Phyto-
logia,,h  '  Herbarius  Sacer,'  and  '  Hortus  Aromaticus.''  The  first  is  the  most  fanciful,  and  the
second  is  now  the  most  useful.

The  next  Biblical  botanist  of  note  is  Matthew  Hiller,  who  died  (H25)  a  few  months  before
his  able  and  judicious  work,  the  '  Hierophyticon,,c  appeared.  This  work  assumes  the  form
of  a  commentary  on  those  passages  of  Scripture  in  which  plants  are  mentioned.  We  regard
with  much  satisfaction  one  short  supplementary  chapter  of  this  work  (chap,  xl.),  in  which  the
author  collects,  from  various  sources,  notices  of  plants  actually  growing  in  Palestine.  The  list
is  meagre,  and  the  authorities  consulted  very  few.  But  it  suffices  to  show  that  Hiller  was  sen-
sible of  the  value  of  such  information ;  and  if  he  had  extended  his  researches  in  this  direc-
tion, and  allowed  the  results  to  influence  and  guide  his  larger  investigations,  he  might  have
produced  such  a  work  on  Scriptural  botany  as  is  still  a  desideratum  in  Biblical  literature.

But  the  most  distinguished  name  in  this  branch  of  Biblical  illustration  is  undoubtedly  that
of  Olaus  Celsius.*1  This  distinguished  man — whose  name  may  be  best  known  to  general
readers  as  that  of  the  patron  of  Linnaeus — appears  to  us  to  have  treated  the  branch  of
inquiry  which  engaged  his  attention  in  a  more  judicious  spirit  than  had  been  exhibited  in  any
previous  work  on  any  part  of  the  natural  history  of  the  Bible.  From  this  we  do  not  except
the  '  Hierozoicon ;'  and  if  the  name  of  Celsius  is  less  eminent  than  that  of  Bochart,  it  can  only
be  from  the  more  limited  range  of  his  inquiries,  and  the  comparatively  small  size  of  the  work
which  resulted  from  them.  Celsius — while  he  equalled  any  of  his  predecessors  in  acquaintance
with  the  materials  of  illustration  which  the  languages  of  Greece  and  Rome  supplied,  and
was  exceeded  by  none  in  the  ready  use  of  the  certainly  not  less  valuable  information  derivable
from  oriental  sources — excelled  them  all  in  the  intimate  knowledge  of  living  nature,  whereby
he  was  enabled  to  identify,  with  unusual  confidence  and  success,  many  of  the  subjects  of
botany  mentioned  in  ancient  writings.  He  had,  moreover,  travelled  in  the  East,  and  was  so
fully  impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  positive  facts  which  only  travellers  in  Palestine
could  supply,  for  the  elucidation  of  the  natural  history  of  that  country,  that,  although  he
leans  much  towards  that  learned  mode  of  investigation  which  we  have  already  characterised,
he  gave  very  unwonted  prominence  and  weight  to  the  facts  of  this  class  with  which  his  tolerably
extensive  reading  in  books  of  travel  in  Palestine  had  made  him  acquainted.     This  combination

a  Jo.  Henr.  Ursini  Arboretum  Biblicum,  in  quo  Arbores  et  Frutices  passim  in  S.  Literis  occurrentes,  Notis  Philologicis,  Philo-
sophicis,  Theologicis,  exponuntur  et  illustrantur.  Norimb.  1685,  12mo.  This  title  well  expresses  the  general  character  of  such
works.  The  second  work  or  volume,  the  tracts  contained  in  which  are  separately  noticed  in  the  text,  bears  the  collective  title  of
*  Historian  Plantarum  Biblicae.'

b  He  explains  his  meaning:  '  Sacra  Phytologia  est  descriptio  historico — theologica  Stirpium  Biblicarum  ad  laudem  Creatoris.'

c  '  Hierophyticon,  sive  Commentarius  in  Loca Scriptural  Sacrae,  qua?  Plantarum  faciiuit  Mentionem.'  Trajecti  ad Rhenum,  1725, 4to.

d  Olavi  Celsii  Hierobotanicon,  sive  de  Plantis  S.  Scripturae,  Dissertationes  Breves.    Amstel.,  1748.

vi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

of  valuable  qualities  placed  the  book  of  Celsius  at  the  very  head  of  its  class,  and  even  now
renders  it  most  valuable,  not  less  to  the  scientific  botanist  than  to  the  student  of  the  Scriptures.

There  is  an  immense  work,  the  '  Physica  Sacra  'a  of  Scheuchzer  (f)  in  eight  folio  volumes,
enriched  by  *750  engravings,  executed  by  the  first  designers  and  engravers  of  the  day,  the
costly  character  of  which  renders  it  of  difficult  access,  and  scarcely  to  be  seen  but  in  great
public  libraries.  This  would  seem  to  throw  into  the  shade  all  the  works  we  have  mentioned.
But,  although  it  discusses,  and  gives  a  picture  of,  every  matter  which  can,  by  any  construction,
however  violent,  be  forced  into  a  natural  history  of  the  Scriptures,  it  is  in  reality  a  very  inferior
performance,  and  exhibits  so  little  of  judgment,  either  in  the  text  or  plates,  and  is  so  lacking
in  original  value  (except  perhaps  in  the  portions  which  treat  of  reptiles  and  insects),  that
scarcely  any  writer  refers  to  it  as  an  authority,  although  the  circumstance,  that  some  of  the
plates  represent  subjects  not  elsewhere  engraved,  gives  the  work  a  certain  value  to  the  general
naturalist.

The  above  works  in  zoology  and  botany  are  the  stock  books  from  which  have  been  derived
the  substance  of  the  materials  which  form  the  current  Natural  Histories  of  the  Bible.

And  here  we  may  notice  two  English  writers  who,  although  they  did  not  themselves  compose
Natural  Histories  of  the  Bible,  have  exerted,  at  least  in  this  country  and  America,  a  very  salu-
tary influence  upon  such  of  these  histories  as  have  since  their  time  appeared.  These  are
Harmer  and  Charles  Taylor.  The  former,  in  his  '  Observations  on  Various  Passages  of  Scrip-
ture,' started  and  pursued  the  idea  that  many  passages  in  the  Bible — an  Oriental  book — might
be  explained  and  illustrated  solely  from  the  works  of  travellers  in  the  East.  The  ingenuity  and
success  with  which  Harmer  applied  this  principle  of  explanation  recommended  it  to  general
attention ;  and  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that,  through  his  own  labours,  and  the  more  extended
application  of  the  principle  by  others,  the  Bible  is  now  much  better  understood  than  it  has
been  at  any  time  since  its  authority  has  been  received  in  distant  countries,  and  rejected  in  that
country  where  it  originated.  As  it  has  been  the  object  of  Harmer  and  his  followers  mainly  to
illustrate  the  customs  mentioned  or  alluded  to  in  Scripture,  questions  of  natural  history  did  not
obtain  a  principal,  or  even  a  large  portion  of  their  attention ;  and  hence  the  chief  value  of
their  labours  is  to  be  sought  in  the  principle  on  which  they  proceeded,  rather  than  in  the
actual  results  of  their  researches.

Of  the  various  writers  who  have  walked  in  the  path  which  Harmer  may  be  said  to  have
opened,  not  one  has  done  so  much  for  the  natural  history  of  Scripture,  whether  in  extent,
or  scientific  arrangement,  as  Mr.  Charles  Taylor  in  his  '  Fragments,'  appended  to  his  edition
of  Calmet's  'Dictionary  of  the  Bible. '(3)  These  'Fragments'  embrace  a  large  variety  of
subjects  for  the  illustration  of  Scripture,  all  of  them  discussed  with  unusual  ingenuity  and
acuteness,  and  forming  altogether  a  very  interesting  collection  of  facts,  and  of  reasonings
upon  them.  It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  a  great  proportion  of  the  facts  bear  very
little  reference  to  the  purpose  for  which  they  are  adduced,  and  that  the  conclusions  from
them  are  often  not  to  be  received  without  considerable  caution.  The  exuberant  fancy  of
Mr.  Taylor  led  him  to  find  points  of  illustration  in  remote  analogies  with  which  cooler  minds
cannot  be  satisfied,  and  to  build  elaborate  and  often  beautiful  hypotheses  upon  foundations  far
too  frail  to  sustain  the  superstructure.  These  observations  apply  with  full  force  to  several  of
the  '  Fragments,'  which  discuss  disputed  points  of  Scripture  natural  history ;  and  it  is  not  in
these  that  Taylor's  chief  service  in  this  department  of  Scriptural  illustration  is  to  be  sought,
but  rather  in  his  '  Expository  Index  referring  to  Subjects  of  Science  in  the  Order  of  the  Sacred
Books,'  and  in  his  '  Attempt  to  arrange  in  a  Systematic  Order  the  Natural  History  of  the
Sacred  Scripture.'  These  contain  short  remarks  on  most  of  the  subjects  of  natural  history
mentioned  in  the  Bible ;  and  they  are  most  truly  valuable,  although  they  partake  largely  in
the  common  faults — that  the  identifications  of  existing  animals  and  products  with  those  men-
tioned in  Scripture  are  often  precarious  and  uncertain,  and  that,  in  the  search  for  the  ancient
products  of  Palestine,  its  existing  products  have  not  received  sufficient   attention,  so   that

a  '  Physica  Sacra,  hoc  est,  Historia  Naturalis  Bibliae.'  August.  Vindel.  1731 — 1735.  4  vols,  folio.  A  German  edition  appeared
simultaneously,  and  translations  in  French  and  Dutch  soon  after  the  completion  of  the  work.  It  is  sometimes  done  up  in  six  or
even  eight  volumes.    The  author  was  a  Swiss  physician,  who  died  before  the  publication  of  the  work  was  completed.

Chap.  I.]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  vii

illustrations  have  been  sought  in  countries  too  remote,  and  too  different  in  climate  and
situation,  to  offer  satisfactory  results.  It  is  indeed  surprising,  to  those  who  carefully  consider
this  and  other  works  of  the  same  description,  how  few  of  the  species  enumerated  and  described
have  been  ascertained  to  exist  in  Palestine.

A  Natural  History  of  the  Bible  forms  a  considerable  portion  of  a  larger  work  by  the  Rev.
Professor  Paxton,  first  published,  in  1819,  in  two  octavo  volumes,  and  enlarged  to  three  in
the  second  edition  of  1825.  It  is  entitled  '  Illustrations  of  Scripture,'  and,  in  the  main,
is  a  useful  and  able  digest,  under  distinct  heads,  of  information  previously  collected  by  others.
This  work  has  no  original  merit  beyond  that  of  arrangement  and  analysis  :  for,  although  the
author's  reading  enabled  him  to  adduce  some  new  facts  in  illustration  of '  Manners  and  Cus-
toms,'  the  'Geography'  is  almost  wholly  from  Bochart's  '  Phaleg;'  and  in  the  'Natural  History'
the  zoological  articles  are  chiefly  drawn  from  the  same  author's  iHierozoicon,'>  and  the  botanical
from  Calmet's  Dictionary  and  Taylor's  '  Expository  Index.'  This  part  of  the  work,  indeed,
only  professes  to  notice  the  subjects  of  natural  history  which  are  prominently  mentioned  in
the  Holy  Scriptures.

But  the  praise  of  producing  the  very  best  work  which  the  English  language  possesses  on
the  general  subject  is  due  to  an  American,  Dr.  Thaddeus  Mason  Harris,  whose  very  able  little
work,  the  '  Natural  History  of  the  Bible,'  has  become  no  less  popular  in  this  country  than
in  the  United  States.  The  great  merit  of  this  book  is  the  clear  and  satisfactory  manner  in
which  it  condenses  the  large  masses  of  facts  and  reasonings  which  had  gradually  accumu-
lated on  the  various  subjects  on  which  it  treats,  and  in  the  judgment  with  which  conflicting
alternatives  are  balanced,  and  a  position  chosen.  Yet  this  excellent  judgment  being  frequently
exercised  upon  imperfect  and  unsatisfactory  materials,  the  result  of  the  most  careful  deter-
mination is  very  often  inconclusive.  The  judicious  author,  having  the  results  of  all  previous
inquiry  before  him,  could  not  fail  to  make  a  better  book  than  any  of  his  predecessors.  He  has
condensed  their  merits,  but  has  not  entirely  escaped  their  defects, — which  we  have  already
described  as  arising  from  a  want  of  sufficient  inquiry  into  the  actual  zoology  and  botany  of
Palestine.  It  is  so  far  from  true  that  "  he  has  exhausted  all  the  learning  of  naturalists  and
travellers ,"a  that  in  his  list  of  authorities  (fifty-one  works  by  forty-two  authors)  the  names  of
only  three  actual  travellers  in  Palestine  occur ;  these  being,  Rauwolff,  Hasselquist,  and  Shaw.
"  The  learning  of  naturalists  and  travellers  "  is  a  very  remarkable  expression ;  and  it  is  most
true  that  the  authors  of  Natural  Histories  of  the  Bible  have,  more  than  any  others,  habitually
forgotten  that  natural  history  is  eminently  a  practical  science — a  science  of  observation ;
although,  in  the  natural  history  of  such  a  country  as  Palestine,  philological  learning  may
doubtless  be  of  much  service,  in  guiding  some  of  the  naturalist's  researches,  and  in  assisting
some  of  his  conclusions.

Having  thus  characterised  the  labours  of  the  principal  writers  on  the  Natural  History  of  the
Bible,  it  remains  to  inquire  what  has  been  done  to  illustrate  the  actual  natural  history  of
Palestine.  We  have  already  stated  that  almost  nothing  has  been  formally  effected  in  this
matter ;  and  hence  the  question  is  rather,  what  materials  for  such  a  history  lie  dispersed  and
uncollected  in  the  mass  of  European  literature  ? — and  this  may  be  still  further  narrowed  to  the
question,  what  travellers  afford  the  most  ample  notices  of  the  produce  of  the  country  ?

The  greater  number  of  the  older  travellers  in  Palestine  were  led  thither  principally  or  solely
by  religious  motives — being  in  fact  monks  and  pilgrims,  who  diligently  sought  out,  and  amply
described,  every  spot  which  was  accounted  sacred,  and  who  had  eyes  and  hearts  for  nothing
else ;  and,  by  minute  accounts  of  that  which  they  had  witnessed  of  this  description,  to  edify
and  instruct  those  pious  persons  who  were  unable  to  make  similar  pilgrimages,  was  deemed  by
them  the  highest  honour  to  which  they  could  aspire,  and  the  most  useful  service  which  they
could  render  to  their  country.  Such  accounts  are  far  more  numerous  than  is  usually  imagined,
and  have  for  centuries  quite  exhausted  a  subject  on  which,  nevertheless,  a  new  book  still  appears
almost  every  year.  Before  the  happy  idea  was  discovered,  that  books  of  travel  containing  pre-
t

a  '  North  American  review,'  vol.  x.  p.  92.

viii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

cisely  the  same  substantive  facts  as  had  already  been  supplied,  times  without  number,  might
be  made  to  read  differently  by  minute  accounts  of  the  traveller's  own  reflections  and  personal
adventures, — before  this,  the  wearisome  sameness  of  the  books  on  the  Holy  Land,  numerous
as  they  were,  is  inconceivable  from  any  examples  now  offered  to  our  notice.  The  route  was  in
nearly  all  cases  the  same — the  places  visited  and  the  objects  noticed  the  same — and  the
accounts  of  the  same  things  and  places  were  given  in  as  nearly  the  same  form  as  well
could  be.

The  earliest  itineraries  and  descriptions  were  in  general  very  commendably  brief;  and  their
notices  of  places  have  a  considerable  topographical  value,  from  the  materials  of  comparison
which  they  afford,  and  from  the  means  of  identifying  doubtful  sites  which  they  sometimes
supply.  But  here  their  use  to  the  present  age  is  at  an  end.  Several  of  the  earliest  accounts
— that  is,  those  of  the  ages  prior  to  the  Crusades,  have  been  committed  to  the  press  by  different
editors;  several  in  the  Acta  Sanctorum  of  the  Bollandists  and  of  Mabillon.  As  none  of
them  offer  any  contributions  to  the  physical  history  of  Palestine,  it  is  not  needful  that  they
should  in  this  place  receive  any  further  notice.

The  Crusades  contributed  to  give  the  people  of  Europe  a  degree  of  knowledge  concerning
Palestine,  which  never  existed  before,  and  has  not  existed  since.  The  letters  of  the  Crusaders
to  their  friends  in  Europe  was  one  important  contribution;  while  the  numbers  of  warriors
and  pilgrims  who  returned  to  their  homes  supplied  the  hearth  of  the  peasant  and  the  shop
of  the  artificer,  not  less  than  the  hall  of  the  noble,  with  a  living  witness  and  describer,
whose  accounts  of  his  doings,  his  marches,  his  drink,  his  food,  and  his  manner  of  life  while
in  the  Holy  Land,  could  not  fail  to  include  much  information  regarding  the  natural  condition
and  characteristics  of  the  country.  This  also  must  have  been  true  of  the  accounts  of  public
transactions,  private  enterprises,  and  military  operations  which  were  constantly  arriving ;  while
the  tales  and  metrical  romances  founded  thereon  could  not  but  in  some  degree  contribute  to
the  same  result.  Indeed,  during  this  age,  accounts  of  the  holy  "  stations,"  as  they  were
called,  by  pilgrims  or  monks,  gave  place  to  accounts  of  the  progress  of  the  "  holy  war,"  or
of  the  more  marked  episodes  which  it  offered;  and  although  the  writers  did  not  formally
profess  to  describe  the  country,  their  statements  incidentally  furnish  more  information  con-
tributory to  its  physical  history  than  had  previously  been  supplied  in  any  form.  They  do  not
indeed  often  descend  to  notice  particular  products ;  but  the  notices  of  the  natural  aspect  of
the  country,  its  seasons,  and  its  physical  phenomena  in  such  works  as  the  History  of  William
of  Tyre,  and  some  of  the  other  pieces  in  the  '  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos '  have  a  value  which  has
not  been  duly  estimated.  One  of  the  writers  of  this  class  and  age,  James  de  Vitry,  who  was
Bishop  of  Cesarea  (Accon)  in  Palestine,  in  the  early  part  of  the  thirteenth  century,  does  indeed,
in  his  '  Historia  Orientalis,  sive  Hierosolymitance?  give  a  formal  description  of  the  condition
of  the  country,  topographical,  physical,  moral,  and  religious.  The  few  short  chapters  on
natural  history  are  not  very  satisfactory  or  of  much  importance,  nor  is  their  range  confined  to
Palestine ;  but  they  are  interesting  as  an  instance  of  attention  to  a  class  of  subjects  which  had
been  generally  overlooked.

To  about  the  middle  of  the  same  century  belongs  the  very  valuable  work  of  Brocard, a  a
German  monk,  who  spent  several  years  in  the  Holy  Land.  He  resided  principally  at  Acre,
from  whence  he  made  excursions  in  all  directions.  The  topographical  value  of  his  work  is
very  great,  as  he  saw  many  towns  and  villages  which  have  since  disappeared,  and  visited  many
places  to  which,  until  lately,  it  has  been  impossible  to  penetrate.  Hence  this  book  was  the
main  stay,  after  the  '  Onomasticon  '  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  of  the  great  Biblical  topographers
of  the  18th  century ;  and  Le  Clerc  even  printed  it  entire  at  the  end  of  his  edition  of  the  work
just  named.  He  was  a  good  general  observer ;  and  sometimes  describes,  with  so  much  exact-
itude and  clearness,  plants  which  were  strange  to  him,  that  they  are  readily  recognised  by  the
botanist,  though  he  does  not  indicate  their  names.

a  '  Brocardi  Monaehi  Ordiuis  Praedicatorum,  Descriptio  Terrae  Sanctae.'  Basil,  1555.  In  biographical  accounts  he  is  often  con-
founded with  a  Dominican  monk  of  the  same  name,  who  lived  ten  years  in  the  convent  of  Mount  Sion,  and  hence  obtained  the
surname  of  Brocardus  de  Monte  Sion.  Even  the  '  Biographie  Universelle '  makes  this  mistake.  But  they  were  different  per-
sons; and  our  Brocard  dedicates  his  book  to  the  other.

Chap.  I.]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  ix

The  observations  which  have  been  already  made,  on  the  general  character  of  the  works  in
Palestine,  must  be  understood  to  extend  down  to  the  latter  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.
They  were  of  what  we  may  call  the  Pilgrim  class  of  travellers,  and  the  notice  which  we  have
taken  of  them  is  intended  to  apply  to  this  extended  period.  After  the  Crusades,  however,  the
accounts  of  the  same  things  became  gradually  more  ample  than  they  had  been,  and  some
ingenious  persons  having  introduced  the  plan  of  inserting,  in  their  accounts  of  the  several
pilgrim  "  stations,"  the  regular  prayers  which  the  Catholic  Church  had  appropriated  to  these
stations,  the  practice  became  so  largely  followed,  that  for  a  long  time  a  book  without  such
appendages  was  of  rare  occurrence.  This  was  certainly  the  principal  improvement  which
the  mass  of  books  received,  until  the  practice  for  travellers  to  furnish  their  accounts  in  their
own  language,  instead  of  the  Latin,  by  increasing  the  number  of  authors  and  the  size  of  books,
encouraged  the  development  of  distinguishing  characteristics,  while  the  same  general  tone  and
spirit  were  preserved.

Such  works  as  that  which  relates  the  journey  to  Jerusalem  of  Anne  Cheron,  in  her  eightieth
year,a  demonstrate  that  even  late  in  the  seventeenth  century  the  spirit  of  pilgrimage  still
glowed  with  an  ardour  which  weakness  could  not  discourage  or  old  age  chill ;  and,  in  the
same  age,  the  favour  with  which  Boucher's  '  Holy  Nosegay '  (4)  was  received  furnished  an
intelligible  intimation  that  there  were  still  many  hearts  on  which  the  most  absurdly  fanciful
emanations  of  that  spirit  might  operate.

We  have  now  to  pass  over  the  wide  field  which  lies  before  us,  in  order  to  point  out  the
works  which,  among  a  multitude,  appear  to  furnish  some  facts  towards  a  physical  History  of
Palestine.

Our  attention  is,  in  the  first  place,  agreeably  arrested  by  the  imposing  expedition  of  Brey-
denbach  in  1483.  With  eleven  distinguished  compatriots, — two  friars,  skilled  in  various
languages ;  a  Transylvanian  archdeacon  ;  Felix  Faber,  a  Dominican,  who  had  already  been  in
the  Holy  Land,  and  appears  to  have  been  engaged  as  secretary  ;b  and  Edward  Rewick,  a
painter  of  some  ability ;  with  a  great  number  of  domestics, — the  travelling  party  formed  a
large  caravan.  Notwithstanding  this  promising  array,  the  object  of  the  company  was  really
pilgrimage  rather  than  research ;  and  many  such  goodly  companies  of  wealthy  pilgrims  did
that  age  send  forth.  The  party  was  formed  at  Mayence,  and  proceeded  to  Venice,  where  it
embarked  for  Palestine.  The  pilgrims  arrived  at  Jerusalem  in  July ;  and  after  having  spent
nearly  six  weeks  in  visiting  all  that  was  remarkable  in  the  city  and  its  environs  to  the  Jordan,
the  mitigation  of  the  extreme  summer  heat  allowed  them,  on  the  24th  of  August,  to  commence
their  journey  across  the  desert,  by  Gaza,  to  Mount  Sinai.  From  thence  they  returned  along
the  borders  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez  and  passed  into  Egypt ;  and,  after  some  stay  at  Cairo,  fol-
lowed the  course  of  the  Nile  to  Rosetta,  where  they  re-embarked  for  Venice  on  November  15,
but  did  not  arrive  at  that  city  till  the  8th  of  January,  1484.  We  have  traced  the  course
of  this  journey,  because  it  was  that  which  was  in  that  age  usually  taken  by  those  who  extended
their  pilgrimages  to  Mount  Sinai ;  but  sometimes,  indeed,  in  the  reverse  order,  the  journey
being  commenced  in  Egypt,  at  Alexandria  or  Rosetta,  and  terminated  at  Joppa.  The  book
which  was  published  in  1486  by  Breydenbach,c  was  not  only  one  of  the  very  first  books
of  travels  submitted  to  the  new  invention  of  printing,  but  was  for  a  long  time  the  best  on  its
subject  which  Europe  possessed.  The  aspect  of  the  country  was  described  with  care  ;  the  more
strange  of  its  animal  and  vegetable  products  were  duly  noticed ;  and,  the  ground  being  then
comparatively  new,  the  characteristics  of  the  desert  between  Palestine  and  Sinai,  of  the  moun-
tains of  Horeb  and  Sinai,  and  of  the  country  between  them  and  Cairo,  were  noted  with  atten-
tion and  well  described.  This  book  may,  upon  the  whole,  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  most
respectable  and  judicious  productions  of  its  age,  and,  as  compared  with  others,  it  supports  the
character  of  a  work  in  the  production  of  which  several  able  travellers  co-operated.

*  '  Relation  du  Voyage  d'Anne  Cheron,  agee  do  quatre-vingts  ans,  a  Jerusalem.'     Paris,  1671,

b  An  account  of  Faber's  previous  journey  is  in  existence;  and  the  German  copy  of  the  account  of  this  other  journey  bears  his
name.  It  is  very  likely  that  this  monk,  who  knew  the  Holy  Land  better  than  any  of  the  party,  wrote  the  account  which  goes
under  the  name  of  Braydenbach,  the  leader  of  the  expedition.

c  '  Beruh.  de  Breydenbach  Opus  transmarine  Peregrinationis  ad  veneraudn  et  gloriosum  Sepulchru  dominicu  in  .TherusalE.
Mogunt.,  1486,

C

x  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

This  work  at  once  took  the  first  rank  in  its  class.  It  was  translated  into  most  European
languages,  and  remained  for  a  long  time  the  standard  book,  from  which  smaller  travellers
supplied  their  own  deficiencies  freely.  Its  wealth  sufficed  to  enrich  scores  of  them.  It  had
scarcely  appeared,  before  Nicole  le  Huen,  who  was  about  to  publish  a  small  history  of  the
Crusades,  translated  into  French  many  passages  of  the  first  part,  being  that  which  concerns  the
Holy  Land  ;  and  the  whole  of  the  second  part,  being  the  journey  to  Sinai  and  Egypt ;  and
from  this,  with  the  help  of  his  own  observations  in  the  first  part,  (for  he  also  had  been  to  Jeru-
salem,) he  prepared  '  Le  Grant  Voyage  de  Hierusalem,'  1487,  which  occupies  as  much  space
as  the  history  to  which  it  is  prefixed.  Le  Huen  acknowledged  that  the  second  part  of  this  por-
tion was  taken  from  Breydenbach,  and  that  he  had  been  himself  unable  to  visit  Mount  Sinai  :
he  is  more  reserved  as  to  the  extent  of  his  obligations  in  the  first  part,  which  offers  a  well-
digested  description  of  the  Land  of  Promise  ;  and,  taking  it  altogether,  '  Le  Grant  Voyage  '  is
a  very  valuable  performance,  which  concurred,  with  the  separate  work  of  Breydenbach,  in
exercising  a  useful  influence  upon  the  best  travellers  of  a  later  day.

We  shall  now  class,  according  to  the  languages  in  which  they  wrote,  such  other  travellers
as  appear  to  us  to  have  taken  a  wider  view  than  the  mass  of  them  did  of  the  country  through
which  they  travelled,  and  who,  while  the  sacred  places  were  the  chief  objects  of  their  attention,
were  not  entirely  unobservant  of  the  physical  characteristics  of  the  districts  through  which
they  passed,  nor  quite  neglected  to  record  the  presence  of  such  natural  products  as  occurred
conspicuously  to  their  notice.

The  Latin  Itineraries  and  Peregrinations  claim  the  first  attention.  They  are  very  numerous,
and,  for  the  most  part,  satisfactorily  brief.  The  greater  part  of  them  are  written  by  monks,
and  are  utterly  barren  of  information,  except  as  regards  the  holy  stations,  which  exception
involves,  in  some  of  them,  the  incidental  merit  of  being  useful  for  topographical  purposes.
Those  travellers,  writing  in  Latin,  who  kept  their  attention  awake  to  subjects  of  general  interest,
and  who  in  consequence  furnish  some  contributions  towards  the  physical  history  of  Palestine,
were  almost  exclusively  laymen,  as  will  appear  when  we  mention  the  names  of  Baumgartena
(1507),b  Furerc  (1565),  Prince  Radzivild  (1580),  and  Cotovice  (1598):  the  work  of  the
last-named  traveller  is  a  closely-printed  volume,  replete  with  all  kinds  of  information,  among
which  some  useful  facts  in  physical  history  may  be  found,  although  not  in  an  adequate  pro-
portion.

The  Spaniards  have  several  books  of  travels  in  Palestine ;  but  we  have  not  met  with  any
which  are  other  than  markedly  devotional  pilgrimages.  Of  those  which  we  have  seen,  the
fine  book  of  Castillo f  (1627)  seems  the  best  of  its  own  class;  but  it  may  be  examined  in  vain
for  such  information  as  we  are  seeking.  A  much  earlier  work,  written  in  1526,  by  Fra.
Antonio  Medina,  is  remarkable,  in  the  Italian  translation,?  which  only  we  have  been  able  to
see,  for  a  profusion  of  coarse  wood-cuts,  exhibiting  a  great  number  of  buildings  and  monu-
ments in  the  Holy  Land,  of  many  of  which  we  know  not  that  any  other  representations  exist.

We  know  not  what  books  on  Palestine  the  Portuguese  have,  besides  the  Itinerary  of  Pantaliam
d'Aveyro,h  which,  judging  from  the  number  of  editions  through  which  it  has  passed,  appears
to  be  held  by  them  in  high  esteem.  It  must,  upon  the  whole,  be  classed  with  the  books  of
devotional  pilgrimage,  though  containing  more  of  general  information  than  books  of  that  class
usually  afford.  For  the  time  it  was  a  good  book ;  but  its  goodness  is  not  of  the  sort  for  which
we  inquire,  although  the  author  sometimes  notices  fruits  and  products  which  he  saw  in
cultivation.

The  greater  part  of  the  Italian  books  which  we  have  seen  follow  the  established  routine  of

3  The  dates  inserted  in  parentheses  in  the  text  are  the  dates  of  the  journey.  The  dates  of  publication  are  given  with  the  titles
in  the  following  notes :  these  last  are  in  general  transcribed  from  our  own  copies  of  the  several  works  ;  but  when  there  have  been
more  than  one  edition,  and  ours  is  not  the  first,  we  have,  when  in  our  power,  inserted  the  date  of  the  first  edition.

b  '  Martini  a  Baumgarteu  in  Braitenbach,  Peregrinatio  in  iEgyptum,  Arabiam,  Palaestinam,  et  Syriam.'    Norib.,  1594.

c  Christ.  Fiireri  ab  Haimendorf,  Itinerarium  jEgypti,  Arabia?,  Palaestinae,  aliarumque  Begionem  Orientalum.'     Norim.,  1521.

d  Ierosolymitana  Peregrinatio  Illustrissimi  Principis  N.  C.  Kadzivili.     Antverpia?,  1614.

e  '  Itinerarium  Hierosolymitanum  et  Syriacum  ;  Auctore  Joanne  Cotovico.'     Antwerp,  1619.

f  •  El  Devoto  Peregrino  y  Viage  de  Tierra  Santa.'  Por  el  M.  B.  Padre  F.  Ant.  del  Castillo.     Madrid.  1656.

S  '  Viaggio  di  Terra  Santa,  con  sue  Statioue  e  Misterii.'     Firenza,  1590.

h  *  Itinerario  da  Terra  Sancta,  e  suas  Particularidades.'  Lisb.,  1593.

Chap.  I.]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  xi

devotional  pilgrimage.  The  book  of  Zuallart,a  (Ital.  Zuallardo)  gives  a  good  general  account
of  the  country,  with  some  interesting  notices  of  its  products  and  physical  characteristics.
The  French  edition,  published  about  twenty  years  after,  by  the  author  himself,  in  Flanders,
his  native  country,  is  a  very  superior  work  to  the  Italian  edition,  being  enriched  by  many
interesting  investigations,  and  by  the  results  of  a  very  extensive  and  judicious  course  of  reading
in  all  kinds  of  ancient  writers,  classical  or  Christian,  from  whom  any  information  could  be
derived.  In  this  form  it  became  a  most  useful  performance — a  sterling  work,  which  takes
place  at  the  head,  in  point  of  time,  of  what  we  may  call  the  Historical  travellers.  Besides,
the  work  is  enriched  by  a  great  number  of  very  neat  copper-plate  engravings  of  sites,  buildings
and  plans,  which  continued  for  more  than  a  century  to  be  freely  copied  by  other  writers.
Indeed,  the  author's  countryman,  Cotovic,  already  mentioned,  whose  book  was  published  only
eleven  years  after  in  the  same  town  (Antwerp)  as  the  first  French  edition  of  Zuallart,  copied
the  whole  of  the  plates,  and  was  not  much  more  scrupulous  in  his  literary  appropriation.

The  next  work  in  Italian  that  seems  to  require  a  notice  is  the  '  Pdgrimage  of  Don  Aquilante
Rochetta'b  (1598),  a  decent  book  of  travel,  from  which  some  notices  of  the  face  of  the
country  may  be  gleaned,  but  which  says  little  of  its  animal  or  vegetable  products.  The  portion
of  Pietro  della  Valle's  (1616)  c  general  travels  which  relates  to  Palestine,  is,  though  brief,  of
considerable  value.  The  Italian  Jesuit  Dandini,d  who,  in  1599,  was  sent  to  Mount  Lebanon
on  a  mission  to  the  Maronite  patriarch,  gives  some  chapters  of  useful  information  concerning
that  region,  although  the  principal  object  of  his  book  was  to  furnish  an  account  of  the  customs
and  doctrines  of  the  Maronites.

The  French  language,  while  it  abounds  in  works  on  Palestine,  of  the  class  which  we  have
so  often  described  as  being  the  most  common,  offers  many  valuable  old  books,  which  have
been  strangely  overlooked  by  those  who  have  written  en  the  physical  characteristics  of  Pales-
tine, and  the  natural  history  of  the  Scriptures.  Indeed,  it  is  quite  safe  to  say,  that  some  of  the
old  French  writers  give  far  better  accounts  of  the  country  generally  than  could  at  the  same
time  be  found  in  any  other  language,  and  far  more  solid  and  satisfactory  than  most  of  the
more  recent  accounts  which  have  in  any  language  been  supplied :  and  had  those  works  been
much  known  in  this  country,  or  even  in  France,  not  a  few  modern  travellers  in  Palestine
would  have  hesitated  to  think  it  in  their  power  to  add  to  the  long-existing  information  con-
cerning that  country ;  and  it  may  be  found  that  the  real  additions  to  previous  information
which  even  the  best  of  them  offer  might  in  general  be  reduced  to  a  very  few  pages  indeed.

The  first  book  which  we  have  met  with  is  that  of  La  Huen,  which  we  have  had  occasion
to  mention  in  noticing  Breydenbach.  Though  in  the  main  little  more  than  a  compilation,
modified  by  some  matter  which  the  author's  own  travels  enabled  him  to  supply,  it  seems  to
have  offered  a  model  which  some  of  the  most  judicious  writers  of  later  date  copied  with  im-
provement and  success.  These  writers  generally  digested  their  information  under  convenient
and  proper  heads,  and  undertook  to  give  a  complete  view  of  the  country,  and  of  its  then
inhabitants,  whose  manners,  customs,  and  religious  tenets  are  often  very  satisfactorily  described.
The  physical  aspect  of  the  country,  and  of  its  particular  parts,  is  generally  stated,  and  its
animal  and  vegetable  products  are  not  entirely  overlooked,  although  occasion  may  be  found
to  regret  that  these  most  important  parts  of  the  subject  fail  to  obtain  a  proportionate  measure  of
attention.

One  of  the  first  and  best  writers  of  this  class  was  Eugene  Roger/  a  missionary  monk,  whose
work  embodies  the  materials  collected  during  a  residence  of  five  years  in  Palestine.  After
a  rapid  general  view  of  the  country  and  its  products,  the  territory  of  each  of  the  Jewish
tribes  is  taken  in  turn,  and  everything  remarkable  in  it  is  carefully  described.     This  occupies

a  '  Divotissimo  Viaggo  di  Gerusalemme,  fatto  e  descritto  da  Giovanni  Zuallardo,  l'anno  1586,  con  disegni  di  vaiii  luoghi  di
Terra  Santa,  intagliati  di  Natale  Bonifacio.'     Roma,  1587.

b  '  Peregrinatione  di  Terra  Santa  e  d'altre  Provincie,  di  Don  A.  Rochetta.'     Palermo,  1630.

c  '  Viaggi  di  Pietro  della  Valle  il  Pellegrino,  descritti  in  lettere  familiari  al  suo  amico  M.  Schipano,  scritti  dall'  anno  1614  fin'al
1626.'     Roma,  1650.

d  '  Missione  Apostolica  al  Patriarca  e  Maroniti  del  Monte  Libano.'     1656.

c  '  La  Terre  Sainte  ;  ou  Description  Topographique,  tres  particuliere  des  saiucts  Lieux,  et  de  la  Terre  de  Promission.'  Paris,
1646.

c  2

xii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

the  first  book ;  the  second  is  devoted  to  maimers  and  opinions.  Doubdan  (1652)a  may  be
allowed  to  take  rank  with  the  best  French  travellers ;  but  although  his  descriptions  of  the  holy
places  are  very  minute,  clear,  and  trustworthy,  he  is  not,  in  the  point  of  view  we  are  taking,
by  any  means  entitled  to  that  pre-eminence  which  Chateaubriand  seems  disposed  to  assign  to
him.  Another  favourite  of  his,  Des  Hayes,b  has  little  to  say  concerning  Palestine ;  and  that
little,  though  exact,  does  not  appear  to  us  of  very  distinguished  value.  M.  de  Moncanys,c  in
a  small  portion  of  a  larger  work,  makes  some  useful  contributions  to  our  knowledge  of  Pales-
tine. His  book  was  one  of  no  common  pretension,  as  will  appear  from  its  title,  which,  on
account  of  its  curiousness,  we  give  at  length  below ;  and  although  there  is  in  this  author
much  of  puerility  and  conceit,  and  his  general  character  as  a  traveller  does  not  now  stand
very  high,  he  certainly  was  (at  least  in  Palestine)  an  attentive  observer  of  nature,  and  hence
he  often  gives  more  really  valuable  information  in  a  few  pages  than  others  do  in  volumes.
Every  day  he  was  careful  to  note  the  physical  characteristics  of  his  route,  and  few  things  in
the  animal  or  vegetable  world  were  allowed  to  escape  his  attention.  In  his  case  we  have  sin-
gular cause  to  regret  that  his  journey  in  Palestine  was  made  during  the  winter,  and  that  his
account  of  it  is  so  short.

The  statement  we  have  before  made  concerning  Zuallart  shows  that,  although,  for  the  sake
of  uniform  classification,  we  have  placed  him  among  the  writers  in  Italian,  he  would  with
more  real  propriety  be  put  among  the  French  travellers.  Very  similar  in  plan  to  his  French
edition  is  the  excellent  work  of  Naud  (16*74)  the  Jesuit,  to  whom  we  are  inclined  to  assign
the  first  place  among  the  historical  travellers.  We  think  that  while  he  excels  all  others  in  the
success  with  which  his  diligence  and  various  erudition  enables  him  to  bring  together  the  inci-
dental notices  which  may  be  found,  in  ancient  accounts  and  histories,  of  the  various  places  to
which  his  statements  refer,  he  is  little  inferior  to  the  very  best  of  them  in  his  descriptions,
from  which  a  considerable  number  of  useful  facts  contributory  to  a  physical  history  of  the
country  may  be  obtained.

Benarde  (1616)  we  have  seen  mentioned  with  more  respect  than  he  had  seemed  to  us  to
claim  ;  but,  on  recurring  to  his  book,  we  perceive  that  he  may  be  allowed  a  place  in  this  list,
in  virtue  of  the  notice  which  he  takes  of  the  produce  of  gardens  and  cultivated  grounds.

The  work  of  Suriusf  (1644 — 47)  is  more  worthily  distinguished  from  the  common  run  of
books  on  Palestine  than  its  title  would  lead  one  to  expect.  It  is  divided  into  three  parts,  under
the  quaint  titles  of  Le  Pe'le'rin  Voyageant,  Le  Pelerin  Sejournant,  and  Le  Pelerin  Ritournant ;
the  second  of  which,  though  chiefly  occupied  with  accounts  of  the  sacred  places,  takes  some
notice  of  the  natural  characteristics  of  the  country,  which  the  author  had  ample  opportunities
of  observing.

The  portion  of  his  book  of  general  travel  which  Thevenot  (1657)  s  devotes  to  Palestine,
though  necessarily  not  extensive,  is  every  way  worthy  of  his  high  reputation,  as  one  of  the
most  instructive  travellers  of  his  own  age  or  any  other.  It  is  indeed  quite  a  refreshment  to
meet  with  him  in  the  somewhat  dreary  assemblage  of  travellers  in  the  Holy  Land.  He  was  a
man  of  scientific  education,  and  a  gentleman ;  and  while  his  chief  attention  is  engaged  by  the
customs  and  institutions  of  the  people  among  whom  he  passes,  he  is  far  from  inattentive  to  the
aspect  of  the  country,  and  is  careful  to  notice  the  vegetable  products  which,  at  the  season  of
his  journey,  were  in  fruit  or  flower.

That  accomplished  gentleman,  the  Chevalier  d'Arvieuxh  (1660),  deserves  most  honourable

a  '  Voyage  de  la  Terre  Sainte,  contenant  une  veritable  description  des  lieux  les  plus  considerables  que  Notre  Seigneur  a
sanctifies  de  sa  presence,  predications,  morale  et  souffrauces,  &c.  &c.'     Paris,  1657-

b  '  Voyage  de  Levant ;  fait  par  le  Commandement  du  Koi,  en  l'annee  1621,  par  Le  Sr.  D.  C     Paris,  1629;  second  edition.

c  '  Journal  des  Voyages  de  Monsieur  de  Monconys ;  oil  les  Scavants  trouveront  un  uombre  infini  de  nouveautez,  en  Machines  de
Mathematique,  Experiences  Physique,  Raisounemens  de  la  belle  Philosophic,  curiositez  de  Chymie,  et  conversations  des  Illustres
de  ce  Siecle  ;  Outre  la  description  de  divers  Animaux  et  Plantes  rares,  plusieurs  secrets  inconnus  pour  le  Plaisir  et  le  Sante,  les
Ouvrages  des  Peintures  fameux,  les  Coiltumes  et  Moeurs  des  Nations,  et  ce  qu'il  y  a  de  plus  digne  de  la  connoissance  d'uu
honnete  Homme  dans  les  trois  Parties  du  Monde.'     Lyon,  1665.

<1  '  Voyage  Nouveau  de  la  Terre  Sainte.'     Paris,  1744.

c  '  Le  Voyage  de  Hierusalem.'    Par  le  Sr.  Benard,  Parisien.    Paris,  1621.

f  '  Le  Pieux  Pelerin,  ou  Voyage  de  Jerusalem.'    Bruss.,  1666.  S  '  Relation  d'un  Voyage  fait  au  Levant.'     Par.  1664-74.

h  '  Memoires  du  Chev.  d'Arvieux.  Par  Jean  Baptist  Labat.,  Paris,  1735.  The  second  volume  contains  the  travels  in  Pales-
line  ;  the  third  gives  a  singularly  interesting  account  of  d'Arvieux's  sojourn  among  the  Arabs  of  Carmel.

Chap.  I.]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  xiii

mention.  He  resided  with  the  French  consul  at  Sidon  (Seide),  and  acquired  an  intimate
acquaintance  with  the  languages  and  manners  of  the  people,  during  some  years  before  he
traversed  the  country.  He  travelled  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  Syria,  and  gave  the
European  world  more  extended  and  clear  ideas  concerning  it  than  had  previously  been  enter-
tained, or  than  were  superseded  till  the  time  of  Volney,  if  then.  His  geographical  observations
and  views  of  the  face  of  the  country  are  truly  valuable,  coming,  as  they  do,  from  a  well-
instructed  mind,  and  being  therefore  refreshing  to  one  who  has  hitherto  had  to  trace  little
more  than  the  hap-hazard  remarks  of  ignorant  pilgrims  and  monks.  His  observations  in
natural  history,  in  the  restricted  sense,  are  not  numerous,  being  confined  to  some  of  the  prin-
cipal productions.

The  next  traveller,  in  point  of  time,  who  requires  to  be  noticed,  is  La  Roquea  (1688),  whose
superior  account  of  Mount  Lebanon,  its  productions  and  inhabitants,  superseded  the  compara-
tively meagre  account  given  by  Dandini,  and  continued  to  bear  the  character  of  supplying  the
best  account  of  this  interesting  region  which  Europe  possessed,  till  in  its  turn  superseded  by
Volney.     Some  of  its  information  is  still  valuable.

But  none  of  the  works  which  we  have  mentioned  seem  to  us  comparable,  on  the  whole,  to
that  of  Morisonb  (1698).  Some  exceed  it  in  erudition,  many  in  minuteness  of  detail,  and  one
or  two  in  geographical  description ;  but  as  a  general  account  of  all  that  is  note-worthy,  and  as
combining  in  just  proportions  the  best  qualities  of  a  good  and  solid  book  of  travels,  this  work
stood  alone  in  its  own  day,  and  has  not  been  exceeded,  if  equalled,  since.

The  German  travellers  in  Palestine  were  subject  to  the  general  influences  which  operated
upon  pilgrims  of  other  nations ;  but  they  were  the  first  to  free  themselves  from  the  bondage  of
routine  pilgrimage,  and  to  offer  to  the  public  really  profitable  information  concerning  the  Holy
Land.  Breydenbach,  whom  we  have  already  mentioned  with  commendation,  was  a  German ;
and  the  first  person  who  visited  Palestine  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  information  concerning
its  natural  history  was  of  the  same  nation.  This  was  Leonhart  Rauwolff,0  whom  we  shall
presently  have  further  occasion  to  mention.  It  is  unhappily  so  difficult  in  this  country  to
collect  old  German  books,  or  to  obtain  clear  information  concerning  them,  that  we  are  by  no
means  confident  that  there  may  not  be  many  more  than  we  are  now  prepared  to  mention,
which  afford  such  information  as  a  writer  on  the  Physical  History  of  Palestine  would  desire
to  obtain.  That  in  this,  as  in  other  cases,  we  only  mention  such  works  as  we  have  seen,  and
that  those  mentioned  throughout  the  present  chapter  is  but  a  selection,  for  a  specific  purpose,  of
a  much  larger  number  which  we  have  examined,  will  account  for  the  absence  of  a  vast  number  of
names  and  titles  which  the  reader  may  find  in  the  catalogues  of  Pinkerton  and  Dela  Richarderie.

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  authors  of  much  the  greater  portion  of  the  Latin  Itineraries,
with  which  we  commenced  this  notice,  were  Germans  ;  and  the  German  nation  must  take  the
credit  of  whatever  praise  has  been  ascribed  to  them.

In  connection  with  this  subject,  the  most  conspicuous  matter  that  comes  under  our  notice
is  a  thick  and  closely-printed  German  folio  volume  of  a  thousand  pages,  bearing  the  date  of
1659,  and  consisting  entirely  of  travels  in  Palestine,  by  Germans,  twenty-one  in  number.
They  are  printed  entire,  and  the  dates  of  travel  range  from  the  middle  of  the  13th  to  the  be-
ginning of  the  17th  century.  A  few  of  them  are  translations  from  some  of  the  Latin  Itineraries
by  Germans,  which  we  have  had  occasion  to  notice.  We  doubt  that  any  other  country  could
produce  a  collection  of  travels  in  the  Holy  Land,  so  creditable  as  this  to  the  character  of  its
earlier  travellers.  There  are  few  articles  in  this  curious  collection  from  which  something
useful  to  the  inquirer  into  the  physical  history  of  Palestine  may  not  be  gleaned.  Those  of  the
number  who  offer  the  most  numerous  and  valuable  contributions  are,  Steffans  Von  Gumpen-
bergd  (1449),  Johann  Tuchere  (1479),  Johann,  Count  of  Solmsf  (1483),  who  was  one  of  the

a  '  Voyage  de  Syrie  et  du  Mont  Liban :  eonteiiaut  la  Description  de  tout  le  Pays  compris  sous  le  Nom  de  Liban  et  d'Anti-
Liban,  Kesraon,  &e.'     Paris,  1722.

b  '  Relation  Historique  d'un  Voyage  nouvellement  fait  au  Mont  de  Sinai,  et  a  Jerusalem.'    Toul.,  1704.

c  '  Besehreibung  der  Raiss  in  die  Morgenlander  fiirnemlicb  Syriam,  Judaeam,  Arabiam,  &c.'  Augs.  1581.  This,  the  original
edition,  has  a  number  of  figures  of  plants,  which  have  not  been  copied  into  the  translation  published  by  Ray.

d  '  Besehreibung  der  Meerfahrt  in  das  Heilige  Landt.'     Frank.,  1561.

e  '  Reise-beschreibung  zum  Heilige  Grabe.*    Aug.  1483.  f  '  Reise  ins  Heilige  Landt  und  zum  berg  Sinai.'

xiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

Breydenbach  party.     Daniel  Ecklina  (1552),  Jacob  Wormbserb  (1561),  Hanns  Helffrichc
(1565),  and  Solomon  Schweiggerd  (1576).     Besides  tbese,  there  are  many  other  travellers  of
the  period    under  consideration,  which  this   collection   does   not   include,  but  who  furnish
intimations,  more  or  less  frequent  and  valuable,  concerning  the  face  of  the  country,  its  climate,
seasons,  and  vegetable  products — we  had  almost  said  '  animal '  also ;  but  it  is  a  remarkable  fact,
that,  by  German  as  well  as  by  other  travellers,  far  more  attention  has  been  given  to  the  botany
than  to  the  zoology  of  the  Promised  Land.     These  travellers  are,  Breuninge  (15*71),  Tschudis
von  Glarusf  (1606),  TroiloS  (1667),  Otto  von  der  Groben h  (1675),  and  Myrike1  (1684).     The
first  named  of  these  regarded,  with  more  attention  than  most  other  travellers  of  his  time,  the
animals,  new  to  him,  which  came  under  his  notice ;  and  several  very  tolerable  figures  are
given.     But,  unhappily,  his  observations  of  this  class  are  more  frequent  and  detailed  in  Egypt
and  Arabia  than  in  Syria ;  or  rather,  by  the  time  he  reached  Palestine,  most  of  the  animals  he
saw  had  ceased  to  be  new  to  him,  and  he  seldom  felt  the  necessity  of  noticing  the  mere
presence  in  Palestine  of  creatures  which  elsewhere  had  already  been  particularly  noticed.
Troilo,  though  not  professedly  more  of  a  naturalist  than  other  travellers  of  his  time,  is  more
than  usually  particular  in  his  attention  to  those  objects  which  do  engage  his  notice.
.  Journeys  to  Palestine  were  hardly  to  be  expected  in  the  16th  and  17th  centuries  from  the
Dutch.     Their  form  of  religion  left  them  no  zeal  to  visit  the  holy  places ;  and  they  were  too
much  troubled,  or  too  much  engaged  in  war  or  maritime  traffic,  to  have  leisure  to  journey  for
science  or  pleasure.     We  do  not  know  that  more  than  two  or  three  Dutch  books  of  travel  in
the  Holy  Land  occur  before  the  18th  century,  and  these  we  have  not  been  able  to  obtain.
Holland  did,  however,  produce  one  valuable  singularity  regarding  Palestine  which  requires  to
be  mentioned.     Dr.  Olfert  Dapper  employed  his  leisure  in  embodying  all  existing  information
concerning   various  foreign  countries  into   connected   accounts  of  them.     The  result  of  his
labours  is  exhibited  in  eight  or  nine  substantial  folios,  illustrated  with  a  vast  number  of  very
superior  engravings.     One  of  the  largest  of  these  volumes  is  entirely  devoted  to  Syria  and
Palestine,11  being,  as  far  as  we  know,  the  most  extensive  single  account  of  the  Holy  Land  which
even  yet  exists  in  any  language.     As  a  compilation,  its  value,  of  course,  arises  from  the
immense  number  of  statements  which  it  brings  together,  from  authors  whose  productions  are
now  forgotten  or  not  easy  of  access.     Dapper  always  faithfully  reports  his  authorities,  and
annexes  their  names  to  the  statements  for  which  they  are  responsible :  but  he  leaves  it  to  his
reader  to  exercise  a  discretion  which  he  wanted ;  as  he  sometimes  adduces  authorities  of  no
great  value,  and  whose  inaccuracies  a  little  of  that  critical  tact  which  he  entirely  wanted
might  have  enabled  him  to  discover.     As  it  is,  his  great  book  is  valuable  or  not,  according  to
the  hands  into  which  it  comes.

It  would  almost  seem  as  if  the  Dutch,  towards  the  close  of  the  17th  century,  had  become
desirous  to  clear  themselves  in  the  eyes  of  Europe  for  their  previous  neglect  of  the  Holy  Land,
by  throwing  into  the  scale  a  few  enormous  and  splendid  volumes,  which  in  costliness  and
physical  ponderosity  might  overpoise  a  score  of  such  comparatively  small  and  humble  works
as  other  European  nations  had  previously  contributed.  Dapper's  great  book  was  something ;
but  being  a  compilation,  its  claims  were  of  a  questionable  sort.  They  soon,  therefore,  followed
with  an  original  traveller,  in  a  volume  much  more  bulky  and  far  more  splendid  than  any
which  had  previously  appeared.  This  was  the  great  work  of  Cornelius  van  Bruyn,1  a  talented
painter,  who,  as  he  travelled,  employed  his  pencil  with  great  activity  and  skill ;  and  was  hence
enabled  to  supply  numerous  engravings  of  objects  never  before,  and  many  of  them  never
since,  represented.  But  this  is  the  chief  merit  of  his  work,  the  literary  claims  of  which  are
not  commensurate  with  the  pictorial.     His  subjects  for  remark  are,  indeed,  very  generally  well

a  '  Reize  zum  Heilige  Grab.'     Colon.  1580.  b  '  Reise  ins  Heilige  Land  und  im  Egypteu.'     Frank.,  1603.

c  '  Reise  nach  Hierusalem,  jEgypten  und  dem  Berg  Sinai.'     Leip.,  1579.

<*  '  Newe  Reiss-besehreibung  aus  Teutchland  nach  Constantiuopel  und  Jerusalem.'     Norim.,  1608.

c  *  Orientalische  Reise  in  die  Turkie.'     Stras.,  1612.  f  '  Reyse  und  Bilgerfahrt  zum  Heilegen  Grab.'     Rohr.,  1606.

e  •  Orientalische  Reisebeschreibung.'     Marien.,  1694.  b  *  Orientalische  Reisbeschreibung.'     Dresd.,1676.

i  '  Reis  nach  Jerusalem  und  dem  Lande  Canaan.'    Osnabr.,  1714.

k  •  Naukerige  Beschryving  van  gantsch  Syrie  en  Palestyn  of  Heilige  Lant,  &c.'     Amst.,  1680.

l  Better,  perhaps,  known  by  the  Frenchified  name  of  Corneillele  Brun.  The  title  of  his  book  is  '  Reysen  door  den  Levant  in  de
Vermaardeste  deelen  van  Klein-Asien,  Scio,  Rhodes,  Cyprus,  iEgypten,  Syrien  en  Palestina.'     Delft,  1699.

Chap.  I.]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  xv

chosen,  but  the  remarks  themselves  are  seldom  very  solid,  and  often  inaccurate.  On  subjects  of
natural  history,  there  are,  however,  many  useful  observations  and  some  engravings.  And  if  the
general  merits  of  Bruyn  suffer,  it  is  rather  from  comparison  with  the  travellers  who  came  after
him,  than  with  those  who  preceded ;  and  this  comparison  is  not  a  very  fair  one  to  make.  But
if  he  had  followed  a  Chardin  in  Palestine  as  he  did  in  Persia,  even  a  retrospective  comparison
could  not  have  been  to  his  advantage.

The  contributions  of  English  travellers,  previously  to  the  18th  century,  to  our  knowledge
of  Palestine,  were  in  no  respect  considerable.  Some  small  accounts  by  English  travellers  may
be  found  in  Hakluyt  and  Purchas ;  but  the  only  names  of  note  which  connect  themselves  with
the  Holy  Land  are  those  of  Sandysa  (1610),  and  Maundrellb  (1697).  The  view  which  the
former  took  had  the  larger  scope,  and  offers  some  interesting  though  rather  indistinct  glimpses
of  the  natural  aspect  of  particular  points,  and  of  the  products  which  they  offered.  Maundrell's
object  was  limited  to  a  view  of  the  holy  places,  of  which  he  furnishes  an  account  so  intelligent
and  perspicuous,  that  his  still  remains  the  standard  description  in  the  English  language,  and  is
scarcely  rivalled  in  any  other.  The  book  is  a  model  of  its  kind ;  and  though  it  contributes
but  few  facts  to  the  physical  history  of  the  country,  these  few  are  valuable.

In  thus  enumerating  the  writers  on  Palestine,  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  18th  cen-
tury, whose  works  do,  more  or  less,  offer  facts  contributory  to  the  physical  history  of  the
country,  we  have  been  mainly  influenced  by  the  wish  to  show  that  there  exist  mines  of  in-
formation which  appear  to  have  been  unknown,  and  which  have  certainly  never  been  explored,
by  those  who  might  have  most  advantageously  employed  the  facts  which  they  offered.  We  are
assuredly  not  disposed  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  these  facts :  none  can  have  had  more
cause  than  ourselves  to  feel  the  inadequacy  of  all  existing  materials.  But  the  very  dearth  of
adequate  materials  does  all  the  more  enhance  the  importance  of  those  which  may  be  collected
from  such  sources  as  we  have  indicated  ;  and  we  are  satisfied  that  these,  together  with  the
other  better  known  sources  of  information,  supply  matter  for  such  a  view  of  the  natural  con-
dition of  this  interesting  country  as  no  writer  has  yet  offered  to  the  public,  or  even  attempted
to  produce.

We  have  brought  down  this  enumeration  to  a  very  convenient  point ;  for  from  about  the
end  of  the  17th  century  a  manifest  change  of  character  is  observable  in  the  books  of  travel  in
Palestine.  This  is  easily  accounted  for.  In  Catholic  countries  the  public  possessed  such
ample  accounts  of  the  Holy  Land,  and  particularly  of  its  sacred  places,  in  which  they  were
most  interested,  that  nothing  further  was  felt  to  be  needed,  or  found  adequate  encouragement.
Indeed  there  are  manifest  signs  in  some  of  the  later  works  of  the  period,  that  they  were  put
forth  by  their  authors  chiefly  with  the  view  of  recommending  themselves  to  the  notice  and
patronage  of  their  superiors  in  the  church.  Hence  the  field  was  abandoned — enough  had
been  done; — and  the  whole  18th  century  did  not  produce  more  than  one  or  two  works  of  any
note  by  Catholic  travellers  in  Palestine.

On  the  other  hand,  at  this  very  juncture,  when  the  subject  began  to  be  dropped  by  Catholics
as  one  which  they  had  exhausted,  it  was  taken  up  by  Protestants  with  all  the  ardour  with  which
men  take  up  a  matter  which  seems  to  them  new,  and  which  really  becomes  new  in  their  hands,
under  the  changed  medium  through  which  it  is  viewed,  and  the  fresh  class  of  feelings  with
which  it  is  examined.  The  Reformation,  by  teaching  that  pilgrimages  had  no  saving  merit
before  God,  nor  any  necessary  influence  in  bringing  the  soul  nearer  to  Him,  withdrew  from  a
part  of  Europe  the  great  motive  which  had  made  the  Holy  Land  a  place  of  concourse  for
"pilgrim  feet"  from  all  parts  of  Christendom.  In  this,  as  in  other  matters, — and  from  the
natural  operation  of  the  principle  of  antagonism, — the  practical  feeling  went  far  beyond  the
abstract  doctrine  :  the  doctrine  only  taught  that  pilgrimages  were  unprofitable,  but  the  actual
feeling,  in  the  first  times  of  the  Reformation,  was,  that  they  were  little  less  than  sinful ;  and
seeing  that  the  Holy  Land  still  continued  to  be  resorted  to  by  Catholic  pilgrims,  journeys
to  Palestine  were  avoided  by  Protestants,  lest  they  should  be  supposed  to  be  influenced  by  the
same  class  of  feelings  and  opinions.     Hence,  an  interval  of  nearly  two  centuries  had  produced

a  '  A  Relation  of  a  Journey  begun  An.  Dom.  1610.'     Loud.  1632.    3rd  edit.
b  '  Journey  from  Aleppo  to  Jerusalem.'     Oxon.,  1707.

xvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

a  dearth  of  information  concerning  Palestine,  singularly  in  contrast  with  its  redundance  in
Catholic  countries.  This  want  began  to  be  felt  at  the  time  we  have  indicated ;  and  when
the  lapse  of  several  generations  had  removed  all  fear  of  misconception,  by  softening  the  first
ardour  of  opposition  to  Catholic  practices,  even  in  things  indifferent,  it  began  to  be  felt  that
a  Protestant  need  be  none  the  worse  for  a  journey  to  Palestine,  or  even  for  visiting  the  places
accounted  holy ;  while  many  clearly  saw  that  valuable  materials  for  the  elucidation  of  the
Scriptures  might  be  drawn  from  the  country  in  which  the  writers  lived,  and  the  characteristics
of  which  influenced  their  allusions  and  the  forms  in  which  their  ideas  were  conveyed.  The
tide  thus  turned  :  and,  from  that  time  to  this,  the  mass  of  writings  on  Palestine  have  been
furnished  by  Protestants,  who  have  now  produced  works  as  numerous  and  diversified  as  those
which  the  Catholics  had  previously  possessed.

This  new  class  of  travellers  to  Palestine  were  clearly  distinguishable  from  the  mass  of  their
Catholic  predecessors.  They  gave  less  exclusive  attention  to,  and  furnish  less  detailed  ac-
counts of  the  sacred  places,  and  the  feelings  which  they  connect  with  them  are  less  enthu-
siastic,— and  this,  because  the  Protestant  saw  cause  to  doubt  much  which  the  Catholic  entirely
believed,  and  stopped  to  inquire  where  the  Catholic  allowed  himself  only  to  feel.  We  find
more  freedom  of  investigation,  and  greater  breadth  of  view  :  but,  seeing  that  none  of  these
later  travellers  spent  more  than  a  few  weeks  in  a  country  where  many  of  their  predecessors
resided  for  years,  they  are  comparatively  superficial  on  those  points  to  which  the  latter  had
been  accustomed  to  attend.  Some  of  these  works  are  invaluable  for  their  clear  and  graphic
descriptions ;  others  for  their  inquiries  concerning  sites  and  accounts  of  ruins ;  some  for
making  us  acquainted  with  districts  not  in  former  times  explored  ;  many  for  accurate  accounts
of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  present  inhabitants ;  and  a  few  for  their  notices  of  the
physical  condition  and  natural  products  of  the  country  :  but,  speaking  of  the  mass,  it  is  a  great
and  growing  evil  that  these  books  tell  us  less  of  Palestine  than  of  the  traveller  and  his  im-
pressions— less  of  the  country  than  of  his  adventures  in  it,  and  of  the  people  with  whom  he
has  to  do.

We  may  now  proceed  to  mention  those  among  these  later  writers  whose  labours  have,  in
any  considerable  degree,  made  us  better  acquainted  with  the  physical  history  of  Palestine.

In  the  18th  century  the  Italian  language  offered  a  valuable  contribution  to  our  knowledge
of  Palestine  in  the  travels  of  the  Abate  Mariti.a  Half  of  the  work  is  occupied  with  the  isle  of
Cyprus,  of  which  it  offers  the  best  account  we  possess :  the  other  half  is  devoted  to  Syria  and
Palestine,  and  through  the  judicious  abstinence  of  the  author  from  such  details  as  are  a
hundred  times  repeated  by  the  older  travellers,  this  portion  of  Mariti's  work  offers  a  much
larger  quantity  of  new  matter  than  its  comparatively  limited  extent  might  lead  one  to  expect.
It  includes,  indeed,  a  somewhat  unsatisfactory  history  of  Jerusalem ;  but  he  gives  a  very  good
account  of  the  different  people  inhabiting  Syria  and  Palestine,  and  the  descriptive  parts  contain
a  larger  number  of  clear  and  trustworthy  statements  concerning  the  products  and  physical
aspects  of  Palestine,  than  are  often  afforded  by  any  single  traveller.

Two  very  eminent  French  writers,  Chateaubriand b  (1806),  and  Lamartine,c  have,  in  our
own  day,  increased  their  reputation  by  the  respective  accounts  of  their  travels  in  Palestine.  It
seems  to  have  been  their  intention  to  evoke  the  spirit  of  the  old  pilgrim  travellers,  and  re-
produce it  to  the  world  in  a  form  more  beautiful  and  more  refined  than  any  in  which  it  has
been  hitherto  seen.  The  attempt  was  so  far  successful,  that  works  were  produced  which,  for
their  very  eloquent  and  beautiful  language,  their  fine  sentiments  and  animated  descriptions,  will
always  be  read  with  pleasure.  But  they  add  almost  nothing  to  our  real  knowledge  of  the
country,  and  can  never  be  referred  to  as  of  any  original  authority  or  value.  The  same  may  be
said,  still  more  strongly,  of  the  only  English  traveller  in  Palestine  by  whom  a  similar  style  of
composition  has  been  attempted.

We  have  introduced  the  names  of  Chateaubriand  and  Lamartine,  more  on  account  of  their
eminence  than  from  their  being  connected  with  the  present  inquiry.  The  case  is  very  different
with  respect  to  their  countryman  and  immediate  predecessor,  Volney,d  who,  about  fifty  years

a  '  Viaggio  dell'  Abate  Mariti  per  Isola  di  Cypro  per  la  Sorie  e  la  Palestina,  &c.,  dell  anno  1760  al  1768.'    Turin,  1/69.
b  '  Itineraire  de  Paris  a  Jerusalem.'     1812.  c  Souvenirs  pendant  mi  Voyage  en  Orient.

<>  '  Voyage  en  Syrie  et  en  Egypte,  en  1783,  1784,  et  1785.'     Paris.    2  vols.,  8vo.,  1800.    Thirdedit.

Chap.  I.]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  xvii

ago,  presented  to  the  public  the  only  original  account  of  the  physical  characteristics  of  the
country  (as  included  in  Syria)  which  has  ever  yet  been  offered  to  the  public  with  any  preten-
sions to  completeness.  This  work  has  none  of  the  minute  descriptions  of  places,  or  details  of
personal  adventure  and  accommodation,  which,  together  or  apart,  fill  up  most  of  the  books  on
the  country ;  but  is  an  excellent  digest  of  observations  made  and  information  collected  during
a  residence  of  three  years  in  Egypt  and  Syria.  The  sceptical  opinions  for  which  the  author
was  afterwards  noted  scarcely  appear  in  this  performance,  which  contains  not  only  the  best
general  account  of  Syria  and  its  inhabitants,  but  the  only  connected  view  of  what  may  be  called
its  physical  geography.

The  German  travellers  of  the  18th  century,  though  not  very  numerous,  maintain  the  respect-
able relative  rank  which  they  had  previously  assumed.  Kortena  supplies  a  considerable
number  of  valuable  facts  concerning  the  physical  geography  and  natural  products  of  Palestine.
The  later  work  of  Schulzb  and  its  value  is  sufficiently  indicated  when  we  state,  that  to  it  the
German  writers,  and  Malte  Brun,  most  frequently  refer  for  information  concerning  the
physical  geography  of  Palestine.  Niebuhr,  although  a  Dane,  must  be  classed  as  a  German
traveller.  His  reputation  is  too  well  understood  to  require  explanation.  But  as  Arabia  was
the  country  of  his  destination,  and  in  which  his  real  fame  was  won,  his  passage  through
Palestine  was  only  an  incident.  Yet,  even  in  passing,  such  a  true  traveller  as  Niebuhr
could  not  fail  to  distinguish  himself  from  the  common  run  of  travellers  in  Palestine;  and
accordingly  the  comparatively  small  space  which  he  allows  to  the  subject  is  marked  by  the
soundness  and  practical  value  of  its  contents.

In  the  present  century,  the  leading  German  name  is  that  of  Seetzen,  the  worthy  predecessor
of  Burckhardt.  In  the  years  1805,  1806,  1807,  in  repeated  excursions  from  Damascus,  he
explored  the  Haouran,  and  the  countries  east  of  the  Jordan,  and  once  passed  to  Jerusalem  by
rounding  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea  from  the  east.  These  were  new  tracts
unexplored  by  European  feet  since,  at  least,  the  times  of  the  Crusaders,  though  now  already
well  worn  by  English  travellers,  following  the  example  which  Seetzen  gave.  It  is  to  be
regretted  that  we  have  no  connected  account  of  his  researches.  All  the  information  which  the
public  has  received  concerning  them  is  contained  in  his  letters  to  Baron  Zach,  which  were
published  in  the  different  volumes  of  the  'Monatliche  Corresponded '  His  journals,  arranged
by  himself,  up  to  April,  1809,  and  therefore  containing  all  his  researches  except  those  con-
nected with  Arabia,  are  still  in  existence,  and  it  may  be  hoped  they  may  yet  see  the  light.0
His  letters  contain  a  large  number  of  excellent  observations  on  the  physical  characteristics
and  natural  (particularly  mineral  and  vegetable)  products  of  those  parts  of  Palestine  which
he  visited ;  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  only  portions  of  his  observations  which  have  yet
been  offered  to  the  English  public  are  those  contained  in  a  thin  pamphlet  published,  in  1810,
by  the  Palestine  Association,  under  the  title  '  Some  Account  of  the  Countries  adjoining  the
Lake  of  Tiberias.'

The  portion  which  relates  to  the  Holy  Land  of  the  work  of  the  Dutch  travellers  Van  Egmont
and  Heyman,d  though  of  small  extent,  contains  a  larger  number  of  good  and  sensible  observa-
tions on  the  physical  characteristics  and  products  of  the  country  than  accounts  of  much
greater  pretension  have  usually  afforded.

In  our  own  language,  the  well-known  and  excellent  work  of  Dr.  Shawe  (1722)  contains
numerous  elucidations  of  Scripture  from  the  customs  and  natural  history  of  the  East ;  but  those
parts  which  refer  to  the  actual  physical  history  of  Palestine  are  brief,  though  very  valuable.

Pocockef  (1738)  is  a  traveller  whose  learning  and  antiquarian  zeal  are  well  understood.

a  '  Reise  nach  dem  Gelobten  Lande.'    Halae  Magd.,  1751.

b  *  Reisen  durch  Europa,  Asia,  und  Afrika.'     Halae  Magd.,  1771-

c  See  the  American  *  Biblical  Repository.'  Dr.  Robinson,  the  editor,  says  that  the  journals  of  Seetzen  had  been,  and  probably
still  were,  in  the  hands  of  Professor  Kruse,  of  Dorpat.  That  gentleman  had  made  some  preparations  to  publish  them,  but
was  prevented  by  his  inability  to  make  out  the  Arabic  words  and  names,  and  his  unwillingness  to  employ  another  person  to  do
this  for  him.  But  Dr.  Robinson  was  told  by  Gesenius,  who  had  examined  the  manuscripts,  that  they  contain  few  important
general  facts  beyond  those  which  had  been  given  to  the  public  by  Seetzen  himself  in  his  letters.

d  *  Travels  through  part  of  Europe,  Asia  Minor,  the  Islands  of  the  Archipelago,  Syria,  and  Egypt,  translated  from  the  Low
Dutch.'     Lond.,  1759.

e  '  Travels,  or  Observations  relating  to  several  Parts  of  Barbary  and  the  Levant,'  3rd  edit.     Edin.,  1808.

f  '  Description  of  the  East.'    Lond.,  1745.

VOL.  I.  (1

xviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

By  these  qualities  he  is  chiefly  distinguished  :  yet  he  has  some  observations  on  the  natural
features  and  products  of  the  country  which  are  entitled  to  respect ;  particularly  as,  to  these,  he
has  added  a  list  of  the  plants  which  he  found  growing  in  Palestine.

Clarke  a  (1801)  spent  but  eighteen  days  in  Palestine,  and  his  account  of  it  is  unequal  to  his
high  reputation,  and  to  some  other  portions  of  his  extensive  work.  It  is  still,  however,  much
above  the  common  level,  and  furnishes  many  interesting  notices  of  plants  observed  by  the
traveller  on  his  way.  Burckhardtb  (1810 — 1812),  though  no  naturalist,  allowed  nothing  to
escape  his  notice  in  the  districts  through  which  he  passed;  and  hence  he  offers  some  very
important  contributions  to  the  natural  history  of  northern  Palestine,  and  the  countries  beyond
Jordan,  and  to  the  east  and  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  were  formerly  occupied  by  the  tribes
of  Reuben  and  Gad,  and  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh,  and  the  nations  of  Moab,  Ammon,  and
Edom.  Indeed,  Burckhardt,  with  Seetzenc  (1805-7),  Irby  and  Mangles d  (1818),  and  Buck-
ingham6 (1816),  are  entitled  to  the  praise  of  having  made  known  to  our  own  age  the  Trans-
Jordanic  country,  with  which  so  many  Scriptural  and  historical  associations  are  connected,  but
which  no  former  travellers  ventured  to  visit,  or  undertook  to  describe.  Among  the  travellers
we  have  just  named,  it  may  be  very  safely  said  that  Irby  and  Mangles  furnish  a  larger  number
of  new  facts  towards  the  physical  history  of  the  Holy  Land  than  are  to  be  found  in  any  of  the
works,  old  or  recent,  which  have  passed  under  our  notice,  or  in  many  of  them  put  together ;
and  it  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  theirs,  which  is  in  many  respects  the  most  informing  book
on  the  general  subject,  has  never  been  properly  offered  to  the  public,  and  is  difficult  to
procure,  having  only  been  printed  for  private  distribution.

Mr.  Buckingham's  descriptions  of  the  physical  characteristics  of  the  districts  over  which  he
travelled  afford  a  more  considerable  number  of  useful  facts,  of  the  required  class,  than  we
expected  to  find.  These  are  the  most  abundant  and  instructive  in  the  work,  which  describes
the  countries  east  of  the  Jordan,  which  is,  in  other  respects  also,  a  more  valuable  performance
than  the  same  author's  previous  work  on  Palestine.f

We  are  happy  that  a  few  scattered  notices  of  the  natural  characteristics  of  particular  spots
enable  us  to  allow  a  place  in  our  list  to  Dr.  Richardson s  (1818),  the  Maundrell  of  the  19th
century,  and,  unquestionably,  the  very  best  topographer  which  has  yet  appeared  of  Jerusalem
and  of  those  parts  of  Palestine  which  he  visited.

Madoxh  (1824)  has  but  very  few  observations  available  for  the  purpose  we  have  in  view;
but  these  few,  which  are  chiefly  miner alogical  notices  and  allusions  to  the  state  of  the  weather,
are  good  and  useful.  Mr.  Madden1  (1827)  has  much  to  say  on  various  points  of  natural
history  before  he  reaches  Palestine ;  but  after  he  enters  that  country,  the  information  we  obtain
from  him  is  very  small  indeed.  The  Rev.  Vere  Monro  k  (1 833)  has  some  knowledge  of  botany,
which  induces  him  to  take  notice  of  plants,  and  to  specify  them  with  unusual  clearness.  The
portion  of  his  work  which  Dr.  Hogg1  (1833)  allows  to  Palestine  is  but  small;  but  that  small
portion  is  valuable,  from  its  unusually  numerous  and  distinct  indications  of  the  products,
appearance,  and  physical  character  of  the  ground  he  passed  over.

From  Mr.  Robinson's  ra  (1830)  two  volumes  some  small  pieces  of  useful  information  may  be
gleaned ;  but  he  makes  so  uncommonly  free  with  the  writings  of  his  English  predecessors,
that  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  the  new  information,  if  there  be  any,  or  to  estimate  the  degree
of  honour  to  which  he  is  himself  entitled.

Major  Skinner11  (1833),  Mr.  Stephens  °  (1836),  and  Lord  Lyndsay  f  (1836),  may  be  classed
together  as  belonging  to  the  personal-adventure  class  of  travellers.  They  offer  us  agreeable
books,  readable,  and  instructive  to  the  class  of  general  readers  for  whose  use  they  are  intended.

a  '  Travels  iu  various  Countries  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa.     Part  ii.  Greece,  Egypt,  and  the  Holy  Land.'

b  '  Travels  in  Syria  and  the  Holy  Land.'     Lond.,  1822.

c  *  Account  of  the  Countries  adjoining  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  the  Jordan,  and  the  Dead  Sea.'     Bath,  1810.

d  '  Travels  in  Egypt,  Nubia,  Syria,  and  Asia  Minor,  during  the  years  1817  and  1818.'    Lond.,  1823.

e  •  Travels  among  the  Arab  Tribes.'     1825.  f  '  Travels  in  Palestine,'  1821.

8  '  Travels  aloug  the  Mediterranean.'     Lond.,  1822.  h  '  Excursions  in  the  Holy  Land,  Syria,  Egypt,  &c.'     Lond.,  1834.

i  '  Travels  in  Turkey,  Egypt,  Nubia,  and  Palestine,  in  1824,  25,  26,  27,  and  29.'

k  *  Summer's  Ramble  in  Syria.'     Lond.,  1835.  '  '  Visit  to  Alexandria,  Jerusalem,  and  Damascus.'     Lond.,  1835.

m  '  Travels  in  Palestine  and  Syria.'     Lond.,  1836.  n  '  Adventures  in  an  Overland  Journey  to  India,  1836.'

°  '  Iucidents  of  Travel  in  Egypt,  Arabia  Petraea,  and  the  Holy  Land.'     Lond.,  1838.

P  '  Letters  on  Egypt,  Edom,  and  the  Holy  Land.'     1833.

Chap.  I]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  xix

But  to  one  by  whom  books  on  Palestine  have  been  studied,  these  works  do  not,  in  Palestine,
offer  anything  new  beyond  the  character,  adventures,  and,  perhaps,  the  impressions  of  the
authors, — save  when  they  state  any  changes  which  may  have  occurred  since  the  visit  of  the
last  preceding  traveller,  or  illustrate  by  new  facts  the  character  and  condition  of  the  people.
For  the  object  we  have  now  in  view,  these  three  works  offer  few  materials;  but  these  few
are  worth  collecting.  Mr.  Stephens  and  Lord  Lyndsay  did  not  turn  to  much  account  their
peculiar  advantage  of  entering  the  Holy  Land  by  a  route  (from  the  south-east)  previously
untrodden.  Major  Skinner  makes  better  use  of  his  advantage  in  crossing  the  eastern  desert
to  the  Euphrates.  One  refreshing  characteristic  is  common  to  the  soldier,  the  merchant,  and
the  nobleman, — an  unaffected  respect  for  the  Holy  Scriptures,  rising,  in  the  case  of  Lord
Lyndsay,  to  a  degree  of  enlightened  piety  which,  in  our  day,  procures  him  honour,  but  which
in  a  day  not  long  past  might  have  exposed  him  to  much  derision,  and  to  many  a  taunt  hard
to  bear.  That  there  are  such  travellers  in  our  day,  and  that  they  are  received  with  attention
and  respect,  is  a  sign  of  the  times,  full  of  promise.

The  latest  of  our  travellers  in  Palestine  is  in  many  respects  the  most  informing  of  any  who
has  appeared  before  the  public  for  many  years.  This  is  the  Rev.  C.  B.  Elliot,a  whose  travels
in  the  country  were  more  than  usually  extensive,  and  whose  observations  in  its  physical
geography  and  every  branch  of  its  natural  history,  are  much  more  than  usually  numerous,
and,  as  far  as  they  go,  truly  valuable.  He  seems  to  have  turned  to  the  best  account  the
advantage  which  he  enjoyed  of  travelling  with  the  Rev.  G.  Nicolayson,  the  well-informed
missionary  to  the  Jews,  who  has  long  resided  in  Syria,  and  of  late  years  at  Jerusalem.  This
advantage,  concurring  with  the  author's  own  turn  for  useful  observation,  results  in  the  pro-
duction of  a  more  original  and  instructive  account  of  a  journey  in  the  Holy  Land  than  the
preceding  fifteen  or  twenty  years  had  afforded.

Of  the  travellers  lately  noticed,  those  who  have  explored  the  country  east  of  the  Jordan
are  Madox,  Robinson,  Stephens,  Lord  Lyndsay  and  Elliot :  but  it  is  not  easy  to  see  that  any  of
them,  excepting  the  last,  makes  any  addition  of  consequence  to  the  information  which  Seetzen,
Burckhardt,  Buckingham,  and  Irby  and  Mangles  had  long  before  supplied.

In  concluding  this  survey,  we  are  quite  aware  that  the  estimate  which  we  have  formed
will,  in  many  instances,  be  found  to  differ  from  those  usually  entertained.  Let  it,  therefore,
be  recollected  that  many  of  the  names  we  have  given  are  those  of  travellers  who  visited  other
countries  besides  Palestine,  and  the  prevailing  estimate  of  whose  character  has  been  formed
with  a  view  to  the  aggregate  result  of  all  their  labours  ;  whereas,  we  have  confined  our  atten-
tion to  those  parts  of  their  works  which  treat  of  the  Promised  Land,  and  which  may  be  worse
or  better  than  the  other  parts.  Then,  again,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  we  have  examined
these  works  for  contributions  to  a  physical  history  of  Palestine,  and  for  no  other  purpose  ;  and
that  our  notices  have  necessarily  been  guided  by  that  limiting  consideration.  And  if  any  one
should  think  that  we  have  manifested  an  inclination  to  estimate  the  travellers  prior  to  the  18th
century  more  indulgently  than  those  since,  it  will  be  remembered  that  the  former  were
selected  from  a  great  number,  and  were  necessarily  estimated  with  some  comparing  reference
to  the  utter  dearth  of  useful  facts  among  their  contemporary  pilgrims  ;  whereas,  the  travellers
of  later  date  could  not  possibly  be  estimated  without  some  view  towards  the  higher  require-
ments of  a  more  improved  age.

It  will  be  recollected  that  the  above  enumeration  is  confined  to  such  authorities  as  seem  to
furnish  some  materials  towards  the  natural  history  and  physical  description  of  Palestine.
Hence  we  have  necessarily  omitted  to  notice  a  multitude  of  works  which,  of  whatever  value  in
other  respects,  afford  little  if  any  information  on  this  class  of  subjects.  Some  of  the  names  we
have  mentioned  must  be  familiar  to  our  readers,  many  of  whom  will  feel  surprise  to  be  told,
that  information  has  been  as  little  sought  for,  by  writers  on  the  physical  history  of  the  Bible,
in  the  more  recent  and  better  known  works  now  mentioned,  as  in  those  older  and  less  known
which  were  before  enumerated.  Shaw  is  the  only  one  of  these  whose  work  appears  to  have
been  consulted.     This  is  a  circumstance  which  makes  one  inclined  to  suspect  that  the  unsatis-

n  '  Travels  in  the  Three  Great  Empires.'     1839.

d  2

xx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

factory  character  of  the  current  books  on  the  subject  proceeds  less  from  the  unacquaintance
of  their  authors  with  proper  sources  of  information,  than  from  indisposition  to  undertake
the  certainly  serious  labour  of  collecting  and  digesting  the  numerous  small  facts  dispersed
over  so  large  a  surface.

It  may  be  asked,  then,  how  have  such  accounts  been  prepared,  since  the  proper  authorities
have  not  been  consulted.  The  answer  has  been  given  by  anticipation, — that  really  no  attempt
has  been  made  to  furnish  the  physical  history  of  Palestine ;  and  that  while  much  has  been
done  to  explain  and  illustrate  the  allusions  to  natural  products  and  physical  circumstances
which  the  Scriptures  contain,  it  has  been  done  on  a  loose  principle,  which  was  very  far  from
requiring  that  the  illustration  should  be  sought  in,  or  even  near,  the  country  which  supplied
the  original  subject.  The  few  who  saw  the  superior  value,  in  such  subjects,  of  facts  derived
immediately  from  the  parent  country,  overlooked  the  sources  we  have  indicated,  and  turned
only  to  those  few  persons  who  had  visited  Palestine  as  professed  naturalists.  These  form
a  class  by  themselves,  and  we  have,  therefore,  reserved  them  for  that  separate  notice  to  which
we  now  proceed.

The  first  of  these  is  Peter  Belon,a  who  spent  three  years  (1546 — 49)  in  exploring  the
Levant,  at  the  expense  of  Cardinal  de  Tournon.  He  travelled  in  Greece,  Asia  Minor,  Egypt,
Palestine  and  Syria.  He  gave  his  principal  attention  to  the  various  animal  and  vegetable
products  which  occurred  to  his  notice,  without  entirely  overlooking  topographical  matters  and
the  manners  of  the  people.  His  account  of  Palestine  is  short,  but  exceedingly  valuable,  from
the  number  of  its  products  which  he  enumerates.  The  name  of  Belon  is  well  known  to
general  naturalists  ;  but  the  results  of  his  researches  have  rarely  been  referred  to  by  writers  on
the  natural  history  of  the  Bible.  His  name  is  not,  for  instance,  given  by  Dr.  Harris  in  his
list  of  authorities.

Later  in  the  same  century,  nearly  three  years  (1576 — 79)  were  also  spent  by  Rauwolffb  in
Palestine,  Syria,  and  Mesopotamia,  for  the  express  purpose  of  acquainting  himself  with  the
botany  of  those  countries.  The  information  which  he  gives  on  the  plants  of  the  Holy  Land
is  extensive  and  very  valuable ;  and  the  little  account  to  which  it  has  been  hitherto  turned  is
the  more  strange,  as  the  work  exists  in  the  English  language,  having  been  translated  under
the  auspices  of  Ray,  who  added  useful  catalogues  of  Levantine  plants,  collected  from  Rauwolff,
Belon,  and  others.

But  by  far  the  most  important  contribution  to  the  natural  history  of  Palestine  made  by  any
single  traveller  was  furnished  by  Hasselquist,  a  pupil  of  Linnaeus.  He  died  on  his  expedition,
in  1752,  at  Smyrna;  and  his  papers  having  been  procured  from  thence,  were  published  by
Linnaeus  himself,0  who  prefixed  an  introductory  account  of  Hasselquist,  in  the  course  of  which
he  thus  states  the  origin  of  that  impulse  which  led  his  lamented  pupil  to  the  Holy  Land  : —
"  In  one  of  my  botanical  lectures  in  the  year  1747,  I  enumerated  the  countries  of  which  we
knew  the  natural  history,  and  those  of  which  we  were  ignorant.  Among  the  latter  was  Pales-
tine. With  this  we  were  less  acquainted  than  with  the  remotest  parts  of  India ;  although  the
natural  history  of  this  remarkable  country  was  the  most  necessary  for  divines  and  writers  on
the  Scriptures,  who  have,  indeed,  used  their  utmost  endeavours  to  know  the  animals  therein
mentioned,  yet  could  not,  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  determine  what  they  were,  until  some
one  should  visit  Palestine  and  acquaint  himself  with  its  natural  history.  This  is  the  more
surprising,  as  botany  is  much  indebted  to  several  industrious  divines,  who  had  strictly  ex-
amined the  plants  of  other  countries ;  but  though  many  of  the  Romish  clergy  travel  to  Palestine
every  year,  not  one  had  ever  troubled  himself  on  this  subject.  Hasselquist  was  very  desirous
of  being  the  first  who  should  inform  the  public  of  the  natural  history  of  Palestine,  and  was
determined  to  accomplish  it.     He  imparted  his  design  to  me  soon  after :  but,  surprised  at  his

a  '  Observations  de  Plusieurs  Singularity  et  Choses  Memorables  trouvees  en  Grece,  Asie,  Judee,  Egypte,  Arable,  et  autres
Pays  estranges.'     Paris,  1588.

*>  'A  Collection  of  Curious  Voyages  and  Travels.  In  two  tomes,  the  first  containing  Dr.  Leonhart  Rauwolff 's  Itinerary
into  the  Eastern  Countries.    Translated  from  the  High  Dutch,  by  Nicholas  Staphorst.'     Lond.,  1693.

c  The  original  is  in  Swedish.  An  English  translation  appeared  under  the  title  of  '  Voyages  and  Travels  in  the  Levant,  in  the
Years  1749,50,51,52;  containing  Observations  in  Natural 'History,  Physick,  Agriculture,  and  Commerce,  particularly  on  the
Holy  Land,  and  the  Natural  History  of  the  Scriptures.  By  the  late  Fred.  Hasselquist,  M.D.  Published  by  Charles  Linnaeus.'
Loud.,  17*56.

Chap.  I.]  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.  xxi

enterprising  spirit,  I  represented  to  him  the  length  of  the  way,  the  great  difficulties,  the  many
dangers,  and  the  very  considerable  expenses  which  would  attend  such  an  undertaking,  and,
lastly,  the  indifferent  state  of  his  own  health,  particularly  the  weakness  of  his  lungs :  but  from
this  he  urged  his  object  the  more,  alleging  that  weak  lungs  could  only  be  cured  by  travel  and
change  of  climate ;  and  so  determined  was  he  in  his  resolution,  that  he  declared  he  would
rather  walk  all  the  way  than  have  his  purposes  crossed.  His  mind  was  fixed  on  the  voyage."
Though  very  inadequately  supplied  with  the  requisite  funds,  he  was  enabled  to  accomplish
all  the  objects  which  he  had  proposed  to  himself;  and  it  was  while  waiting  at  Smyrna  for  a
passage  home  with  his  collections,  that  he  was  attacked  by  the  illness  of  which  he  died.  The
collection  of  his  papers,  published  by  Linnaeus,  is  not  extensive,  and  a  considerable  portion  is
occupied  with  matter  pertaining  to  Egypt,  Natolia,  and  Cyprus :  but  his  accounts  and  lists
of  animals,  insects,  and  plants  of  Palestine  are  invaluable  as  far  as  they  go,  and,  in  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge,  must  form  the  basis  of  all  that  can  be  offered  on  the  subject.  Had
Hasselquist  lived  to  digest  his  own  materials,  he  might  have  given  the  world  something  like  a
complete  natural  history  of  the  Holy  Land ;  but,  as  it  is,  he  can  only  be  regarded  as  one  of
many  contributors  to  such  a  history,  though  by  far  the  chief  among  them  all.  The  specimens
of  plants  collected  by  him  furnished  Strand,  one  of  the  disciples  of  Linnaeus,  with  the  principal
materials  for  the  '  Flora  Palaestina,'  inserted  in  the  38th  volume  of  the  Linnsean  '  Opuscula.'

The  famous  Danish  expedition,  projected  by  Michaelis  and  supported  by  the  King  of  Den-
mark, was,  in  its  original  design,  intended  chiefly  to  procure  illustrations  of  the  sacred
records,  and  particularly  of  the  natural  history  of  the  Scriptures.  The  naturalist  of  the  expe-
dition, however,  died  in  Arabia  ;  and  although  the  survivor,  Niebuhr,  published  a  catalogue  of
subjects  of  natural  history  a  from  his  papers,  it  relates  entirely  to  Egypt  and  Arabia,  and  offers
no  direct  contributions  to  the  natural  history  of  Palestine.  As,  however,  the  Bible  notices  the
products  of  Arabia  and  Egypt  as  well  as  of  Palestine,  the  work  has  been  much  used  by
later  writers  on  the  natural  history  of  the  Bible,  particularly  as  it  gives  the  native  names  of  the
various  products  enumerated,  and  thus  opens  an  extensive  mine  which  might  be  explored  for
those  etymological  analogies  for  which  such  writers  very  anxiously  seek.

As  the  materials  which  the  great  French  work  on  Egypt  offers  have  been  entirely  over-
looked by  all  writers  on  the  physical  and  natural  history  of  Palestine,  the  plan  of  this  chapter
requires  us  to  indicate  their  value.

M.  Delisle,  in  his  descriptions  of  Egyptian  plants,b  necessarily  includes  many  which  are
common  to  Egypt  and  Palestine.  In  his  memoir  on  the  plants  which  grow  spontaneously  in
Egypt,  he  makes  some  useful  observations  in  comparative  botany,  including  Syria  in  his
consideration  ;  and  the  succeeding  memoir  on  the  plants  cultivated  in  Egypt  offers  some  valu-
able allusions  to  the  ancient  and  modern  state  of  cultivation  in  Palestine.0  The  *  Floras  iEgyp-
tiacae  Illustratio '  of  the  same  writer  is  very  valuable,  as  it  combines  the  results  of  all  previous
inquiry,  and  clearly  indicates  the  species  common  to  Egypt  and  Palestine,  as  well  as  those  found
on  the  common  border  of  both  countries.

The  twentieth  volume  treats  on  the  physical  geography  of  Egypt,  by  M.  Girard,  and  from
it  some  pieces  of  useful  information  may  be  gleaned  by  the  writer  on  the  physical  history  of
Palestine  who  wishes  to  take  a  large  view  of  his  subject — which  view,  to  be  of  historical
value,  must,  while  it  includes  Lebanon  on  the  north,  include  also  on  the  south  the  desert
regions  which  border  equally  on  Palestine  and  Egypt,  as  well  as  the  mountains  and  deserts  of
the  Sinai  peninsula.

In  the  twenty-first  volume  M.  de  Rosiere  supplies  much  valuable  information  concerning
the  mineralogical  construction  of  districts  which  are  historically  and  physically  connected  with
Palestine,  and  which  must  be  comprehended  in  such  a  large  view  as  that  to  which  we  have
adverted.

The  account  which  MM.  Savigny  and  Audouin  give,  in  part  of  vol.  xxi.,  the  whole  of  vol.  xxii.,

a  '  Descriptions  Animalum,  Avium,  Amphibiorum,  Piscium,  Insectorum,  Vermium ;  quse  in  Itinera  Orientali  observavit  Pe-
trus  Forskal.'     Hauniae,  1775.    4to.

b  '  Description  de  l'Egypte,'  tome  xix.,  8vo  edit..

c  '  We  may  here  mention  that  the  subject  of  the  agriculture  of  the  Hebrews  lias  been  ably  treated  by  Reyuier  in  his  work,  '  De
l'Economie  Publique  et  Rural  des  Arabes  et  des  Juifs.'    Geneva,  1820 ;  and  also  by  the  Rev.  T.  Plumtree,  in  the  '  Investigator.'

xxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  I.

and  part  of  vol.  xxiii.,  of  the  invertebrate  animals  "  of  Egypt  and  Syria,'''  will,  as  this  inclusion
of  such  Syrian  species  as  were  known  to  the  Commission  intimates,  supply  much  important
information  concerning  this  great  division  of  animals  which  may  elsewhere  be  sought  in  vain.

Part  of  the  twenty-third  volume  is  occupied  by  M.  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire's  description  of  the
mammalia  found  in  Egypt.  This  does  not  profess  to  include  Syrian  species ;  but,  as  it  is  well
known  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  animals  specified  are  common  to  Egypt  and  Palestine,
much  of  this  account  is  applicable  to  the  mammalia  of  the  latter  country.

The  next  article  in  the  same  volume  gives  the  ornithology,  by  M.  Savigny,  under  the  title
of  '  Systeme  des  Oiseaux  de  l'Egypte  et  de  la  Syne.'  This  is  rather  a  meagre  list,  and  pro-
fesses to  form  but  part  of  a  more  extensive  work.  It,  however,  notices  the  principal  birds
known  to  exist,  not  only  in  Egypt,  but  in  Palestine,  which  latter  small  country  is  of  course  not
expected  to  offer  any  birds  peculiar  to  itself.

In  the  twenty-fourth  volume  M.  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  describes  the  reptiles  found  in  Egypt ;
and  although  we  know  that  Palestine  is  less  prolific  of  such  creatures  than  Egypt,  it  is  not
known  that  the  Holy  Land  contains  any  species  which  this  account  does  not  include.  The
memoirs  on  the  fishes  of  the  Nile,  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  Mediterranean  coast,  is  of  peculiar
value  in  a  branch  of  our  inquiry  concerning  which  little  information  is  elsewhere  to  be  found.
We  may  thus  know  what  fish  the  Hebrews  were  likely  to  obtain  from  the  Mediterranean ;
and  even  an  account  of  the  fish  of  the  Nile  cannot  fail,  with  due  care,  to  be  profitable,  when
we  recollect  the  ancient  report,  preserved  by  Josephus,  and  corroborated  by  modern  travellers,
that  the  species  of  fish  in  the  Sea  of  Galilee  also  exist  in  the  Nile,  whence  it  was  anciently
imagined  that  there  was  some  subterraneous  communication  between  the  river  and  the  lake.

It  will  be  seen  from  this  statement  that  the  '  Description  de  l'Egypte '  furnishes  much  in-
formation of  the  sort  we  are  seeking,  supplied  by  some  of  the  first  men  of  our  age.  Consider-
able information,  suited  to  the  illustration  of  the  antiquities,  arts,  and  customs  of  the  Hebrews,
might  also  be  drawn  from  other  parts  of  this  great  work,  which  has  singularly  been  overlooked
by  writers  on  Palestine  and  the  Jews.

In  an  enumeration  of  this  kind,  it  would  be  unpardonable  to  overlook  Dr.  Russel's  '  Natural
History  of  Aleppo.'  It  gives  a  far  better  account  of  the  whole  natural  history,  in  every  depart-
ment, about  Aleppo,  than  Hasselquist  and  all  other  authorities  put  together  afford  concerning
Palestine ;  and  if  any  one  had  supplied  a  similar  work  concerning  that  country,  little  would
have  been  left  to  desire.  The  district  of  Aleppo  is,  like  Palestine,  in  Syria ;  but  that  city  being
three  degrees  of  latitude  to  the  north  of  the  Holy  Land,  and  about  one  degree  of  longitude
to  the  east  of  the  parallel  of  the  Jordan,  some  difference  in  its  seasons  and  products,  particu-
larly its  vegetable  products,  may  be  expected.  And  this  expectation  of  difference  will  be
increased  when  we  consider  that  the  district  of  Aleppo  is  much  more  elevated  above  the  sea
than  any  part  of  Palestine ;  that  although  some  parts  of  Palestine  are  equally  distant  from
the  Mediterranean,  they  are  not  like  the  Aleppo  district,  separated  from  that  sea  by  ranges  of
high  mountains.  But  the  difference  thus  arising  may  be  in  some  degree  counterbalanced  by
the  equalizing  effect — upon  all  those  parts  of  Syria  not  involved  in  the  higher  mountains,  or
situated  close  upon  the  coast — of  the  deserts  of  the  east  and  south,  which  modify,  to  an  extent
not  easily  calculated,  the  effects  which  might  be  expected  to  result  from  difference  of  latitude
and  physical  elevation.  And  looking  to  mere  situation,  without  reference  to  the.  difference  of
latitude,  the  northern  part  of  Palestine,  towards  Lebanon,  and  the  high  plains  east  of  the
Jordan,  might  seem  to  be  not  very  differently  situated  than  the  Aleppo  district.  Upon  the
whole,  however,  the  temperature  of  Palestine  must  be  some  degrees  higher  than  that  of  Aleppo
— or  intermediate  between  that  of  Aleppo  and  Egypt,  or  of  Aleppo  and  Arabia;  and  it  is  of
importance  to  find  some  general  principles  which  may  ascertain  how  much  of  Dr.  Russel's
account  of  the  natural  history  of  one  part  of  Syria  may  be  applicable  to  another.  In  the  first
place  it  is  evident  that,  if  we  find  in  Palestine  such  products,  animal  or  vegetable,  as  the  Aleppo
district  affords,  the  account  which  Dr.  Russel  gives  of  them  may,  without  hesitation,  be  adopted
with  respect  to  the  zoological  subjects,  and  also  with  respect  to  the  botanical,  but  with  more
attention  in  this  class  to  possibly  modifying  circumstances.  The  enumeration  of  species  may
also  assist  us  to  discover  some  of  those  found  in  Palestine  which  travellers  have  failed  to

Chap.  I.]

SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.

xxm

mention.  For  instance,  we  have  lists  for  Aleppo,  Egypt,  and  Arabia,  that  is,  for  countries
between  which  Palestine  is  interposed.  If  we  find  a  product  in  Egypt  or  in  Arabia,  we  have
no  right  to  conclude  that  it  is  also  in  Palestine — their  temperature  being  higher  than  that  of
the  Holy  Land :  so  in  like  manner,  that  a  product  is  found  in  the  Aleppo  district  offers  us  no
reason  to  conclude  that  it  is  in  Palestine,  the  Aleppo  temperature  being  considerably  lower;
but  if  we  find  this  product  both  in  the  higher  and  lower  temperature, — if  we  find  it  not  only
in  Egypt  or  Arabia,  but  also  in  Aleppo,  we  shall  have  some  right  to  conclude  that  it  is  also
afforded  by  Palestine,  it  being  scarcely  credible  that  so  small  a  country  should  be  surrounded
on  all  sides  by  a  product  which  it  does  not  contain.  And  this  conclusion  will  be  strengthened
ifv/e  find  this  same  product  not  only  in  Aleppo,  and  in  Egypt  or  Arabia,  the  higher  and  lower
temperatures,  but  also  in  Cyprus,  the  temperature  of  which  is  intermediate,  and  very  similar
to  that  of  Palestine.  This  is  the  only  assumption  under  which  we  can  use  the  valuable
materials  of  Russel's  '  Natural  History  of  Aleppo  '  as  collated  with  those  which  the  '  Descrip-
tion de  l'Egypte,'  Forskal,  Mariti,  and  others,  offer  concerning  the  products  of  Egypt,  Arabia,
and  Cyprus.  The  assumption,  thus  guarded,  is  far  more  modest  than  any  which  former
writers,  on  the  subjects  before  us,  have  taken;  and,  moderate  as  it  is,  we  shall  be  most
reluctant  to  resort  to  it,  and  trust  that  the  success  which  has  rewarded  our  perseverance  in
rooting  up  information  concerning  the  actual  products  of  Palestine  will  leave  us  but  small
occasion  to  resort  even  to  the  assumption  which  we  have  thus  carefully  guarded.

It  was  necessary  to  be  particular  in  this  explanation,  that  the  very  restricted  use  to  which
we  propose  to  apply  such  materials  as  have  been  almost  the  exclusive  reliance  of  previous
writers,  and  which  they  have  employed  with  little  discrimination,  may  be  clearly  understood.

In  the  preceding  pages  we  have  indicated  a  want,  and  pointed  out  the  sources  from  which
it  might  be,  at  least,  partially  supplied.  This  must  not,  however,  lead  to  the  expectation  that
the  ensuing  pages  offer  any  pretensions  adequately  to  supply  the  want  we  have  indicated,
though  we  are  willing  that  it  should  be  understood  to  point  out  what  we  conceive  to  be  a
better  course  of  proceeding  than  any  which  we  know  to  have  been  hitherto  taken.  It  professes
to  be  nothing  more  than  a  sketch,  in  which,  after  having  traced  the  physical  geography  of
the  country,  we  shall  proceed  to  enumerate  its  products  in  the  several  departments  of  nature.
In  this  part  we  shall  set  down  no  article  which  has  not  been  ascertained  to  exist  in  Palestine ;
although,  of  course,  such  facts  as  it  may  be  desirable  to  introduce,  illustrative  of  the  natural
history  and  character  of  the  same  product,  may,  when  necessary,  be  drawn  from  other
countries.  As  there  appears  no  adequate  reason  for  connecting  with  the  history  of  Palestine
particular  accounts  of  products  which,  although  they  exist  there,  are  also  widely  diffused  in
other  countries,  such  will  very  often  be  barely  specified,  while  more  particular  attention  may
be  given  to  those  articles  which  are  almost  peculiar  to  Palestine  or  Syria,  which  there
exhibit  peculiar  characteristics,  or  which,  for  any  reason,  were  of  peculiar  interest  or  im-
portance to  the  Jewish  people.

SUPPLEMENTARY    NOTES.

0)  "Bochart,"  p.  iv. — We  feel  that  we
shall  be  in  great  danger  of  seeming  to  do  in-
justice to  some  most  deservedly  eminent  names,
unless  we  again  and  again  remind  the  reader
that  our  inquiry  is  confined  to  a  single  object,
in  pursuit  of  which  we  cannot  properly  turn
aside  to  admire  any  excellence  but  that  for
which  we  seek.  We  want  distinct  and  positive
facts  for  the  natural  history  of  Palestine ;  and
if  we  do  not  find  these  in  the  quarters  most
likely  to  supply  them,  or  in  the  extent  which
might  be  expected,  it  would  be  quite  beside
the  purpose  for  us  to  occupy  our  space  in  ex-
plaining what  other  things,  as  good,  perhaps,

or  better,  but  not  suited  to  the  required  use,
may  in  those  quarters  be  found.

These  observations  we  may,  with  much  pro-
priety, connect  with  the  name  of  Bochart,
although  there  cannot  be  any  persons  who
hold  that  name  in  higher  honour  than  we  do ;
and  we  cannot  let  it  pass  without  the  addition
of  a  few  more  remarks,  which  may  further
explain  the  view  we  take  of  such  works,  and
exonerate  us  from  any  imputation  of  not  ren-
dering to  a  distinguished  man  the  honour  of
which  he  is  worthy.

Bochart's  '  Hierozoicon '  was  a  production  of
those  days   in  which  the   entire  labour  of  a

XXIV

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  I.

diligent  life  was  often  embodied  in  a  single
work.  This  was  not  exactly  Bochart*  s  case,
since  he  found  leisure  to  produce  other  works ;
but  the  '  Hierozoicon'  is  still  the  labour  of
thirty  years;  and  the  thirty  years'  labour  of
such  a  man  as  Bochart  could  not  fail  to  pro-
duce results  worthy  of  all  admiration  and  re-
spect. With  such  sentiments  the  '  Hierozoicon'
was  regarded  by  Cuvier,  who  signalises  it  as  the
most  perfect  account  which  we  possess  of  the
knowledge  of  nature  which  existed  among
ancient  nations.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  cyclopaedia  of
ancient  natural  history ;  and  as  such  it  is  indis-
pensable to  the  natural  historian,  and  possesses
a  character  and  value  of  its  own,  which  no
other  work  can  supersede,  and  with  which  no
other  can  interfere.  The  facts  preserved  in
this  work  are  often  erroneous  and  doubtful:
but  it  is  a  fact  of  the  highest  importance  to
know  what  the  ancients  or  the  orientals  have
stated  on  subjects  of  natural  history  ;  and  it  is
the  circumstance  that  the  work  of  Bochart  has
supplied,  to  the  more  practical  natural  his-
torians of  later  days,  all  the  information  of  this
sort  which  they  could  want,  which  has  main-
tained its  use  and  authority  unimpaired.  This,
its  permanent  character,  does  not,  as  some
mistakenly  imagine,  prove  its  value  as  a  book
of  natural  history,  or  show  how  much  its
author  was,  in  the  knowledge  of  nature,  in
advance  of  his  age.  On  the  contrary,  the  work
is  not  the  production  of  a  natural  historian,
but  is  a  work  of  learned  research — a  collection
of  old  knowledge  in  natural  things,  the  use
and  character  of  which  remains  unaffected  by
any  advances  which  may  have  been  made  in
the  science  of  Nature.

We  have  been  anxious,  this  once,  to  show
that  we  are  not  insensible  to  the  general  merits
of  writers,  whose  labours  prove  to  be  of  less
value  for  our  limited  purpose,  than  their  pro-
fessed object  might  lead  one  to  expect.  We
think,  indeed,  that  their  mode  of  investigating
natural  history  was  partly  a  matter  of  necessity,
arising  from  the  scarcity  of  positive  facts,  and
arose  partly  from  the  want  of  a  proper  appre-
ciation of  the  value  of  such  of  these  facts  as  did
exist  and  might  have  been  collected.  Hence
all  work  in  natural  history  was  considered  to
be  accomplished,  when  all  which  the  ancients
had  said  was  brought  together  ;  and  while  the
general  result  of  this  was  curious,  and,  in  many
ways,  useful,  much  harm  was  done,— at  least,
as  it  regards  Palestine, — by  the  establishment
of  a  precedent,  with  a  special  application  to
that  country,  which  has  been  indiscriminately
followed  by  later  writers,  notwithstanding  the
large  number  of  positive  and  tangible  facts
which  has  gradually  accumulated,  and  the
greatly  improved  forms  which  all  physical  in-

quiry has  taken.  Indeed,  if  the  reader  should
take  the  trouble  to  examine  these  works,  with
this  specific  object  in  view,  and  notes  how  few
of  the  adduced  facts  are  derived  directly  from
Palestine,  and  how  little  of  the  abundant  in-
formation is  more  than  hypothetically  appli-
cable to  that  country,  we  suspect  he  may  be
led  to  doubt  whether  they  have  not  done  more
harm  than  good  for  the  natural  history  of
Palestine,  however  highly  he  may  be  disposed
to  estimate  their  value  in  other  respects.

(z)  "  Scheuchzer,"  p.  vi. — The  few  persons
whom  we  have  known  to  possess  copies  of  this
superb  work  have  seemed  so  very  proud  of  it,
and  to  entertain  such  exaggerated  notions  of
its  authority  and  value,  that  a  few  further
remarks  upon  it  may  not  be  inexpedient.

The  plates,  which  are  best  in  the  Latin
copies  and  worst  in  the  French,  form  such  a
series  of  illustrations  as  very  few  other  works
possess,  and  are  apt  to  dispose  the  spectator  to
annex  an  idea  of  value  and  importance  to  the
text  which  they  illustrate.  But  a  cursory  ex-
amination, even  of  the  plates,  is  quite  enough
to  indicate  that  Scheuchzer's  mind  laboured
under  a  considerable  want  of  sound  judgment
and  discretion.  There  is  not  a  passage  of  Scrip-
ture, having  the  least  reference  to  any  produc-
tion of  nature,  any  physical  phenomenon  or
incident,  or  any  operation  in  manufacture  or
art,  which  Scheuchzer  does  not  undertake  to
illustrate  by  an  engraving.  The  engravings
thus  brought  together,  form,  what  one  of  the
biographers a  of  the  author  justly  denominates
un  bizarre  recueil.  The  same  writer  does  not
indicate  the  literary  inadequacy  of  Scheuch-
zer's work  with  sufficient  clearness,  but  re-
marks strongly  on  the  plates.  If  the  Bible,
as  he  instances,  mentions,  in  any  passage,  a
quadruped  or  bird,  the  animal  is  designed  in
all  sorts  of  positions  and  in  very  elaborate  land-
scapes :  if  the  eye  or  the  ear  is  mentioned,  the
plates  hasten  to  show  all  the  anatomical  details
of  those  organs.  The  engravings  become,  if
possible,  more  useless  still,  considering  the
professed  object  for  which  they  are  introduced,
and  of  the  work  to  which  they  belong,  when
they  not  only  represent  ordinary  circumstances,
such  as  a  combat,  a  sacrifice,  or  the  anointing
of  a  king,  but  even  miraculous  events,  such
as  the  descent  of  fire  from  heaven  upon  Sodom
and  Gomorrah,  or  the  earth  swallowing  up
Dathan  and  Abiram,  or,  finally,  simple  alle-
gories or  mere  allusions,  all  of  which  are  made
the  subjects  of  expensive  and  elaborate  plates,
under  the  sole  pretext  that  they  relate  to
natural  objects.

a  Iu  the  '  Biographic  Universelle.'

Chap.  I.]

NOTES  TO  SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION.

XXV

(3)  "Calmet,"  p.  vi. — The  singular  work  of
Mr.  Charles  Taylor,  to  which  the  text  refers,
has  connected  so  much  confusion  with  all  re-
ference to  Calmet's  authority,  that,  in  justice
to  ourselves  and  others,  who  have  sometimes
had  occasion  to  annex  to  our  statements  the
sanction  of  his  eminent  name,  the  following
explanation  may  be  given.

The  three  great  works  which  chiefly  distin-
guished the  useful  life  of  this  learned  and
ingenious  Benedictine  were  his  Commentary,
his  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  and  his  History  of
the  Bible.  The  first  of  these  bears  the  title  of
'  Commentaire  Litteral  sur  tous  les  Livres  de
l'Ancien  et  Nouveau  Testament,'  Paris,  1719
— 1726,  in  nine  vols,  folio.  This  immense
work,  which  is  but  little  known  in  England,
was  pronounced  by  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  to  be
"  without  exception  the  best  comment  on  the
sacred  writings  ever  published ;"  and  this
high  measure  of  praise,  understood  as  it  was
given,  will  scarcely  seem  exaggerated  to  those
who  have  any  actual  knowledge  of  the  work  to
which  it  is  applied.  This  stupendous  produc-
tion comprehends  a  large  number  of  Disserta-
tions on  a  great  variety  of  subjects  belonging
to  sacred  antiquities  and  criticism ;  which  were
also  published  separately  in  three  4to.  volumes.
Soon  after  the  appearance  of  these  Disserta-
tions, a  very  laudable  attempt  was  made  to  ex-
tend the  benefit  of  their  multitudinous  inform-
ation and  extensive  research  to  the  English
reader,  by  the  publication  of  a  portion,  under
the  title  of  '  Antiquities,  Sacred  and  Profane  ;'
but  the  work  was  never  completed,  and  the
volume  then  issued  is  now  very  difficult  to
obtain.

Calmet's  next  great  work,  and  that  by  which
his  name  is  alone  popularly  known  in  this
country,  was  the  '  Dictionnaire  Historique,
Chronologique,  Geographique,  et  Litteral  de  la
Bible,'  Paris,  1730,  4  tomes,  folio.  This,  which
has  formed  the  basis  of  all  modern  dictionaries
of  the  Bible,  was  speedily  presented  to  the
English  public  by  the  Rev.  S.  D'Oyly,  and  the
Rev.  J.  Colson,  in  three  large  folio  volumes,
illustrated  by  160  capital  engravings.  This
dictionary,  although  the  most  useful  and  popu-
lar of  Calmet's  works,  and  novel  in  its  plan,  is
little  other  than  an  alphabetical  digest  of  the
information  which  had  already  been  given  in
the  Commentary  and  Dissertations,  omitting
much  valuable  matter  which  those  works  con-
tain, and  adding  something  from  the  surplus
materials  which  had  been  collected  for  them.
This  does  not  by  any  means  detract  from  the
value  of  the  work,  but  explains  the  mode  of
its  construction.  Towards  the  end  of  the  last
century,  D'Oyly  and  Colson's  edition  of  Calmet
had  become  scarce  and    costly,  which  sug-

VOL.  I.

gested  to  Mr.  Charles  Taylor  the  advantage  of
putting  forth  a  new  edition ;  and  his  method
of  performing  this  task  was  singular  in  the
extreme.  He  first  reduced  the  Dictionary  by
abridgment  to  about  one -third  of  its  original
extent,  so  that  it  might  be  comprehended  in
two  rather  loosely-printed  quarto  volumes,  and
to  these  he  added  two  other  volumes,  contain-
ing much  more  matter  than  the  abridged  Dic-
tionary, consisting  of  articles  of  various  length,
which  he  called  'Fragments,'  on  the  antiquities,
geography,  natural  history,  and  mythology  of
the  Bible ;  and  the  work  was  completed  by  a
fifth  volume,  consisting  of  engravings,  designed
chiefly  to  illustrate  the  'Fragments,'  and  con-
taining few  of  those  in  Calmet's  original  work.
This  publication  has  acquired  extensive  and
deserved  popularity  under  the  general  name
of  '  Calmefs  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  and  by
that  title  the  writers  who  really  cite  Taylor's
'  Fragments'  usually  refer  to  the  authority  they
have  employed.  The  Dictionary  portion  of
this  edition  is,  indeed,  seldom  quoted,  and  is  of
small  value  compared  with  the  original  English
edition  of  D'Oyly  and  Colson.  Hence  it  cu-
riously enough  happens  that  the  name  of  Cal-
met is  in  this  country  associated  with  writings
not  his  own,  and  which  he  could  not  have
written ;  while  the  English  public  is  compara-
tively ignorant  of  the  real  productions  of  this
eminent  man.  Hence  also  a  writer  who  now
uses  the  name  of  Calmet,  without  careful  dis-
crimination, is  at  once  supposed  to  be  availing
himself  of  Taylor's  ingenious  speculations.
This  mistaken  notion  has,  we  believe,  been
connected  with  the  frequent  references  to
'  Calmet '  in  the  '  Pictorial  Bible'  by  the  author
of  the  present  work ;  and  to  preclude  its  re-
currence, it  may  be  proper  to  explain  that
wherever  the  'Fragments'  are  cited  by  him,
they  are  ascribed  to  their  proper  author,  "  Tay-
lor," not  "  Calmet  ;*'  and  that  such  references
rarely  occur  is  because  the  '  Fragments '  were
almost  never  consulted  in  the  progress  of  that
undertaking.  This  was  not  from  any  dispo-
sition to  undervalue  those  ingenious  and  often
instructive  papers,  but  from  the  feeling  that
the  facts  which  they  contain  have  so  often  and
in  such  various  forms  been  presented  to  the
English  reader,  that  they  had  become  fami-
liarly known,  and  needed  not  to  be  repeated.
The  greater  portion  of  the  facts  and  opinions
quoted  by  us  under  the  name  of  Calmet  have
been  derived  from  the  '  Dissertations,'  as  they
appear,  in  an  improved  and  corrected  form,
in  the  fourth  edition  of  the  '  Bible  de  Vence.'a
The  notes  in  the  folio  '  Commentaire '  also
supplied    some  valuable  facts,  and  the  Dic-

a  Twenty-five  tomes,  8vo.    Paris,  1820—1824.

e

XXVI

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  I.

tionary  was  occasionally  consulted  in  the  com-
plete edition  of  D'Oyly  and  Colson.  While
this  explanation  has  a  primary  reference  to
the  '  Pictorial  Bible,'  it  is  not  unsuitably  here
introduced,  as  it  will  serve  to  distinguish  the
references  to  Calmet  and  Taylor,  respectively,
which  the  present  work  may  contain.

The  same  writer's  'History  of  the  Bible'3
is  a  plain  and  useful  performance,  perfectly
trust-worthy,  but  no  Avise  remarkable,  unless
for  the  very  absence  of  that  learned  and  cu-
rious research  which  distinguishes  all  Calmet's
other  works.  The  preface  declares  that  this
character  was  purposely  given  to  a  produc-
tion intended  for  the  instruction  of  plain
readers,  and  in  which  it  was  judged  desirable
to  imitate  the  brevity  and  precision  of  Abbe

a  '  Histoire  de  l'Ancien  et  Nouveau  Testament,  et  des  Juifs,
pour  servir  d' Introduction  a  l'Histoire  Ecclesiastique  de  M.
l'Abbe  Fleury,  4  tomes,  4to.,  Paris,  1735.'  So  our  copy  is
dated,  but  there  were  prior  editions.

Fleury,  to   whose   '  Ecclesiastical  History '
was  designed  to  form  an  introduction.

it

(4)  "  Boucher,"  p.  ix. — For  the  benefit  of
the  curious  in  title-pages,  we  preserve  that
which  Boucher  has  prefixed  to  his  curious
performance  :— "  Le  Bouquet  Sacre,  ou  le
Voyage  de  la  Terre- Sainte,  compose  des  roses
du  Calvaire,  des  lis  de  Bethleem,  des  hyacintes
du  Mont  Rivet,  et  de  plusieurs  autres  pensees
de  la  Terre-Sainte,  par  le  P.  Boucher,  frere-
mineur-observantin.  Rouen,  1698."  Of  a  piece
with  this  is  the  equally  irreverent  and  absurd
dedication  of  the  work — "  Au  Roi  des  Rois
Jesus  eternel,"  etc. — "  Et  a  tres-sainte  et  tres-
puissante  princesse  Marie,  epouse  du  Pere
eternel,  mere  du  Fils  tout  puissant,  sacre  temple
du  Saint-Esprit,  Imperatrice  des  anges,  Avo-
cate  des  pecheurs  et  brise-tete  du  serpent
infernal."

[Crusaders  approaching  Jerusalem.]

CHAPTER    II.

MOUNTAINS.

[Scene  in  Mountains  of  Gilead — Ruins  of  Jerash.]

Palestine,  the  country  in  which  were  transacted  the  important  events  which  it  is  the  object
of  the  ensuing  history  to  record,  is  a  small  territory  on  the  western  borders  of  Asia,  frontino-
the  Mediterranean,  being  the  south-eastern  portion  of  Syria.  On  the  north  this  territory  is
bounded  by  the  Lebanon  mountains ;  but  its  southern  border  is  lost  in  the  open  desert  which
separates  Palestine  from  Egypt,  and  which  formed  a  kind  of  neutral  ground  between  them.
As,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  take  some  line  of  boundary  here,  in  order  that  the  length  of
the  country  from  north  to  south  may  be  stated,  it  cannot  be  far  wrong  to  draw  it  from  the
stream  of  El  Arish  (supposed  to  be  the  scriptural  "  River  of  Egypt"),  eastward  to  a  point
about  25  geographical  miles  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  on  the  borders  of  that  valley  which
extends  between  that  Sea  and  the  Gulf  of  Akaba.  Assuming  this  southern  boundary,  and
fixing  the  northern  one  at  the  parallel  of  the  stream  which  flows  from  Lebanon  into  the  sea
about  five  miles  to  the  north  of  Sidon,  Palestine  will  appear  to  be  comprehended  between
30°  40',  and  33°  36'  of  northern  latitude ;  and  the  length  of  a  line  drawn  from  the  northern
line  to  the  southern,  through  the  centre  of  the  country,  will  not  be  less  than  180  miles.

The  eastern  border  of  Palestine  is  well  defined,  in  nearly  a  straight  line,  by  the  river
Jordan  and  its  lakes ;  but  the  opposite  border,  that  of  the  sea-coast,  spreads  out  to  the  south-
south-west,  whereby  the  width  of  this  strip  of  country  gradually  increases  southward,  so  that,
on  arriving  near  the  southern  border,  the  breadth  of  the  land  is  found  to  be  about  thrice  as
great  as  in  the  uttermost  north.     The  line  of  extreme  breadth  is  embraced  between  33°  45',

e  2

xxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

and  35°  30'  of  eastern  longitude,  being,  in  that  latitude,  92  geographical  miles ;  but  the  least
breadth  of  this  territory  in  the  north  does  not  exceed  20  miles,  and  the  average  breadth  cannot
be  overstated  at  about  50  miles.

This  is  the  proper  Palestine,  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  Holy  Land,  the  land  of  Promise.
But,  for  historical  purposes,  it  is  quite  necessary  that  the  first  of  these  names  should  be  under-
stood to  include  the  domains  beyond  the  Jordan  which  were  as  much  in  the  occupation  of  the
Hebrew  people,  and  belong  as  much  to  their  history,  as  the  territory  west  of  that  river.
This  inclusion  will  give  to  Palestine  the  districts  of  Argob  and  of  Bashan,  of  Gilead,  and
the  country  south  to  the  river  Arnon,  which  formed  the  northern  frontier  of  Moab.  With
this  enlargement,  the  length  of  the  country,  regarded  as  a  whole,  is  not  increased ;  and  the
line  of  extreme  breadth  may  still  be  sought  in  the  south.  A  view  of  the  map,  however,  shows
that  the  average  breadth  now  bears  a  much  higher  proportion  than  in  the  separate  measure-
ment of  the  western  country.  There  the  extreme  breadth  is  little  more  than  an  accident  of
the  southern  boundary  line,  and  the  average  breadth  bears  no  proportion  to  it :  but  now,  in
viewing  the  whole  together,  giving  the  country  an  addition  of  breadth  in  its  narrowest  part,
and  none  in  its  widest,  the  previous  disproportion  between  the  extreme  and  the  average
measurements  becomes  greatly  reduced;  and  this  result  is  obtained  by  the  increase  in  the
latter,  while  the  former  remains  the  same.

Taking  this  larger  view  of  the  country,  the  resulting  effect  will  be  that  its  length  remains
at  180  miles,  but  its  average  breadth  is  increased  to  about  65  miles.  We  have  also  endea-
voured to  form  some  estimate  of  the  superficial  extent  of  the  whole  country,  and  find  room  to
calculate  it  at  about  11,000  geographical  square  miles.  This  does  not  give  a  superficial  extent
equal  to  one-fourth  of  England  (with  Wales),  or  more  than  two-fifths  of  Scotland,  Ireland,  or
Portugal.  Bavaria  and  Sardinia  offer  an  area  about  twice  as  large ;  that  of  Denmark  is  about
one-third  larger  :  but,  according  to  the  estimate  we  have  made,  the  area  of  Palestine  is  nearly
double  that  of  Wales,  Wirtemberg,  or  Tuscany.  Thus,  as  to  mere  extent,  the  country  can
only  be  compared  to  some  of  the  smaller  European  states,  of  which  Hanover,  Belgium,  Swit-
zerland, the  Papal  States,  and  the  island  of  Sicily  appear  to  offer  the  nearest  approximation.
But  the  real  surface  is  much  greater  than  this  estimate  and  these  comparisons  would  imply  :
for  Palestine  being  essentially  a  hilly  country,  the  sides  of  the  mountains  and  slopes  of  the
hills  enlarge  the  actual  surface  to  an  extent  which  does  not  admit  of  calculation.

But,  with  all  allowances,  Palestine  remains  so  small  a  country,  that  undue  importance  might
seem  to  be  given  to  it  by  the  extent  to  which  its  history  is  carried,  did  we  not  bear  in  mind
that  a  country  only  gives  a  name  to  the  history  of  the  men  by  whom  it  has  been  occupied —
that  it  is  a  history  of  human  conduct  and  passion,  of  human  hearts  and  minds,  the  operations
of  which  may  be  as  impressively  and  importantly  developed,  and  generally  are  more  so,  on  a
small  arena  as  on  one  that  is  large.  It  is  this  which,  in  ancient  and  modern  history,  has  given
importance  to  the  histories  of  spots  as  small  as,  or  even  smaller  than,  Palestine.  It  is,  perhaps,
because  the  springs  of  human  action  in  such  cases  are  more  clearly  displayed,  and  that  all
the  moving  personages  of  one  time  are  seen  in  circumstances  of  real  collision  or  comparison,
acting  with  or  acting  upon  each  other — that  he  takes  up  history  as  a  part  of  the  study  of  man,
seldom  thinks  of  seeking  instruction  but  where  the  principles  of  human  action  are  exhibited
with  concentrated  effect,  either  through  the  physical  necessities  of  a  confined  territory,  or  by
the  moral  action  of  a  representative  government.  All  history,  ancient  or  modern,  conveys  true
instruction  or  not,  or  is  really  interesting  or  not,  in  proportion  as,  from  the  one  or  the  other  of
these  causes,  the  spirit  and  policy  of  the  people  of  which  it  treats  are  concentratively  displayed.
This  is  not  a  hypothesis,  but  a  fact,  which  any  one  has  the  power  to  verify,  by  observing  that
the  history  of  no  country  is  deemed  of  much  interest,  or  is  by  any  means  an  object  of  popular
study,  to  which  this  rule  does  not  apply  ;  and  that  the  real  interest  we  take  in  the  history  of
a  country  begins  or  ceases  with  the  production  or  discontinuance  of  this  concentrative  effect.
Without  this,  history  is  but  a  continued  tale  of  wrong  and  outrage ;  or  but  a  succession  of
biographies  of  "  great"  men,  which  offer  individual,  not  national,  portraits,  and  which,
although  they  may  be  interesting  as  individual  portraitures,  do  really,  by  occupying  the  field
of  view,  exclude  from  notice  those  national  developments  which  are  the  verities  of  history,  and

Chap.  II.]  MOUNTAINS.  xxix

which  give  to  the  history  of  a  nation  all  those  characteristic  distinctions  by  which  its  real
interest  is  constituted.

Seeing,  then,  that  the  importance  and  interest  of  a  history  is  not  to  be  estimated  by  the
physical  extent  of  the  country,  or  the  numbers  of  the  people  to  which  it  refers,  it  seems  to  us
that  nothing  can  be  more  unphilosophical  than  the  cavils  of  those  so-called  "  philosophers  "
who  have  been  wont  to  sneer  at  the  importance  which  has  been  assigned  to  so  narrow  a  terri-
tory as  Palestine,  and  to  so  small  a  people  as  the  Hebrew  nation.  And  equally  have  those
been  mistaken,  who  have  sought  to  meet  these  objections  by  magnifying  the  extent  of  the
Hebrew  dominion,  and  the  numbers  of  the  Hebrew  people.

These  observations  concede  the  supposition  that  the  History  of  Palestine  must  be  esti-
mated by  the  same  rules  as  other  histories.  But  this  is  not  the  fact.  In  so  far  as  it  in-
cludes the  history  of  the  Hebrew  people,  it  is  the  most  peculiar  of  histories ; — it  is  a  history
of  the  intercourse  between  heaven  and  earth  during  a  long  series  of  ages  ; — it  is  the  history  of
that  religion  which  was  the  destined  precursor  of  the  Christian  system  ; — it  is  the  history  of  one
great  act  through  the  successive  stages  of  its  progress  and  development, — God  himself  being
the  Author  of  that  act,  the  Jews  the  agents  of  its  operation,  and  Palestine  the  country  selected
for  its  exhibition.  Besides,  this  history  has  what  no  other  history  ever  could  possess, — a
visible  design  and  object  from  beginning  to  end.  One  marked  portion  of  this  design  has  been
accomplished,  and  with  its  accomplishment  the  House  of  Israel  ceased  to  be  a  nation ;  the
other  portion  is  now  fulfilling,  and  the  great  result,  now  shadowed  forth  in  dark  prophecies,
remains  a  subject  for  future  histories.

Thus,  in  every  way,  the  history  of  Palestine,  in  all  that  it  comprehends,  is  really  the  most
generally  important  while  it  is  the  most  peculiar  of  histories.  And  if  it  had  been  possible  that
the  circumstances  which  it  embraces  should  have  taken  place  in  some  small  valley  among  the
mountains,  never  inhabited  by  more  than  a  hundred  people,  the  history  of  that  valley  and  that
people  would  be  the  most  important  that  was  ever  written.

Palestine  itself  necessarily  thus  becomes  of  great  interest,  from  its  connection  with  these
circumstances,  from  the  associations  which  result  from  this  connection,  and  from  the  various
lore  which  has  been  brought  to  bear  on  all  its  characteristics.  The  country  which  God
specially  set  apart  for  his  great  designs,  and  which,  in  consequence,  contains  no  spot  of  ground
on  which  some  commissioned  angel  has  not  trod,  or  which  does  not  suggest  some  incident  in
the  histories  of  patriarchs,  prophets,  apostles,  priests  and  kings,  whose  names  supply  the
familiar  links  by  which  our  minds  measure  old  times, — excites  a  peculiar  interest  in  us,  scarcely
inferior  to  that  with  which  our  own  native  land  is  regarded.

But  even  considered  in  itself,  Palestine  is  a  country,  small  though  it  be,  well  worthy  of
attention,  and  in  some  respects  as  peculiar  as  the  people  whose  history  is  inseparably  con-
nected with  it.  It  does  not,  like  most  other  small  countries,  constantly  remind  you  that  it  is
physically  but  part  of  a  larger  country,  from  which  it  is  but  conventionally  separated ;  but  it
is  a  complete  country — a  compact,  distinct,  and  well-proportioned  territory.  It  offers,  as  it
were,  an  epitome  of  all  the  physical  features  by  which  different  countries  are  distinguished,  and
which  very  few  possess  in  combination.  It  has  its  lofty  mountains,  its  stern  rocky  wilder-
nesses, and  its  smiling  hills ;  it  has  its  pleasant  valleys,  its  wide  plains,  and  elevated  plateaus ;
and  while  on  the  one  hand  it  presents  an  extended  sea-coast,  with  its  harbours,  beaches,  cliffs,
and  promontories,  on  the  other  the  solitary  deserts  extend  their  inhospitable  wastes  of  sand.
The  principal  river  of  this  country,  and  the  smaller  streams,  the  large  inland  lakes — one  of
them  so  remarkable  in  its  characteristics, — the  hot  springs,  and  the  various  volcanic  indi-
cations, complete  the  singularly  varied  natural  attributes  of  this  "  glory  of  all  lands."

While  these  remarks  apply  to  our  general  subject,  they  may  not  unsuitably  introduce  that
division  of  it  to  which  they  are  prefixed — the  Physical  History  of  Palestine.

To  form  a  clear  idea  of  the  geographical  plan  of  Palestine  we  must  extend  our  view  consider-
ably beyond  and  around  it.  Northward,  that  view  must  take  in  Ccele-Syria  and  the  region  of
Lebanon  ;  eastward,  it  must  embrace  the  plains  and  mountains  of  the  Haouran,  and  the  lands
of  Moab  and  Ammon ;  and  southward,  it  must  overlook  the  inheritance  of  Edom  and  the

xxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

wilderness  of  Paran,  and  must  penetrate  even  into  the  peninsula  of  Sinai.  And  this  extension
of  the  survey,  while  it  is  geographically  necessary,  is  also  historically  convenient  j  for  the
regions  thus  indicated  have  not  only  a  kind  of  secondary  importance  throughout  the  history,
hut  were  all,  for  a  season,  subject  to  the  Hebrew  sceptre.

Thus,  while  there  are  many  questions  even  in  this  Physical  History  which  will  require  us
to  confine  our  view  to  the  narrow  bounds  of  Palestine,  there  are  others  which  will  allow  us
to  commence  our  survey  where —

"  Hoar  Lebanon,  majestic,  to  the  winds,
Chief  of  a  hundred  hills,  his  summit  rears,
Unshrouded — ' '

and  permit  it  to  include,  as  we  continue  our  progress, —

"  By  Jordan  south,
Whate'er  the  desert's  yellow  arms  embrace  ;
Rich  Gilead,  Idumea's  palmy  plain,
And  Judah's  olive  hills;  thence  onward  those
Cliff-guarded  eyries,  desert  bound,  whose  height
Mock'd  the  proud  eagles  of  rapacious  Rome,
The  fam'd  Petrsean  citadels  ;  till  last
Rise  the  lone  peaks,  by  Heav'n's  own  glory  crown'd,
Sinai  on  Horeb  piled."  a

Palestine  is  so  involved  among  the  southward  continuations  of  Lebanon  as  to  take  the  cha-
racter of  a  mountainous  country,  affording,  however,  some  considerable  plains,  and  numerous
valleys,  the  principal  of  which  will  hereafter  demand  our  separate  attention.  This  fact  brings
us  at  once  to  the  application  of  the  considerations  which  we  have  just  stated,  and  compels
us  to  follow  the  track  of  survey  which  has  been  indicated :  for  any  one  who  glances  at  the
map  will  at  once  see  that  the  mountains  of  Palestine  form  but  a  section  of  a  great  system  of
mountains,  which  commences  on  the  north  long  before  we  reach  the  Promised  Land,  and  which
is  prolonged  to  the  south  long  after  we  have  left  it.  And  if,  in  scientific  strictness,  this  en-
larged view  were  not  necessary  in  a  history  of  Palestine,  yet  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  this
is  not  only  a  history  of  Palestine,  but  of  the  Jews;  and  the  renown  of  the  mountains  of
Horeb,  Seir,  and  Lebanon,  in  their  history,  would  still  render  most  desirable  their  inclusion
in  this  part  of  our  work.

That  the  mountain  framework  of  Syria  is  such  as  to  authorise  the  view  we  have  taken  is
shown  by  Volney,  in  a  passage  which  will  very  suitably  introduce  the  description  we  are  to
furnish : —

"  If  we  examine  a  map  of  Syria,  we  may  observe  that  this  country  is  in  some  measure
only  a  chain  of  mountains,  which  distribute  themselves  in  various  directions  from  one  leading
branch ;  and  such  in  fact  is  the  appearance  it  presents,  whether  we  approach  it  from  the  side
of  the  sea,  or  by  the  immense  plains  of  the  desert.  We  first  discover,  at  a  great  distance,  a
clouded  ridge,  which  runs  north  and  south  as  far  as  the  sight  extends ;  and,  as  we  advance,
distinguish  the  summits  of  mountains,  which,  sometimes  detached  and  sometimes  united  in
chains,  uniformly  terminate  in  one  principal  line  which  overtops  them  all  :  we  may  follow
this  line  without  interruption  from  its  entry  by  the  north  quite  into  Arabia.  It  first  runs  close
to  the  sea,  between  Alexandretta  and  the  Orontes,  and,  after  opening  a  passage  to  that  river,
continues  its  course  to  the  southward,  quitting  for  a  short  distance  the  shore,  and  in  a  chain
of  continued  summits  stretches  as  far  as  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,  where  it  separates  into
two  branches,  to  enclose,  as  it  were,  in  a  basin  this  river  and  its  three  lakes.  In  its  course  it
detaches  from  this  line,  as  from  a  main  trunk,  an  infinity  of  ramifications,  some  of  which  lose
themselves  in  the  desert,  where  they  form  various  inclosed  hollows,  such  as  those  of  Damascus
and  Haouran,  while  others  advance  towards  the  sea,  where  they  frequently  end  in  steep  de-
clivities, such  as  Carmel,  Nakoura,  Cape  Blanco,  and  in  almost  the  whole  country  between
Beirout  and  Tripoli  of  Syria ;  but  in  general  they  gently  terminate  in  plains,  such  as  those  of
Antioch,  Tripoli,  Tyre,  and  Acre."

It  appears  to  us  that  Volney  considers  this  principal  Syrian  chain,  which  he  so  correctly

a  '  Lebanon,'     A  Poem.

Chap.  II.]  MOUNTAINS.  xxxi

describes,  as  a  branch  from  the  great  chain  of  Taurus,  which  we  have  ourselves  been  accus-
tomed to  regard  as  the  root  of  all  the  mountains  which  fill  the  south-west  of  Asia.  Malte
Brun,  however,  is  of  a  different  opinion,  and  as  we  do  not  like  to  disagree  with  him  without
absolute  necessity,  and  as,  moreover,  we  are  bent  on  avoiding  questions  of  merely  theoretical
geography,  we  shall  be  content  to  repeat  his  statement,  only  observing  that  we  see  no  reason
why  a  break,  made  by  even  the  wide  valley  of  a  river,  should  necessarily  be  considered  to  destroy
all  connection  between  the  opposite  mountains.  Malte  Brun's  observation  is, — "  The  mountains
are  not  at  all  ramifications  of  Mount  Taurus.  Mount  Rossus,  a  prolongation  of  Amanus,
terminates  at  the  valley  of  the  Orontes.  But  the  proper  Syrian  chain  begins  on  the  soutli  of
Antioch,  by  the  huge  peak  of  Mount  Cassius,  which  shoots  up  to  the  heavens  its  needle-like
point,  encircled  with  forests."

The  continuation  of  these  mountains  southward  gives  occasion  to  remark,  as  Volney  states,
that  the  main  chain  separates  near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan  into  two  branches,  to  enclose,
as  in  a  basin,  that  river  and  its  lakes.  These  two  branches,  with  their  numerous  ramifications,
constitute  the  mountains  of  Palestine  on  both  sides  of  the  Jordan.  The  country  to  the  south
of  the  Dead  Sea  was  too  little  known  in  the  time  of  Volney  to  enable  him  to  trace  the  con-
tinuation and  termination  of  these  two  ranges  beyond  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea.
His  map  makes  the  western  range  approach  nearer  to  the  eastern  at  this  point ;  and  it  then
continues  to  proceed  in  this  closer  proximity,  parallel  with  it,  southward,  for  about  forty
miles,  when  it  suddenly  strikes  westward,  joining  the  eastern  range,  and  shutting  up,  as  in  a
cul  de  sac,  the  valley  which  they  had  hitherto  enclosed  between  them.  But,  in  reality,  the
valley  remains  open,  and  the  two  ranges  continue  to  run  parallel  to  each  other  unto  the
Gulf  of  Akaba,  where  they  separate,  the  one  taking  the  eastern  coast  of  that  gulf,  and  opposing
its  terminating  promontories  to  the  Red  Sea  at  the  point  where  that  gulf  opens.  The  other
takes  the  western  side  of  the  same  gulf,  entering  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  which  divides  this
gulf  from  that  of  Suez.  Here  it  may  be  considered  to  terminate,  most  grandly,  near  the  point
of  the  peninsula,  in  those  renowned  mountains  at  whose  foot  the  shepherd  Moses  was  feeding
his  flock  when  the  Most  High  called  him  to  lead  forth  the  Hebrew  nation  from  their  bondage
in  Egypt ;  and  from  whose  highest  top  He  afterwards  made  known  his  law  to  the  same  people.

Thus,  in  an  enlarged  point  of  view,  the  mountains  of  Anti- Lebanon,  dividing  in  the  north  of
Palestine,  send  forth  two  southward  branches,  which  between  them  enclose  not  only  the  basin
of  the  Jordan  and  Dead  Sea,  but  that  of  the  broad  valley  which  extends  from  that  sea  to  the
^Elanitic  Gulf,  and  of  the  gulf  itself, — the  whole  extent  being  not  less  than  340  geographical
miles.

This  view,  in  its  natural  connections,  of  the  mountain  system  of  Palestine,  from  its  root  in
Lebanon  to  its  termination  at  the  opening  of  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  will  tend  much  to  simplify
our  further  task  by  supplying  a  combination  for  those  conspicuous  parts  which  must  now,
severally,  engage  our  attention,  that  we  may  observe  more  closely  the  natural  character  of
those  mountains,  the  forms  they  bear,  and  the  ornament  with  which  they  are  invested.

The  mountains  of  Syria,  as  they  vary  their  levels  and  situations,  are  also  greatly  changed
in  their  form  and  appearance.  In  the  northern  portion,  between  Scanderoon  and  the  valley  of
the  Orontes,  the  firs,  larches,  oaks,  box-trees,  laurels,  yews,  and  myrtles  with  which  they
abound,  give  them  an  air  of  liveliness  with  which  the  traveller  is  delighted.  On  some  declivities
he  even  meets  with  cottages  environed  with  fig-trees  and  vineyards,  and  the  sight  of  these
repays  the  fatigues  he  has  endured  on  a  road  which,  by  rugged  paths,  leads  him  from  the
bottom  of  valleys  to  the  tops  of  hills,  and  from  the  tops  of  hills  to  the  bottoms  of  valleys.
The  inferior  branches,  which  extend  to  the  northward  of  Aleppo,  on  the  contrary,  present
nothing  but  bare  rocks,  without  earth  or  verdure.

That  part  of  the  range  of  mountains  which  extends,  through  two  degrees  of  latitude,  from
Mount  Cassius  southward  to  Lebanon,  offers,  on  its  seaward  slopes,  a  soil  and  situation  suitable
for  the  growth  of  vines,  olives,  and  tobacco ;  but  on  the  eastern  side — that  of  the  desert — the
summits  and  declivities  of  this  chain  present  the  aspect  of  almost  one  continued  series  of  white
and  barren  rocks.

xxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

About  the  parallel  of  Tripoli  (lat.  34°  28'  N.)  we  come  to  the  commencement  of  two  parallel
ranges  which  extend  through  about  one  degree  of  latitude.  They  form  at  their  termination
the  natural  frontier  of  Palestine,  and  enclose  between  them  a  fertile  valley  which  has  the
average  breadth  of  fifteen  miles.  These  are  the  mountains  of  Lebanon;  and  the  valley
which  lies  between  them  is  the  Hollow  Syria  (Ccele-Syria)  of  the  ancients ;  but  by  the  present
inhabitants  is  called,  pre-eminently,  El  Bekka,  or  the  valley.  The  westernmost  of  these  ranges
gradually  inclines  toward  the  sea,  and  terminates  at  the  mouth  of  the  Leontes,  near  the
renowned  city  of  Tyre ;  while  the  more  inland  range  is  that  which,  as  already  described,
divides  near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,  to  enclose  on  the  west  and  east  the  prolonged  basin
which  contains  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes,  and  the  valley  and  gulf  of  Akaba.  The  denomination
of  Lebanon  is  applied  in  Scripture,  and  by  the  ancient  Orientals,  to  both,  or  indifferently  to
either,  of  the  parallel  ranges  which  enclose  the  long  valley  of  Ccele-Syria;  but  the  Syrian
Greeks  gave  the  name  of  Anti-Libanus  to  the  easternmost  range,  which  overlooks  the  plains  of
Damascus.  This  name,  although  affording  a  distinction  which  is  useful  in  precise  description,
has  been  so  arbitrarily  employed  by  some  of  the  old  historians,  as  to  occasion  some  confusion,
the  rectification  of  which  has  involved  much  unprofitable  discussion,  into  which  we  need
not  enter.

The  present  natives  of  the  country  have  found  the  convenience  of  distinguishing  the  two
ranges  by  different  names,  Anti-Libanus  they  call  the  eastern  mountain  (Jebel  Essharki),  in
opposition  to  Libanus,  which  they  call  the  western  (Jebel  el  Gharbi),  but  to  which  they  also
assign  the  ancient  name  in  the  form  of  Jebel  Libnan.a

The  mountains  of  Lebanon  are  by  far  the  highest  of  the  whole  range.  The  highest  ridge
of  the  western  Lebanon  is  marked  on  both  sides  by  a  line,  drawn  at  the  distance  of  two  hours'
journey  from  the  summit,  above  which  all  is  barren ;  but  the  slopes  and  valleys  below  this
mark  afford  pasturage,  and  are  capable  of  cultivation,  by  virtue  of  the  numerous  springs  which
are  met  with  in  all  directions.  Cultivation  is,  however,  chiefly  found  on  the  seaward  slopes,
where  numerous  villages  flourish,  and  every  inch  of  ground  is  turned  to  account  by  the
industrious  natives,  who,  in  the  absence  of  natural  levels,  build  terraces  to  level  the  ground,
and  to  prevent  the  earth  from  being  swept  down  by  the  winter  rains,  and  at  the  same  time
to  retain  the  water  requisite  for  the  irrigation  of  their  crops.b  Here,  amid  the  crags  of  the
rocks,  are  also  to  be  seen  the  supposed  remains  of  the  renowned  cedars,  but  a  much  greater
number  of  firs,  oaks,  brambles,  mulberry  trees,  figs,  and  vines. c

The  general  elevation  of  Anti-Libanus  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  western  range ;  but  about
its  southward  termination,  where  it  divides  to  send  its  branches  east  and  west  of  the  Jordan,
the  ridge  rises  loftily  and  overtops  all  the  other  summits  of  Lebanon.  This  highest  mountain
of  the  region  bears  the  distinct  name  of  Jebel  Essheikh,  and  is,  unquestionably,  the  Mount
Hermon,  the  perpetual  snow  of  whose  far-seen  summit  is  more  than  once  alluded  to  by  the
sacred  writers.  (l)  Our  information  concerning  Anti-Libanus  generally  is  less  complete  than
that  which  we  possess  respecting  the  parallel  range.  We  know,  however,  that  it  has  fewer
inhabitants,  and  is  scarcely  anywhere  cultivated.  Indeed,  it  is  not  equally  cultivable :  for  it
would  appear,  from  a  comparison  of  the  dispersed  notices  in  Burckhardt,  that  its  western
declivities  towards  the  great  valley  of  Baalbec  (Ccele-Syria),  are  completely  barren,  without
trees  or  pasture ;  but  on  the  summits  and  on  the  eastern  side,  facing  the  plains  of  Damascus,
there  appear  at  least  to  be  parts  affording  good  pasturage,  and  abounding  also  in  stunted  oak-
trees,  of  which  few  are  higher  than  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet.  The  common  route  across
these  mountains,  from  Baalbec  to  Damascus,  at  one  time  ascends  into  the  region  of  snow  (in
March) ;  at  another,  follows  the  direction  of  the  mountain  torrents,  between  parallel  lines  of
hills,  by  the  side  of  aspens,  of  oaks,  and  numerous  willows  by  the  water-courses.*1

Leaving  now  the  mountains  of  Lebanon,  and  following  the  branch  which  passes  into  Palestine,
we  observe  that  the  mountains  become  less  high  and  rugged,  and  more  fit  for  tillage.  They
rise  again  to  the  south-east  of  Mount  Carmel,  are  covered  with  woods,  and  afford  most  pleasant
prospects  ;  but  as  we  advance  towards  Judea,  they  lose  their  verdure,  the  valleys  grow  nar-

a  Burckhardt's  *  Syria,'  p.  4.  b  Burckhardt,  pp.  19,  20,  23.  c  Volney,  vol.  i.  p.  272.

d  Burckhardt,  iv.  15.     Elliot,  ii.  2/6.

Chap.  II.]

MOUNTAINS.

xxxm

rower,  they  become  dry  and  stony,  and  form  at  the  Dead  Sea  a  pile  of  desolate  rocks,  full  of
caverns  and  precipices. a

There  appears  to  be  considerable  general  resemblance  in  the  progressive  characteristics  of
the  mountain  chains  of  both  the  east  and  west,  as  far  as  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Asphaltic
Lake,  if  not  farther.  But  as  we  shall,  in  another  part  of  this  chapter,  consider,  somewhat
at  large,  the  mountains  of  the  eastern  country,  we  shall  not  dwell  on  this  matter  now.

The  preceding  view  has  been  too  rapid  to  include  those  descriptive  details  which  are  of  the
most  interest  to  the  general  reader,  or  to  notice  those  particular  eminences  which  claim  con-
sideration, either  from  their  prominent  importance  among  the  physical  characteristics  of  the
country,  or  from  their  connection  with  some  of  the  events  which  the  history  of  Palestine
records.  Commencing,  therefore,  again  with  Lebanon,  we  shall  proceed  from  thence  south-
ward, noticing  the  principal  mountains  which  occur  first  in  the  west  and  then  on  the  east  of
the  Jordan.

We  are  glad  that  this  arrangement  enables  us  to  introduce  Volney's  correct  and  animated
description  of  Lebanon,  which  we  now  give  in  his  own  words  : —

"  Lebanon,  which  gives  its  name  to  the  whole  extensive  chain  of  the  Kesraoun  and  the
country  of  the  Druses,  presents  us  everywhere  with  majestic  mountains.     At  every  step  we

[Distant  view  of  Lebanon.]

meet  with  scenes  in  which  nature  displays  either  beauty  or  grandeur.  When  we  land  on  the
coast,  the  loftiness  and  steep  ascent  of  this  mountainous  ridge,  which  seems  to  enclose  the
country,  those  gigantic  masses  which  shoot  into  the  clouds,  inspire  astonishment  and  awe.
Should  the  anxious  traveller  then  climb  those  summits  which  bounded  his  view,  the  wide-
extended  space  which  he  discovers  becomes  a  fresh  subject  of  admiration.  But  completely  to
enjoy  this  majestic  scene,  must  he  ascend  to  the  very  point  of  Lebanon,  or  the  Sannin.
There,  on  every  side,  he  will  view  an  horizon  without  bounds ;  while  in  clear  weather  the  sight
is  lost  over  the  desert  which  extends  to  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  over  the  sea  which  bathes  the
coasts  of  Europe.     He  seems  to  command  the  whole  world,  while  the  w  andering  eye,  now

Volney,  vol.  i.  p.  272.

VOL.   I.

xxxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

surveying  the  successive  chains  of  mountains,  transports  the  imagination  in  an  instant  from
Antioch  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  now  approaching  the  surrounding  objects,  observes  the  distant
profundity  of  the  coast,  till  the  attention,  at  length  fixed  by  distincter  objects,  more  minutely
examines  the  rocks,  woods,  torrents,  hill-sides,  villages  and  towns ;  and  the  mind  secretly
exults  at  the  diminution  of  things  which  formerly  appeared  so  great.  He  contemplates  the
valley,  obscured  by  stormy  clouds,  with  a  novel  delight,  and  smiles  at  hearing  the  thunder,
which  had  so  often  burst  over  his  head,  growling  beneath  his  feet;  while  the  threatening
summits  of  the  mountain  are  diminished  till  they  appear  like  the  furrows  of  a  ploughed  field,
or  the  steps  of  an  amphitheatre ;  and  he  feels  himself  flattered  by  an  elevation  above  so  many
great  objects,  on  which  pride  makes  him  look  down  with  a  secret  satisfaction.

"  When  the  traveller  visits  the  interior  parts  of  these  mountains,  the  ruggedness  of  the
roads,  the  steepness  of  the  descents,  the  height  of  the  precipices,  strike  him  at  first  with
terror;  but  the  sagacity  of  his  mule  soon  relieves  him,  and  he  examines  at  leisure  those
picturesque  scenes  which  succeed  each  other  to  entertain  him.  There,  as  in  the  Alps,  he
travels  whole  days  to  such  a  place  that  was  in  sight  at  his  departure :  he  winds,  he  descends,
he  skirts  the  hills,  he  climbs ;  and  in  this  perpetual  change  of  position  it  seems  as  if  some
magic  power  varied  for  him  at  every  step  the  decorations  of  the  scenery.  Sometimes  he  sees
villages  as  if  ready  to  glide  from  the  steep  declivities  on  which  they  are  built,  and  so  disposed,
that  the  terraced  roofs  of  one  row  of  houses  serve  as  a  street  to  the  row  above  them.  Some-
times he  sees  a  convent  standing  on  a  solitary  eminence,  like  Mar  Shaya,  in  the  valley  of  the
Tigris.  Here  is  a  rock  perforated  by  a  torrent,  and  becoming  a  natural  arch,  like  that  of
Nahr  el  Leben.a  There  another  rock,  worn  perpendicular,  resembles  a  lofty  wall.  Frequently
on  the  sides  of  hills  he  sees  beds  of  stones  stripped  and  detached  by  the  waters,  rising  up  like
artificial  ruins.  In  many  places,  the  waters,  meeting  with  inclined  beds,  have  undermined  the
intermediate  earth,  and  formed  caverns,  as  at  Nahr  el  Kelb,  near  Antoura ;  in  others  are
formed  subterraneous  channels,  through  which  flow  rivulets  for  a  part  of  the  year,  as  at  Mar
Elias  el  Roum  and  Mar  Hanna  ;b  but  these  picturesque  situations  sometimes  become  tragical.
From  thaws  and  earthquakes,  rocks  have  been  known  to  lose  their  equilibrium,  roll  down
upon  the  adjacent  houses,  and  bury  the  inhabitants :  such  an  accident  happened  about  twenty
years  ago,  and  overwhelmed  a  whole  village  near  Mar-djordjos,  without  leaving  a  single  trace
to  discover  where  it  formerly  stood.  Still  more  lately,  and  near  the  same  spot,  a  whole  hill
side,  covered  with  mulberry  trees  and  vines,  was  detached  by  a  sudden  thaw,  and  sliding  down
the  declivity  of  the  rock,  was  launched  altogether,  like  a  ship  from  the  stocks,  into  the  valley.
Hence  arose  a  whimsical  but  reasonable  litigation,  between  the  proprietor  of  the  original
ground  and  the  owner  of  the  emigrated  land ;  the  cause  was  brought  before  the  emir  Yousef,
who  indemnified  both  parties  for  their  mutual  losses.  It  might  be  expected  that  such  acci-
dents would  disgust  the  inhabitants  of  those  mountains ;  but,  besides  that  they  are  rare,  they
are  compensated  by  an  advantage  which  makes  them  prefer  their  habitations  to  the  most
fertile  plains :  I  mean  the  security  they  enjoy  from  the  oppressions  of  the  Turks.  This
security  is  esteemed  so  valuable  a  blessing  by  the  inhabitants,  that  they  have  displayed  an
industry  on  those  rocks  which  we  may  elsewhere  look  for  in  vain.  By  dint  of  art  and  labour
they  have  compelled  a  rocky  soil  to  become  fertile.  Sometimes,  to  profit  by  the  water,  they
conduct  it  by  a  thousand  windings  along  the  declivities,  or  stop  it  by  forming  dams  in  the
valleys :  while  in  other  places  they  prop  up  ground,  ready  to  crumble  away,  by  walls  and
terraces.  Almost  all  these  mountains,  thus  laboured,  present  the  appearance  of  a  flight  of
stairs,  each  step  of  which  is  a  row  of  vines  or  mulberry  trees.  I  have  reckoned  from  100  to
120  of  these  gradations  in  the  same  declivity,  from  the  bottom  of  the  valley  to  the  top  of  the
eminence."

If  the  traveller  seeks  on  the  northern  shores  of  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth  for  the  ruins  of
Capernaum,  that  city  "  once  exalted  unto  heaven,"  but  now  utterly  "  cast  down,"  and  pauses
in  his  search  to  survey  the  mountains  by  which  the  lake  is  inclosed,  he  observes  to  the  north

a  Or  "  River  of  Milk."  It  falls  into  the  Nahr  el  Salib,  called  also  the  River  of  Beirout :  this  arch  is  upwards  ofl60  feet  long,
85  wide,  and  near  200  high  above  the  torrent.

*>  "  These  subterraneous  rivulets  are  common  throughout  Syria.  There  are  some  at  Damascus,  at  the  sources  of  the  Orontei,
and  at  those  of  the  Jordan.'*    The  last  we  shall  soon  have  occasion  to  notice.

Chap.  II.]

MOUNTAINS.

XXXV

of  him,  hill  rising  above  hill  in  beauteous  succession,  and  that  the  loftiest  visible  eminence  is
crowned  by  a  castellated  city,  whose  commanding  situation  is,  perhaps,  unrivalled  in  the  world.
If  this  strange  prospect  tempts  his  feet  to  the  ascent,  he  is  surprised  to  find  the  task  less
arduous  than  he  had  anticipated.  Gradually  one  mountain  after  another  is  left  below ;  and  at
last  he  arrives  at  a  pyramidal  hill  which  overtops  them  all,  and  on  the  extreme  summit  of
which  the  city  stands.  This  city  now  bears  the  name  of  Safet,  and  is  thought  to  represent
the  Bethulia  of  which  so  much  mention  is  made  in  the  Book  of  Judith ;  and  it  is  also,  with
very  sufficient  probability,  supposed  to  be  that  city  to  which  Jesus  Christ,  when  preaching  in
this  neighbourhood  his  famous  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  directed  the  attention  of  his  audience,
when  he  reminded  them  that  "a  city  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid."a  (2)  The  elevation  of  the
mountain  attracts  the  clouds,  and  at  Safet  rains  are  frequent.

Mount  Tabor  is  the  highest  mountain  in  Lower  Galilee,  and  one  of  the  most  striking  in
the  Holy  Land.     It  stands  at  the  north-east  of  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon ;  and  although

. .  ■    ■     ■  -    ■

[Mount  Tabor.]

surrounded  by  chains  of  mountains  on  nearly  all  sides,  it  is  the  only  one  that  stands  entirely
aloof  from  its  neighbours,  although  it  appears  to  us  questionable  whether  it  may  not  itself  be
regarded  as  the  bold  termination  of  a  branch  thrown  out  by  the  chain  which  encloses  on  the
west  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.  There  is  such  a  branch,  and  the  connection  between  it  and  this
mountain  appears  to  be  very  close.

The  figure  of  Mount  Tabor  approaches  that  of  a  semisphere,  and  offers  a  very  regular
appearance.  Its  ground  figure  is  usually  described  as  round,  and,  indeed,  seems  to  be  per-
fectly so  to  those  coming  from  the  midst  of  the  great  plain  or  from  the  Sea  of  Galilee  ;  but  it
is  really  somewhat  more  long  (from  east  to  west)  than  broad,  so  that  its  true  figure  inclines  to
oval.  This  is  most  clearly  seen  when  the  mountain  is  viewed  from  the  hills  of  Nazareth.
The  height  of  Mount  Tabor  has  been  loosely  guessed  not  to  exceed  1000  feet  above  the  level  of
the  plain ;  but  it  has  not  been  subjected  to  any  accurate  measurement,  nor  have  its  dimen-

Matt.  v.  14.

f  2

xxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

sions  been  stated  with  reference  to  any  other  standard  than  that  of  time.  From  this  it  appears
to  take  three  hours  to  travel  round  the  base  of  the  mountain;  that  an  hour  is  generally  required
to  reach  the  summit  by  a  circuitous  path,  but  that  the  ascent  may  be  accomplished  in  three-
quarters  of  an  hour,  or  even  half  an  hour  by  a  forced  exertion ;  and  that  the  plain  upon  the
top  of  the  mountain  is  almost  half  an  hour  in  circuit.

The  mountain  is  inaccessible  except  on  the  north,  where  the  ascent  offers  so  little  difficulty
that  there  are  few  parts  which  suggest  to  the  traveller  the  prudence  or  necessity  of  dismounting
from  his  horse.  This  remarkable  mountain  offers  so  rare  a  combination  of  the  bold  and  beau-
tiful, that  pilgrims  of  all  ages  have  expatiated  upon  its  glories  with  untiring  wonder  and
delight.  The  trees  of  various  species,a  and  the  bushes  always  green,  with  which  it  is  invested,
and  the  small  groves  with  which  it  is  crowned,  contribute  no  less  than  its  figure  to  its  perfect
beauty.  Ounces,  wild  boars,  gazelles  and  hares  are  among  the  animals  which  find  shelter  in
its  more  wooded  parts ;  while  the  trees  are  tenanted  by  "  birds  of  every  wing,"  whose
warblings  and  motions  beguile  the  fatigue  of  the  ascent.  "  The  path,"  says  a  late  traveller,
"  wound  around  the  mountain,  and  gave  us  a  view  from  all  its  different  sides,  every  step  pre-
senting something  new,  and  more  and  more  beautiful,  until  all  was  completely  forgotten  and
lost  in  the  exceeding  loveliness  of  the  view  from  the  summit.  Stripped  of  every  association,
and  considered  merely  as  an  elevation  commanding  a  view  of  unknown  valleys  and  mountains,
I  never  saw  a  mountain  which,  for  beauty  of  scene,  better  repaid  the  toil  of  ascending  it."

The  objects  which  are  embraced  by  "  the  view  from  the  top,"  thus  admiringly  alluded  to
by  Mr.  Stephens,  have  been  carefully  enumerated  by  the  Rev.  C.  B.  Elliot  in  a  passage  which
we  here  introduce,  as  calculated  to  give  a  very  useful  idea  of  the  relative  bearing  of  different
mountains  seen  from  this  great  central  point.  "  The  view  it  commands,"  he  says,  "  is  magni-
ficent. To  the  north,  in  successive  ranges,  are  the  mountains  of  Galilee,  backed  by  the
mighty  Lebanon ;  and  Safet,  as  always,  stands  out  in  prominent  relief.  To  the  north-east  is
the  Mount  of  Beatitudes,  with  its  peculiar  outline  and  interesting  associations ;  behind  which
rise  Great  Hermon,  and  the  whole  chain  of  Anti-Lebanon.  To  the  east  are  the  hills  of  the
Haouran,  and  the  country  of  the  Gadarenes,  below  which  the  eye  catches  a  glimpse  of  the
Lake  of  Tiberias,  while  to  the  south-east  it  crosses  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and  rests  on
the  high  land  of  Bashan.  Due  south  rise  the  mountains  of  Gilboa,  and  behind  them  those  of
Samaria,  stretching  far  to  the  west.  On  the  south-south-west  the  villages  of  Endor  and  Nain
are  seen  on  the  Little  Hermon.  Mount  Carmel  and  the  Bay  of  Acre  appear  on  the  north-west
[west  by  north  ?] ;  and  towards  them  flows,  through  the  fertile  plains  of  Esdraelon,  '  that
great  river,  the  river  Kishon,'  now  dwindled  into  a  little  stream.  Each  feature  in  this
prospect  is  beautiful :  the  eye  and  mind  are  delighted  ;  and,  by  a  combination  of  objects  and
associations  unusual  to  fallen  man,  earthly  scenes,  which  more  than  satisfy  the  external  sense,
elevate  the  soul  to  heavenly  contemplations."

The  beautiful  upper  plain  is  inclosed  by  a  wall, — probably  the  same  which  was  built  by
Josephus,  when  governor  of  Galilee, — and  contains  some  ruins,  which  are  probably  those  of
the  two  monasteries  which,  according  to  William  of  Tyre,  were  built  here  by  Godfrey  of
Bouillon,  in  the  place  of  others  of  earlier  date  which  the  Moslems  had  destroyed.  The  plain
has  at  different  times  been  under  cultivation ;  but  when,  from  oppression  or  fear,  abandoned
by  the  cultivator,  it  becomes  a  table  of  rich  grass  and  wild  flowers,  which  send  forth  a  most
refreshing  and  luxurious  odour.  In  summer  the  dews  fall  copiously  on  Tabor,  and  a  strong
wind  blows  over  it  all  day.  Thick  clouds  rest  upon  its  head  every  morning,  and  do  not  dis-
appear till  noon.

The  mountain  is  the  scene  of  some  historical  circumstances,  which  it  will  be  our  future  duty
to  record ;  but  its  chief  interest  to  the  Christian  pilgrim  arises  from  the  very  old  tradition
which  points  it  out  as  the  place  where  Christ  appeared  in  glory  with  Moses  and  Elias.  b

Beyond  Mount  Tabor,  five  miles  to  the  south-south-west,  a  range  of  hills  extends  for  several
miles  from  east  to  west.  This  range  is  of  no  considerable  elevation,  and  is  fertile  and  proper
for  pasturage.     At  its  foot  there  are  some  natural  caves,  formerly  used  for  sepulchres,  but  in

a  Burckhardt  says  chiefly  oak  and  wild  pistachios.     *  Syria,'  p.  334.

b  Nau,  623-9;  Morison,  208-17;  Burckhardt,  332-6 ;  Stephens,  ii.  317-19 ;  Elliot,  ii.  364.

Chap.  II]

MOUNTAINS.

xxxvn

which  the  Arabs  now  stable  their  horses.     The  range  claims  to  be  noticed,  as  it  is  commonly
regarded  as  the  "  Mount  Hermon"  which  the  Psalmist  celebrates  for  its  pastures  and  abundant

-

'■■■■«'.  J

>:■'■■;■"■■■-'..■■•    '■

[Mountains  of  Galilee  and  Samaria. ll]

dews.b     It  is  therefore  called  the  Little  Hermon,  to  distinguish  it  from  that  snow-capped  range
of  Anti- Lebanon,  to  which  also  the  name  of  Hermon  has  been  applied.

In  the  same  quarter,  to  the  south  and  south-east  of  Tabor,  another  range  of  hills,  separated
in  one  part  from  the  Little  Hermon  by  a  valley  six  miles  broad,  advances  to  the  borders  of  the
Jordan  near  Bysan,  the  ancient  Bethshan  or  Scythopolis ;  and,  for  some  miles  northward  from
thence,  continues  to  bound  on  the  west  the  valley  of  that  river.  This  group  of  hills  rises  to  the
height  of  800  feet  above  the  level  of  the  road,  and  is,  perhaps,  1000  feet  above  the  level  of  the
Jordan.  This  lengthened  ridge  rises  up  in  peaks,  and  bears  a  little  withered  grass  and  a  few
scanty  shrubs  scattered  about  in  different  places.  In  this  sterile  and  arid  character  these  hills
are  remarkably  distinguished  from  those  of  the  lesser  Hermon,  and  indeed  from  all  other
mountains  in  this  neighbourhood,  which  are  in  most  parts  covered  with  trees  and  copses,
herbs,  flowers  and  grass.  This  range  is  the  Mount  Gdboa  of  Scripture,  by  which  name  (Jebel
Gilbo)  the  natives  still  call  it ;  and  its  peculiarly  desolate  character  was  ascribed  by  most  of
the  old  travellers  to  the  poetical  imprecation  of  David  upon  the  mountains  where  "  the  shield
of  the  mighty  was  vilely  cast  away,"  in  the  words  "  Ye  mountains  of  Gilboa,  let  there  be  no
dew,  neither  let  there  be  rain  upon  you,  nor  fields  of  offerings."  (2  Sam.  i.  21.)  But  this  is,
perhaps,  assigning  too  literal  a  sense  to  the  denunciations  of  the  royal  poet,  since  it  is  admitted
that  ample  dews  and  heavy  rains  have  been  experienced  by  travellers  upon  these  very
mountains.0

On  the  maritime  shore,  nearly  east  of  Tabor,  occurs  the  only  very  prominent  headland  which
the  generally   low   and    even  coast    of  Palestine  offers.     This   headland  forms  the   seaward

a  This  view  is  taken  on  the  road  from  Nazareth  southward.  The  mountain  to  the  right,  in  the  foreground,  is  alleged  to  be
that  from  which  the  people  of  Nazareth  designed  to  cast  Jesus  down :  the  rest  of  the  field  shows  part  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,
with  the  heights  of  Little  Hermon,  and,  in  the  distance,  the  mountains  of  Samaria,  among  which  the  town  of  Nablous  (Shechem)
is  situated.

b  Psalm  xlii.  6;  lxxxix.  12.

c  '  Borchardus  Terras  Sanctas  Descriptio,'  p.  308 ;  Cotovicus,  34/  ;  Morison,  216,  217 ;  Richardson,  ii.  424  ;  Elliot,  ii.  360,  361.

xxxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

termination  of  a  mountain  range  to  which,  and  more  particularly  to  the  promontory  itself,
helongs  the  name  of  Carmel — so  renowned  in  the  Hebrew  annals,  and  in  the  history  of  the
Crusades.  This  promontory  incloses  on  the  south  the  bay  of  Acre ;  and  its  ridge  then  retires
from  the  coast,  south-eastward,  to  join  the  central  chain,  which  we  have  described  as  prolonged
from  Lebanon.  Regarded  in  the  reverse  direction,  it  is  a  branch  of  this  chain,  the  promontory
being  then  its  termination.  This  connection  may  very  clearly  be  traced ;  but  attention  being
restricted  to  the  part  more  immediately  connected  with  the  promontory,  and  partaking  in  its
sensible  characteristics,  it  extends  about  seven  leagues.  Its  elevation,  even  in  the  highest
part,  where  it  fronts  the  sea,  is  comparatively  moderate ; a  but  it  commands  very  extensive
views,  and  its  general  beauty  has  been  mentioned  with  intense  admiration  from  the  time  of
Solomon  (Cant.  vii.  5)  till  now.  In  front  the  view  extends  to  the  distant  horizon,  over  the  dark-
blue  waters  of  the  Mediterranean ;  behind  stretches  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon,  and  the  moun-
tains of  the  Jordan  and  Judea ;  below,  on  the  right  hand,  lies  the  city  of  Acre,  diminished  to  a
mere  speck ;  while,  in  the  far  distance  beyond,  the  eye  rests  on  the  summits  of  Lebanon ;
and,  turning  to  track  the  coast  on  the  left  hand,  takes  in  the  ruins  of  Csesarea — the  city  of
Herod  and  the  Roman  governors  of  Palestine.

The  interior  of  Galilee  and  Samaria  is  often  obscured  by  fogs ;  but  the  heights  of  Carmel
enjoy  a  pure  and  enlivening  atmosphere,  calculated  to  render  mere  existence  a  delight.  The
continual  verdure  which  covers  the  mountain  scarcely  allows  the  whiteness  of  its  calcareous
rocks  to  appear.  The  pine,  oak,  olive,  laurel,  and  many  other  trees,  grow  (but  not  to  any
considerable  size)  above  a  beautiful  carpet  of  grass  and  wild  flowers  ;  and  this  rich  covering
of  grass  and  flowers  extends  to  the  fine  prairies  around,  by  virtue  of  the  numerous  streams
which  come  to  them  from  the  mountain.  The  forests  and  woods  of  Carmel  offer  a  verdure
which  passes  not  away  at  any  season ;  from  the  number  of  the  shrubs  and  plants  which  in
their  turns  succeed  each  other.  To  these  woods  numerous  wild  animals  resort ;  and  birds,
still  more  numerous,  attracted  by  the  abundance  of  suitable  food,  and  by  the  streams  which
wind  through  the  valleys  of  Carmel,  enliven,  by  the  harmony  of  their  varied  songs,  one  of  the
most  beautiful  spots  which  this  very  beautiful  world  affords. (3)

At  that  time,  when  those  mountains  of  the  Holy  Land,  with  which  any  Scriptural  incidents
could  be  connected,  were  crowded  with  persons  who  deemed  it  meritorious  to  withdraw  from
the  turmoil  of  the  world,  the  caves  of  this  mountain  were  occupied  by  thousands  of  such
persons,  and  its  sides  were  covered  with  the  chapels  in  which  they  worshipped,  and  the  gardens
which  they  cultivated.  The  grottos  still  exist ;  many  ruins  of  the  ecclesiastical  erections  of  this
time  are  dispersed  upon  the  mountain ;  and  some  of  its  products  seem  to  offer  evidence  of  the
cultivation  to  which  it  was  then  subject :  but  now,  after  many  ages,  it  may  be  supposed  to
have  reverted  to  somewhat  of  that  more  natural  condition  in  which  it  probably  appeared  when
the  Hebrew  poets  and  prophets  celebrated  the  "  excellency  of  Carmel." b

Crossing  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  we  leave  Galilee,  and  arrive  among  the  beautifully-wooded
hills  of  Samaria,  which  exhibit  scenery  very  different  from  that  of  the  mountains  of  Galilee.
Among  numerous  venerable  olive  woods,  towns  and  villages  are  scattered  in  every  direction,
and  some  of  the  views  rival  those  of  Switzerland.

The  singularity  and  historical  importance  of  the  twin  mountains  of  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  in
Samaria,  entitle  them  to  notice.  They  are,  perhaps,  as  Josephus  describes,  the  highest  moun-
tains in  Samaria,  but  they  do  not  appear  to  be  elevated  above  700  or  800  feet  from  the  valley,
although  their  elevation  above  the  sea-level  is  much  greater,  the  ground  being  here  considerably
elevated.  The  two  mountains  are  separated  only  by  a  narrow  valley,  and  they  exhibit  a  re-
markable analogy  of  size,  figure,  and  height.  It  was  perhaps  for  this  reason,  as  well  as  from
their  convenient  proximity,  with  a  valley  intervening,  that,  on  taking  possession  of  the  Promised
Land,  it  was  ordered  that  assembled  Israel  should  hear  and  respond  to  the  curses  of  the  law,
declared  from  Mount  Ebal,  and  to  its  blessings  from  Mount  Gerizim.  The  blessings  and  the
curses  may  seem  to  have  remained  upon  these  mountains ;  for,  while  Gerizim  is  fertile  and  of
pleasant  aspect,  Ebal  is  utterly  barren.     This  superiority  of  Gerizim  may  be  owing,  not  only  to

a  The  only  estimate  which  we  have  seen  makes  it  1500  feet,  which,  from  a  comparison  of  circumstances,  seems  a  considerable
exaggeration.

b  Morison.liv.  ii.,  ch.33;  Nau.liv.  v.,  ch.  21 ;  Zuallart,liv.i4.,ch.2;  Make  Brun,  in  '  Syrie;'  Skinner,  ch.  v. ;  Stephens,  ii.  343.

Chap.  II.]  MOUNTAINS.  xxxix

its  having  a  northern  aspect  on  the  side  towards  the  valley,  so  that  it  is  less  than  Ehal  scorched
by  the  hot  suns  of  summer,  but  to  its  slope  of  ascent  being  less  abrupt,  so  that  the  soil  is  more
liable  to  accumulate  on  its  surface,  and  less  subject  to  be  washed  down  by  the  autumnal  rains.
Gerizim  was  deemed  by  the  Samaritans  the  holiest  of  mountains ;  and  upon  it  they  had  their
temple,  in  which,  rather  than  in  that  at  Jerusalem,  they  held  that  men  ought  to  worship.  The
temple  exists  no  longer ;  but  a  remnant  of  the  people  and  of  their  worship  still  lingers  in  the
valley  below,  where  is  still  the  city  called  Shechem  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  Sychar  in  the
New,  and  whose  classical  name  of  Neapolis  is  now  exhibited  in  the  modern  one  of  Nablous.

The  valley  which  divides  the  mountains,  and  in  which  the  thousands  of  Israel  were  congre-
gated, is  more  than  a  league  in  length,  but  only  from  200  to  300  paces  broad.  This  valley,
shaded  with  groves  of  figs,  olives,  almonds,  and  apricots,  bounded  by  high  mountains,  and  with
a  clear  and  beautiful  stream  winding  and  murmuring  through  its  centre,  is  one  of  the  most
beautiful  in  Palestine.*

Judea,  the  southern  part  of  Palestine,  is  a  country  full  of  hills  and  valleys,  conformably  to
the  Scriptural  intimations.  The  hills  are  generally  separated  from  one  another  by  valleys  and
torrents,  and  are  for  the  most  part  of  moderate  height,  uneven,  and  seldom  of  any  regular
figure.  The  rock  of  which  they  are  composed  is  easily  converted  into  soil,  which,  being
arrested  by  terraces,  when  washed  down  by  the  rains,  render  the  hills  cultivable  in  a  series  of
long,  narrow  gardens,  formed  by  these  terraces,  from  the  base  upwards.  Thus  the  hills  were
cultivated  in  former  times  most  abundantly,  and  were  enriched  and  beautified  with  the
olive,  the  fig-tree,  and  the  vine ;  and  thus  the  limited  cultivation  which  now  subsists  is  still
carried  on.  But  when  the  inhabitants  were  rooted  out,  and  cultivation  abandoned,  the  terraces
fell  to  decay,  and  the  soil  which  had  collected  on  them  was  washed  down  into  the  valleys,
leaving  only  the  arid  rock,  naked  and  desolate.  This  is  the  general  character ;  but  in  some
parts  the  hills  are  beautifully  wooded,  and  in  others  the  application  of  the  ancient  mode  of
cultivation — under  which  the  valleys  are  covered  with  corn,  while  the  terraced  hills  are  clothed
with  fig-trees,  olive-trees,  or  vines — suggests  to  the  traveller  how  rich  this  country  once  was,
and  still  might  be,  and  how  beautiful  was  the  aspect  which  it  offered.b

All  these  characteristics  of  desolation  apply  with  peculiar  force  to  that  portion  of  Judea c
which  formed  the  inheritance  of  Benjamin.  Its  most  favourably -situated  mountains  are  wholly
uncultivated ;  and,  perhaps,  in  no  other  country  is  such  a  mass  of  rock  exhibited  without  an
atom  of  soil.  In  the  eastward,  towards  the  termination  of  the  Jordan  and  the  head  of  the  Dead
Sea,  this  district  takes  a  naturally  stern  and  grand  character,  such  as  no  other  part  of  Palestine
offers ;  and  higher  mountains  occur  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  southern  country.

Here  the  road  from  Jerusalem  to  the  plain  of  Jericho,  after  a  few  miles,  leads  to  and  traverses
the  sternest  and  most  desolate  mountain  wilderness  in  all  Palestine.  The  ridge  of  mountains
in  this  singular  district  which  immediately  faces  the  plain,  forming  part  of  the  mountains  which
inclose  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  is  the  highest  in  Judea.  They  bear  the  name  of  Quarantania,
from  an  ancient  opinion  that  the  wilderness  which  they  form  was  that  in  which  Christ
remained  for  forty  days  fasting,  after  he  had  been  baptized  in  the  river  Jordan ;  and  that  the
highest  summit  of  the  ridge  is  that  "  exceeding  high  mountain  "  from  which  the  devil  showed
him  "  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them."  (Matt.  iv.  8.)  Speaking  of
this  wild  region,  Morison  says,  "  I  am  persuaded  that  there  are  very  few  deserts  in  the
world  so  frightful  as  this ;  and  I  am  compelled  to  acknowledge  that,  melancholy  as  are  the
vast  solitudes  of  Arabia  Petraea,  which  I  traversed  in  my  journey  from  Egypt  to  Sinai,  they  are
altogether  pleasant  in  comparison  to  this."  Maundrell  bears  similar  testimony,  calling  it  "A
most  miserable,  dry,  and  barren  place,  consisting  of  high  rocky  mountains,  so  torn  and
disordered,  as  if  the  earth  had  suffered  some  great  convulsion,  in  which  its  very  bowels  had
been  turned  outward."

a  Elliot,  ii.  380;  Buckingham,  ch.  29;  Morison,  liv.  ii.,  ch.  10.  Stephens  (the  recent  American  traveller)  says  that,  till
he  came  here,  from  the  south,  he  had  thought  that  he  would  not  give  the  estate  of  a  wealthy  gentleman  in  Genessee  for  the
whole  kingdom  of  David.

*>  Mariti,  ii.  362;  Elliot,  ii.  407,  408.

c  By  Judea  we  are  to  be  understood  as  meaning,  not  merely  the  territory  of  the  single  tribe  of  Judah,  but  the  kingdom  of  Judea
as  distinguished  from  that  of  Israel.

xl  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

Of  the  Mountain  of  Temptation  a  the  ascent  is  so  difficult  and  perilous,  that  many  travellers
of  no  ordinary  enterprise  have  desisted  from  the  attempt  to  reach  its  summit.  Of  this  number
was  Hasselquist,  who  describes  the  mountain  as  "  high  and  pointed ;  and  on  our  left  as  we
ascended,  towards  which  the  rock  was  perpendicularly  steep.  It  consists  of  a  loose,  white
limestone,  mixed  with  another  that  is  grayish  and  harder.  The  way  up  to  its  highest  point  is
dangerous  beyond  imagination.  It  is  narrow,  steep,  full  of  rocks  and  stones,  which  obliged  us
frequently  to  creep  over  them  before  we  could  accomplish  our  design.  The  difficulty  is
increased  by  the  valley  on  one  side  ;  which,  besides  its  terrible  aspect,  is  most  dangerous,  as,
in  case  any  one  should  slip,  his  death  would  be  certain.  I  went  as  far  up  on  this  terrible
mountain  as  prudence  would  permit,  but  ventured  not  to  proceed  to  the  summit."  We  sup-
pose he  went  up  two-thirds  of  the  mountain,  the  ascent  of  which  is  attended  with  more  fatigue
than  danger ;  but  the  remaining  third  is  so  formidable,  that  few  even  of  the  old  pilgrims,
though  actuated  by  the  fervour  of  religious  zeal,  ventured  to  the  summit ;  and  those  who
did,  described  it  as  the  most  perilous  undertaking  of  their  lives.  The  view  from  the  top,
however,  well  repays  the  fatigue  and  danger  of  the  enterprise  :  it  embraces  the  whole  extent  of
the  Dead  Sea,  and  beyond  it  the  plains  of  Moab,  and  Mount  Pisgah,  whence  Moses  viewed
the  Promised  Land;  while  just  under  the  eye  are  the  plains  of  Jericho  and  the  river  Jordan.
This  mountain,  like  the  others  of  the  same  ridge,  is  full  of  caves,  of  various  form  and  size,
which  have  alternately  offered  secure  retreats  to  fugitives,  recluses,  and  robbers.b  Such  caves
are,  indeed,  most  numerous  among  the  steep  and  rugged  mountains  at  the  northern  extremity
of  the  Dead  Sea  on  this  side  the  Jordan ;  which,  except  in  being  of  much  less  elevation,  offer
the  same  essential  characteristics  as  the  mountains  of  Quarantania.

Of  Judea  Proper,  the  most  mountainous  part  is  the  country  around  Jerusalem,  and  between
it  and  the  head  of  the  Asphaltic  Lake.  More  to  the  south,  the  breadth  of  the  country  is  less
occupied  by  mountains,  which  are  confined  chiefly  to  the  central  ridge :  its  dependent  hills
and  its  disparted  branches,  which  are  sent  forth  to  divide  and  diversify  the  plains, — which
extend,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  and,  on  the  other,  to  the  barren
and  high  rocks  which  thickly  set  the  western  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea, — are  of  such  essential
form  and  character  as  we  have  already  described.  The  naked  hills  prevail  most  in  the  north
and  south  of  Judea,  and  occur  frequently  in  other  parts.  Cultivation  on  the  hills  is  most
common  for  about  half  the  distance  from  Jerusalem  to  Hebron,  southward ;  and,  in  the  other
half,  the  uncultivated  hills  are  more  or  less  wooded.  The  only  mountain  in  this  region,  which
is  seen  from  far,  and  seems  to  require  particular  notice,  is  that  one,  nearly  detached,  which
rises  about  five  miles  to  the  south-east  of  Bethlehem.  It  is  called  the  "  Franks'  Mount,"  from
its  having  been  fortified  and  held  by  the  Christians  many  years  against  the  Moslems  during  the
Crusades.  The  summit  still  exhibits  some  ruins  of  the  strong  castles  which  they  built  there.
The  situation  would  seem  almost  impregnable,  for  the  mountain  is  very  high  and  rugged,
and  so  steep  that  Nau,  the  only  traveller  by  whom  we  can  find  it  to  have  been  ascended,  was
obliged  to  dismount  at  its  base,  and  climb  on  foot  to  its  top.c

None  of  the  other  mountains  of  Palestine  Proper  are,  separately,  of  such  physical  or  histo-
rical importance  as  to  require  notice  in  this  part  of  the  present  work.  But  its  historical
portion  will  be  found  to  characterise,  as  occasion  requires,  most  of  the  hills  and  hilly  districts
of  the  country.

We  must  now  proceed  to  view  the  more  remarkable  mountains  in  the  country  beyond  the
Jordan.  For  this  our  materials  are  still  very  inadequate.  But  this  will  be  the  less  sensibly
felt,  as  few  of  the  mountains  of  this  part  of  the  country  are  of  such  Scriptural  or  historical
renown,  as  to  create  the  consciousness  of  need  for  that  information  which,  if  felt  to  be  wanted,
could  not  be  very  perfectly  supplied.

Jebel  Essheikh,  which  forms  the  natural  northern  frontier  of  Palestine  beyond  Jordan,  has
already  been  noticed.     This  mount  sends  a  branch  or  continuation  southward,  which,  under

a  Such  is  the  uame  usually  given  it ;  but  the  old  French  travellers  often  also  call  it  Mont  du  Diable.
t>  Hasselquist,  128;  Maundrell,  79;  Morison,  523;  Surius,  493.
c  Seetzen,  41  ;  Hasselquist,  126;  Roger,  182;  Nau,  439.

Chap.  II.]  MOUNTAINS.  xli

the  name  of  Jebel  Heish,  extends  about  twenty-five  miles,  terminating  in  the  Tel  Faras,  at  a
distance  of  about  ten  miles  eastward  from  a  point  somewhat  below  the  head  of  the  Lake  of
Gennesareth.  The  ground  traversed  by  this  chain  is  much  elevated  above  the  eastward  plains
of  Damascus  and  Djolan;  so  that,  seen  from  thence,  it  appears  to  be  composed  of  considerable
mountains  :  but  when  the  traveller,  having  gradually  ascended  from  the  plains,  comes  near  to
them,  they  appear  to  be  of  very  moderate  elevation.*

For  twenty-four  miles  (eight  hours)  to  the  south  of  the  termination  of  the  Jebel  Heish,  is  an
open  country,  equally  divided  by  the  river  Jarmouk.  This  open  country  contains  the  famous
pasture  lands  of  Argob  and  part  of  Bashan.  Eastward,  this  land  slopes  to  the  plains  of  the
Haouran,  and  westward  it  is  interrupted  by  the  steep  descents  to  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth  and
the  valley  of  the  Jordan.  And  here  it  may  be  proper  to  observe,  that  the  general  level  of  the
plain  country  beyond  the  Jordan  is  high  above  the  valley  of  that  river,  which  offers  one  of  the
lowest  levels  in  all  Syria.  (4)  This  large  space  of  open  country  may  be  called  flat  in  comparison
with  the  hilly  region  to  the  south ;  and,  viewed  from  a  distance,  appears  more  fiat  than  it
really  is;  for,  besides  that  the  ground  has  a  gradual  descent  towards  the  eastern  plains,  it  is
intersected  by  numerous  deep  valleys,  rich  in  pastures.

Beyond  this  district  the  mountains  rise  again,  and  increase  in  altitude  and  breadth  as  they
traverse,  or  rather  fill,  the  country  of  Gilead  to  and  beyond  the  river  Jabbok.  In  this  part  the
mountains  are  in  higher  and  broader  masses  than  anywhere  else  on  this  side  the  Jordan ;  and
here,  as  we  have  hitherto  done,  we  shall  notice  the  more  prominent  points,  without  attempting
to  discriminate  the  various  ridges  and  branches  which  it  offers.

The  part  of  Gilead,  north  of  the  Jabbok,  is  comprehended  in  the  modern  districts  of  Belad
Beni  Obeid,  Adjeloun,  and  Moerad.  All  these  are  mountainous  districts  throughout,  and  are
more  or  less  wooded,  particularly  with  the  oak  and  wild  pistachio.  The  wood  is  most  abun-
dant in  Adjeloun.  The  mountains  of  Moerad  are  the  highest  and  most  dense.  The  principal
points  in  these  districts  are,  the  mountain  of  Kafkafa,  a  long  and  broad  mountain  facing  the
eastern  plains.  On  the  lower  slopes  of  this  calcareous  mountain,  wild  pistachio  trees  abound  ;
higher  up  oaks  become  more  frequent  and  the  forest  thickens ;  near  the  top  are  some  remains
of  the  foundations  of  ancient  buildings,  and  the  summit  commands  an  extensive  and  beautiful
view  over  the  neighbouring  mountains  and  plains.  The  mountain  of  Oeraboun,  which  marks
the  limits  between  the  districts  of  Adjeloun  and  Moerad,  is  chiefly  remarkable  for  the  thickest
forest  of  oak  trees  which  Burckhardt  had  seen  in  Syria.  The  mountains  of  Moerad  contain
no  points  which  have  attracted  particular  attention ;  but  it  is  observed  that  their  higher  summits
seem  to  be  considerably  more  elevated  than  those  of  the  mountains  of  the  southern  side  of  the
Jabbok  (now  Zerka).b

To  the  south  of  this  river  the  districts  are  less  subdivided ;  for  the  denomination  of  the
Belka  seems,  from  Burckhardt's  use  of  it,  to  embrace  the  whole  tract  of  country  between
that  river  and  the  head  of  the  Dead  Sea.  It  appears  that  a  portion  of  this  country,  immedi-
ately to  the  south  of  the  Zerka,  must  be  understood  as  included  in  the  Scriptural  name  of
Gilead.  For  this  very  name,  in  the  modified  form  of  Jelaad,  is  still  given  to  a  mountain  six
miles  to  the  south  of  that  river.  This  mountain  runs,  from  east  to  west,  about  seven  miles  in
length ;  and  upon  it  are  the  ruins  of  two  towns,  which  also  bear  the  names  of  Jelaad  and
Jelaoud.  Closely  adjoining  this  mountain  rises  that  of  Jebel  Osha,  which  far  overtops  all  the
other  mountains  of  the  Belka.  It  is  a  fine  mountain,  well  wooded,  and  its  summit  gives  a
very  striking  view  over  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  while  Jericho  is  visible  at  a  great  distance
to  the  south.  The  mountain  takes  its  name  from  a  tomb  which  is  supposed  to  be  that  of  the
prophet  Hosea.

South  of  the  Zerka  the  chain  of  mountains  increases  its  breadth.  And  in  this  inheritance
of  Gad  and  (partly  of)  Reuben,  which  the  Belka  forms,  the  traveller,  from  the  sultry  plains  of
the  Jordan,  is  refreshed  by  the  cool  winds  which  blow  over  this  high  region :  everywhere  he
finds  the  grateful  shade  of  the  oak  and  wild  pistachio,  and  looks  around  upon  a  scenery  more
resembling  that  of  Europe  than  he  is  likely  to  find  in  all  Syria.0

Before  arriving  at  the  parallel  of  the  Dead   Sea  the   mountainous   country   contracts   its

s  Burckhardt,  286,  314.  b  Burckhardt,  246,  248,  265,  286,  288,  289,  290,  314,  346,  &c.  c  Burckhardt,  339,  348,  353.

VOL.   I.  g

xlii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  II.

breadth  ;  and  about  the  head  of  that  sea  is  reduced  to  the  single  principal  chain,  which
afterwards  enlarges  to  form  the  mountains  of  Seir.  This  chain,  commencing  nearly  opposite
the  northern  extremity  of  the  Asphaltic  Lake,  and,  at  its  other  extremity,  joining  Mount
Seir,  appears  to  form  the  mountains  which  in  Scripture  bear  the  name  of  Abarim.  There
it  is  recorded  that  from  Mount  Nebo,  one  of  the  highest  summits  of  this  range,  and  which,
from  the  context,  must  have  been  in  its  northern  part,  Moses  was  permitted  to  view  the
Promised  Land ;  and  that  there  he  died.  Writers  disagree  as  to  the  situation  of  this  moun-
tain. Nau  refers  to  a  mountain  near  Szalt,  evidently  meaning  Mount  Osha,  mentioned
above;  and  we  should  be  inclined  to  agree  with  him,  if  it  did  not  seem  that  this  moun-
tain is  more  to  the  north  than  the  history  will  allow.  Six  miles  westward  from  Heshbon
is  the  situation  assigned  to  Mount  Nebo  by  Eusebius,  who  is  followed  by  most  later  writers.
It  is  an  excellent  position  for  the  history ;  but  being  unable  to  learn  that  the  situation  is
occupied  by  any  eminent  mountain,  we  may,  perhaps,  with  the  few  travellers  who  have  visited
this  part  of  the  country,  look  for  it  in  Mount  Attarous,  which  rises  about  eight  miles  to  the
north  of  the  river  Modjeb  (the  ancient  Arnon).  This  mountain  offers  the  highest  summit  of
the  neighbourhood.  No  traveller  seems  to  have  ascended  it;  and  it  is  only  slightly  mentioned,
in  passing,  as  a  tall  and  barren  mountain,  on  whose  summit  might  be  perceived  a  heap  of
stones  overshadowed  by  a  wild  pistachio  tree.a

We  have  no  information  of  any  noted  mountain  in  the  country  south  of  the  Arnon.  Beyond
that  river  lie  wide  plains  covered  with  absinthium  and  other  plants  and  shrubs.  But,  on
approaching  Kerek,b  the  country  becomes  more  mountainous ;  and  at  this  point,  beyond  the
plains  of  Moab,  where  the  mountains  rise  again,  we  should  be  inclined  to  fix  the  commence-
ment of  Mount  Seir,  the  southward  continuation  of  which  we  have  already  indicated.  This
forms  here,  at  its  commencement,  a  very  mountainous  country  between  Kerek  and  the  end  of
the  Dead  Sea ;  nor  is  the  breadth  of  mountain  country  thus  indicated  much  diminished  in  the
southward  progress  of  the  chain.0

[Mountains  of  Seir.]

Our  attention  must  next  be  directed  to  the  mountains  which  now  line,  on  the  east  and  on  the
west,  the  broad  valley  of  Araba,  which  extends  between  the  Asphaltic  Lake  and  the  Red  Sea,
and  through  which  the  river  Jordan  is  believed  to  have  once  continued  its  southward  course.
The  prolongations  of  Lebanon  exhibit  a  very  different  character  on  the  opposite  sides  of  this

»  Upland,  *  Palestine,'  lib.  i.  cap.  51 ;  Nau,  365  ;  Burckhardt,  3/0;  Irliy  and  Mangles,  464;  Macmicliael's  *  Journal,*  243.
*>  About  twenty-five  miles  east  from  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea.  c  Seetzen,  36-40  ;  Burckhardt,  3/5,  et  scq.

Chap.  II.]  MOUNTAINS.  xliii

valley.  The  western  chain  of  hills  is  not  half  as  high,  as  those  to  the  east.  Burckhardt,  after
descending  the  eastern  mountains  and  crossing  the  valley  below,  proceeded  to  ascend  the
western  hills  : — "  After  an  hour  and  a  half  of  gentle  ascent,  we  arrived  at  the  summit  of  the
hills,  and  then  descended  by  a  short  and  very  gradual  declivity  into  the  western  plains,  the
level  of  which,  although  higher  than  that  of  the  Araba,  is,  perhaps,  1000  feet  lower  than  the
eastern  desert."  In  that  case  the  height  of  the  eastern  mountains  must  be  very  considerable,
seeing  that  their  elevation  above  the  valley  of  Araba  must  be  above  1000  feet,  by  as  much  more
as  that  valley  is  below  the  level  of  the  western  desert,  added  to  as  much  as  the  mountains
themselves  are  above  the  level  of  the  eastern  plain.  The  same  traveller  had  an  extensive
view  over  the  western  chain  from  the  point  where  he  crossed  it ;  and  he  says  that  it  is  inter-
sected by  numerous  wadys  in  which  the  talh  tree  a  grows.  The  rock  is  described  by  him  as
entirely  silicious,  and  of  the  same  sort  as  that  of  the  desert  which  extends  from  thence  to  Suez.
But  Burckhardt  saw  too  little  of  this  chain  to  use  the  word  "entirely"  with  safety ;  and  Laborde,
who  saw  much  more  of  it,  says  its  more  southern  part,  at  least,  is  composed  of  chalk  and  lime-
stone ;  and  adds,  that  its  hills  are  there  pretty  regular  in  form,  and  rise  in  a  tabled  shape,  not
(as  more  to  the  north)  above  the  level  of  the  western  desert,  which  there  commands  a  great
part  of  the  valley.  Lord  Lindsay,  who  crossed  this  chain  in  its  northern  portion,  says,  "  We
entered  the  low  barren  hills  that  skirt  Wady  Araba  on  the  west,  and,  for  several  hours  during
this  and  the  following  day,  traversed  a  country  of  the  most  utter  desolation,  hills  succeeding
hills,  without  the  slightest  picturesque  beauty,  covered  with  loose  flints,  sand,  and  gravel."  b

The  far  more  important  and  lofty  mountains  which  bound  the  valley  of  Araba  on  the  east,
form,  as  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  notice,  the  proper  mountains  of  Seir  of  the  Scriptures,
although  we  know  not  that  this  denomination  might  not,  in  its  larger  acceptation,  comprehend
also  the  western  hills.  They  rise  very  high  above  the  valley,  and,  as  viewed  from  thence,  in-
crease in  elevation  in  the  progress  to  the  south.  But  this  increase  is  only  apparent,  and  owing
to  the  southward  slope  of  the  valley,  as  evinced  by  the  equal  level  of  the  eastern  plain,  beyond
the  mountains.  As  viewed  from  that  plain,  the  mountains  have  no  sensible  increase  of  altitude
southward ;  and  from  thence,  indeed,  they  only  exhibit  the  appearance  of  low  hills.  This  is
owing  to  the.  elevation  of  the  eastern  plain,  far  above  the  level  of  the  valley.  This  circumstance
is  observed,  indeed,  throughout  the  country  from  the  Lake  of  Tiberias  southward.  From  the
borders  of  that  lake,  or  of  the  Jordan,  or  of  the  Dead  Sea,  the  traveller  has  to  make  steep  and
difficult  ascents  up  a  succession  of  tall  cliffs  and  high  mountains,  on  surmounting  the  highest
of  which  he  finds  that  he  has  to  make  but  a  comparatively  slight  descent  into  the  eastern
plains.

These  mountains  of  Seir  must  not  be  understood  as  a  single  range  of  high  hills ;  but  as  an
extensive  mountainous  region,  from  ten  to  twelve  leagues  in  width,  forming  a  rocky  belt,
separating  the  Stony  Arabia  from  the  eastern  deserts  of  sand.  On  first  viewing  these  moun-
tains from  the  southern  part  of  the  valley  of  Araba,  high  rocks  of  granite  appear  as  if  fractured
into  a  thousand  different  forms.  These  rocks  of  granite  formation0  extend  almost  as  far  north-
ward as  the  Wady  Gharandel,d  which  is  almost  half  way  between  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  and  Petra ;
they  then  begin  to  be  covered  with  chalk  and  limestone,  which  extend  five  leagues  to  the  north
and  north-east,  and  then  disappear  amidst  rocks  of  sandstone  veined  with  oxide  of  iron,  and
presenting  more  fantastic  shapes  than  any  other  parts  of  the  mountain.  How  far  to  the  north
of  Petra  these  last  characteristics  extend,  we  find  no  authority  that  states ;  but  we  learn  from
Burckhardt  that  sandstone  continues  to  be  very  common  as  far  to  the  north  as  the  Wady  el
Ahsa  (near  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea),  after  which  it  occurs  but  rarely.

That  the  exterior  aspects  of  these  mountains,  viewed  from  the  valley,  are  unusually  stern  and
dark,  would  appear  from  the  general  terms  which  travellers  employ.  Lord  Lindsay  speaks  of
them  as  "  the  black  mountains  from  which  the  Edomites  looked  down."  And  Mr.  Stephens,
standing  on  the  shore  of  the  northern  extremity  of  the  ^Elanitic  Gulf,  saw  before  him  the  broad

a  The  tree  that  produces  the  gum-arabic.  b  '  Letters  on  Egypt,  Edom,  and  the  Holy  Land,'  vol.  ii.  p.  46.

c  Laborde,  whose  authority  we  are  following  just  here,  appears  to  include  porphyry,  with  granite,  in  this  denomination.
J  The  reader  must  be  mindful  to  distinguish  this  Wady  Gharandel  from  another  of  the  same  name  (about  mid- way  between
Suez  and  Mount  Sinai),  which  we  shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  mention.

g  2

xliv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  II.

sandy  valley  of  Akaba,  "  with  high,  dark,  and  barren  mountains,  bounding  it  like  a  wall."
He  says,  "  The  land  of  Idumea  lay  before  me  in  barrenness  and  desolation  ;  no  trees  grew  in
the  valley,  and  no  verdure  on  the  mountain  tops.  All  was  bare,  dreary,  and  desolate."  a  The
opposite,  or  eastern,  face  of  these  mountains,  however,  presents  a  very  different  appearance,
not  only  from  their  apparent  lowness,  owing,  as  we  have  already  described,  to  the  elevation  of
the  eastern  plateau  in  which  they  terminate,  but  from  its  regular  form  and  unbroken  course,
and  from  its  being  the  only  part  covered  uniformly  with  vegetable  mould.  This  was  too  im-
portant a  feature  in  so  stony  or  sandy  a  region  to  have  been  overlooked,  and  accordingly  we
here  find  numerous  marks  of  ancient  cultivation.  Stones  which  have  been  arranged  to  mark
the  limits  of  fields,  as  well  as  the  ruins  of  separate  habitations  and  villages,  scattered  every-
where over  this  elevated  country,  still  attest  the  industry  of  the  ancient  inhabitants  in  cultivating
an  apparently  unfriendly  soil.

[Mount  Hor.]

The  tallest  summit  among  the  mountains  of  Seir  is  Mount  Hor,  on  which  Aaron  died,  and
whose  towering  bulk  is  a  land-mark  to  the  wanderer  afar  off  in  the  surrounding  deserts.  It
offers  a  commanding  view  over  the  plains  and  mountains  below.  "  If  I  had  never  stood  on
the  top  of  Mount  Sinai,"  says  the  last-cited  traveller,  "  I  should  say  that  nothing  could  exceed
the  desolation  of  the  view  from  the  summit  of  Mount  Hor ;  its  most  striking  objects  being  the
dreary  and  rugged  mountains  of  Seir,  bare  and  naked  of  trees  and  verdure,  and  heaving  their
lofty  summits  to  the  skies,  as  if  in  a  vain  and  fruitless  effort  to  excel  the  mighty  pile,  on  the
top  of  which  the  high-priest  of  Israel  was  buried."

Yet  even  here  all  is  not  barren.  The  interior  of  these  desolate  mountains — their  valleys  and
their  hollows — present  many  a  scene  of  verdure  and  beauty.  While  the  same  writer,  in  sum-
ming up  his  impressions,  remembers  that  the  mountains  were  barren,  solitary,  and  desolate,
and  that  the  higher  he  ascended  their  aspect  became  more  wild  and  rugged,  and  rose  to
sublimity  and  grandeur, — he  does  not  forget  that,  among  these  arid  wastes  of  crumbling  rock,
there  were  beautiful  streams  gushing  forth  from  the  sides  of  the  mountains ;  and  sometimes
small  valleys,  where  the  green  grass  and  shrubs  and  bushes  were  putting  forth  in  early  spring;

a  '  Incidents  of  Travel,'  vol.  ii.  p.  41.

Chap.  II.]  MOUNTAINS.  xlv

and  that  he  saw,  among  the  stony  mountains  of  Arabia  Petrsea,  more  verdure  than  he  had
observed  since  he  left  the  banks  of  the  Nile.

The  spot  which  has  just  been  referred  to,  as  that  by  which  travellers  are  now  attracted  to
the  mountains  of  Seir,  is  the  deep  hollow  in  their  bosom,  whose  tall  cliffs  offer  those  wonderful
sculptures  and  excavations  of  temples,  habitations,  and  tombs,  which  compose  the  ancient
metropolis  of  Edom,  now  but  lately  revealed,  in  the  freshness  of  its  beauty,  to  the  admiration
of  nations  which  have  sprung  into  existence  since  it  became  a  desolation.  Of  this  spot  and
this  city  we  have  elsewhere a  spoken,  and  shall  probably,  in  this  work,  have  some  further
occasion  to  speak.  This,  and  other  hollows  and  valleys  of  these  mountains,  exhibit  some  very
striking  geological  characteristics,  which,  were  they  properly  discriminated,  might  throw  much
light  on  their  physical  construction.  All  travellers  mention,  with  wonder  and  admiration,  the
beautiful  and  varied  appearance  of  the  rock  composing  the  cliffs  which  enclose  the  valley  of
Petra.  "  The  whole  stony  rampart  that  encircled  the  city,"  says  Mr.  Stephens,  "  was  of  a
peculiarity  and  beauty  which  I  never  saw  elsewhere,  being  a  dark  ground  with  veins  of  white,
blue,  red,  purple,  and  sometimes  scarlet  and  light  orange,  running  through  it  in  rainbow
streaks ;  and  within  the  chambers,  where  there  had  been  no  exposure  to  the  action  of  the
elements,  the  freshness  and  beauty  of  the  colours,  in  which  these  waving  lines  were  drawn,
gave  an  effect  hardly  inferior  to  that  of  the  paintings  in  the  tombs  of  the  kings  at  Thebes."
Other  travellers  speak  to  the  same  effect ;  and  Lord  Liudsay  adds  that  some  of  the  oldest
excavations  are  almost  filled  with  earth,  decomposed  from  the  fragments  that  are  constantly
flaking  off  from  the  roof.  "  I  was  surprised,"  he  says,  "  to  find  the  stone  so  crumbling :  it
must  have  been  as  easy  to  cut  as  chalk  :  I  could  break  it  easily  with  my  fingers."  Stephens
was  informed  by  the  Arabs  that  -no  stone  veined  like  the  rocks  at  Petra  was  to  be  found  else-
where ;  which  at  least  shows  that  they  knew  of  none  like  it.

A  few  miles  to  the  north  of  this  place  is  another  valley,  or  rather  defile,  called  Wady  Sig.
It  has  only  been  described  by  Lord  Lindsay,  whose  description  we  quote  for  the  sake  of  the
impression  of  relief  which  it  gives  to  the  general  picture,  and  of  the  vegetable  products  which
it  specifies : — "  It  is  one  of  the  most  romantic  denies  I  ever  saw  :  lofty  crags,  almost  perpen-
dicular, tower  on  each  side,  deep  fissures  yawning  in  their  breasts,  tufted  with  evergreens,  and
single  isolated  rocks  guarding  the  pass  like  sentinels :  the  road  winds  through  a  thick  wood  of
sedder,  arrah,  oleander,  and  acacia  trees, — every  shade  of  green."

Still  more  to  the  north  occurs  the  broadest  valley  in  the  whole  chain  of  mountains.  It  is
that  of  El  Ghoeyr,  which,  being  the  only  one  that  offers  a  passage  practicable  to  any  large
body  of  people  is,  with  good  reason,  conceived  by  Colonel  Leake b  to  be  the  "highway,"
through  which  the  host  of  Israel  vainly  sought  the  permission  of  the  Edomites  to  pass  from
the  western  desert  into  the  eastern  plains.0  It  is  described  by  Burckhardt  as  a  large,  rocky,
and  uneven  basin,  considerably  lower  than  the  eastern  plain,  upwards  of  twelve  miles  across  at
its  eastern  extremity,  but  narrowing  towards  the  west.  It  is  intersected  by  numerous  wadysd
of  winter  torrents,  and  by  three  or  four  valleys  watered  by  rivulets  which  unite  below  and  flow
into  the  great  western  valley.  The  Ghoeyr  is  famous  for  the  excellent  pasturage  produced  by
its  numerous  springs ;  and  it  has,  in  consequence,  become  a  favourite  place  of  encampment
for  all  the  Bedouins  of  these  mountains.  The  borders  of  the  rivulets  are  overgrown  with
deflee  and  the  shrub  rethem.f  The  rock  is  principally  calcareous;  and  there  are  detached
pieces  of  basalt,  and  large  tracts  of  breccia,  formed  of  sand,  flint,  and  pieces  of  calcareous  stone.
"  Calcareous  with  basalt"  is  the  character  which  Burckhardt  continues  to  assign  to  the  still
more  northern  part  of  these  mountains.  By  this  he  probably  means,  as  he  explains  near  this,
that  the  body  of  the  mountain  is  calcareous,  with  its  superficies  covered  with  large  basaltic
blocks.

The  chain  of  hills  is  of  much  less  apparent  height  northward,  approaching  the  Dead  Sea,
than  southward,  approaching  the  Gulf  of  Akaba ;  and  among  the  circumstances  which  in  this

a  '  Pictorial  Bible,'  notes  on  2  Kings  xiv.  7;  2  Chron.  xxv.  12;  Jer.  xlix.  15.
b  Preface  to  Burckhardt,  p.  xv.  =  Numbers  xx.  xxi.

The  word  wady,  spelt  by  French  travellers,  ouadi,  denotes  the  channel  of  a  stream  or  river,  or  any  valley  or  ravine  through
which  a  stream  flows,  whether  constantly  or  only  in  the  winter  season.
e  Solarium  furiosum.  f  Genista  Raetam,  Forsk.

xlvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  II.

part  render  their  aspect  less  6tern  and  desolate,  may  be  mentioned  that  the  mountains  are  in
parts  overgrown  with  short  balout  trees.

We  have  uow,  in  the  last  place,  to  extend  our  attention  southward  to  the  desert  region  in
which  the  host  of  Israel  wandered  many  years,  and  to  the  mountains  venerable  beyond  all
others,  for  the  associations  which  the  most  ancient  history  in  the  world  connects  with  them.
In  the  conformities  which  may  still  be  traced  in  this  wild  region,  with  the  indications  which
that  history  offers,  there  is  much  to  engage  our  attention,  even  were  we  to  neglect  the  sacred
character  of  the  transactions  from  which  those  indications  arise  But  besides  this,  the  region
of  Sinai  is  in  itself,  apart  from  the  sacred  interest  connected  with  its  deserts  and  its  mountains,
so  striking  and  peculiar  as  to  deserve  far  more  attention  than  we  shall  be  able  to  allow  it,
although  we  are  not  without  fear  that  some  of  our  readers,  less  impressed  than  ourselves  with
a  sense  of  the  historical  and  physical  interest  of  this  region,  may  deem  that  here  and  in  some
future  pages,  we  afford  it  an  undue  share  of  our  consideration.

The  basin  of  the  Arabian  Gulf,  which  in  its  direction  presents  some  analogy  with  the  bed  of
the  Nile,  is,  like  it,  divided  into  two  arms  at  its  northern  extremity.  The  triangular  space  com-
prehended between  these  two  arms  is  known  under  the  name  of  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  and
must  be  regarded  as  pertaining  to  Arabia  Petrsea.  The  westernmost  of  the  arms  of  the  Red
Sea,  which  enclose  this  triangle  between  them,  is  called  the  Gulf  of  Suez,  from  the  town  of
that  name,,  situated  near  its  termination ;  and  the  easternmost  arm  bears  the  name  of  the  Gulf
of  Akaba,  from  the  fortress  which  stands  near  its  head.  The  route  of  the  Israelites,  when  they
visited  the  mountains  of  Sinai  from  Egypt,  lay  along  the  borders  of  the  former  gulf;  and  this
is  the  route  which  travellers  now  take.  In  proceeding  southward  from  Suez,  they  have,  for
the  most  part,  a  range  of  hills  of  small  importance  on  their  left  hand ;  and  these  are  nearest
the  road  in  the  north,  and  gradually  recede  from  it  in  the  progress  southward,  and  ultimately
strike  off  across  the  peninsula,  dividing  it,  as  it  were,  into  two  parts.     These  intersecting  hills

[Mountains  of  El  Tyh,  with  the  Rock  of  the  Pilgrims.]

bear  the  name  of  El  Tyh,  or  of  the  Wandering,  which  name  also  belongs  to  the  northern  half
of  the  peninsula  beyond  them ;  and  are  so  called  by  the  Arabs  in  memory  of  the  wanderings
of  the  Israelites.     All  these  hills  are  of  secondary  formation,  and  are  markedly  disconnected,

Chap.  II.]

MOUNTAINS.

xlvii

not  only  by  this  formation,  but  by  broad  valleys,  from  the  mountains  of  the  south.  The  inter-
secting El  Tyh  hills,  which  may  be  regarded  as  forming  the  northern  boundary  of  the  Sinai
mountains,  are  the  most  regular  ranges  in  the  peninsula,  being  almost  throughout  of  equal
height,  without  any  prominent  peaks,  and  extending  in  an  uninterrupted  line  eastward.  The
opposite  coast  of  this  peninsula,  on  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  which  consists  of  a  series  of  bays
separated  by  projecting  head-lands,  exhibits,  in  its  tall  cliffs  and  capes,  traces  of  primitive
formations  which  connect  it  physically  with  the  southern  mountains:  and  we  have  lately
noticed,  on  the  authoritv  of  Laborde,  that  these  formations  extend  into  the  mountains  of  Seir
as  far  as  the  Wady  Gharandel.

The  proper  mountains  of  Sinai,  so  renowned  in  Biblical  history,  are  all  in  the  southern
part  of  the  peninsula,  or  that  part  which  is  cut  off  by  the  El  Tyh  hills.  This  southern  part,
in  the  midst  of  which  arises  the  mountains  of  Horeb  and  Sinai,  presents  a  space  of  nearly
1200  square  leagues,  covered  with  primitive  mountains,  principally  porphyritic.  All  the
species  of  rock  which  appertain  to  this  formation  are  here  exhibited  in  an  abundance  and
with  a  diversity  which  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  find  elsewhere.  The  French  scientific
commissioners,  MM.  Roziere  and  Coutelle,  who  made  a  long  sojourn  in  the  peninsula  and
explored  much  of  this  southern  region,  could  think  of  no  mountains  which  appeared  to  offer  so
many  analogies  as  those  of  the  Vosges.  The  nature  of  the  rocks,  their  dispositions,  accidents,
passages,  transitions,  and  the  forms  and  elevations  of  the  mountains,  all  suggested  very
striking  resemblances.

[General  View  of  Sinai.]

The  summits  of  Mounts  Sinai,  Horeb,  Serbal,  and  Om  Shomar,  which  are  the  most
remarkable,  rise  to  the  height  of  about  8000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  neighbouring  valleys,
which  are  themselves  elevated  from  500  to  600  feet  above  the  level  of  the  surrounding  sea.
This  region  is  separated  from  the  foot  of  the  secondary  chain  of  El  Tyh  by  a  broad  sandy
plain,  which  affords  good  pasturage  in  spring,  but,  being  destitute  of  water,  is  not  much  fre-
quented even  by  Bedouins.  This  plain,  on  the  land  side,  seems  to  correspond  to  others  along
the  sea  border,  on  both  sides,  after  passing  which  the  ascent  begins,  through  various  gently
sloping  valleys  to  the  high  central  region  of  Sinai.  We  cannot  clearly  make  out  what  extent
Burckhardt  gives  to  an  observation  which  he  makes  soon  after  the  ascent,  by  the  usual  road,
begins, — "  The  ranges  of  mountains  in  this  country  differ  in  their  formation  from  all  the
other  Arabian  chains  which  I  have  seen,  the  valleys  reaching  to  the  very  summits,  where

xlviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

they  form  a  plain,  and  thence  descend  to  the  other  side."  We  suppose  this  applies  not  to
the  valleys  in  the  high  central  region  itself,  but  to  those  in  the  ascent  to  it.  The  traveller
has  the  lofty  central  summits  in  view  several  days  before  he  comes  to  them ;  and  when  he
reaches  their  borders,  he  finds  that  abrupt  cliffs  of  granite,  from  500  to  600  feet  in  height,
their  surface  blackened  by  the  sun,  surround  the  avenues  leading  to  the  elevated  platform  to
which  the  name  of  Sinai  is  more  especially  applied.  Such  cliffs  enclose  the  holy  mountains
on  three  sides,  leaving  only  the  east  and  north-east  sides,  towards  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  more
open  to  the  view.  It  takes  about  four  hours  and  a  half,  after  reaching  these  cliffs,  to  arrive
at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai,  through  the  defile  which  is  followed  by  these  travellers  who  take
the  nearest  route  from  Suez.  Arriving  here,  the  traveller  finds  an  extensive  Greek  convent,
like  a  fortress,  situated  in  so  narrow  a  valley,  that  while  one  part  of  the  building  stands  upon
the  lower  slope  of  Mount  Horeb,  a  space  of  twenty  paces  only  is  left  between  its  walls  and
the  eastern  mountains.

The  names  of  Mounts  Horeb,  Sinai,  Moses,  St.  Catherine,  are  applied  by  travellers  in  such
sort,  that  the  reader  is  often  at  a  loss  to  distinguish  their  application ;  and  it  is  only  by  a
careful  comparison  of  their  accounts  that  he  learns  that  the  name  of  Horeb  is  now  applied  to
the  mountain  at  whose  base  the  convent  stands,  and  which  forms  a  sort  of  breast  from  or
upon  which  rise  the  twin  summits  of  Mounts  St.  Catherine  and  Sinai,  which  last  also  bears
the  name  of  Moses  (Jebel  Mousa)  :  or,  in  other  words,  that  Mount  Horeb  is  the  base,  and
Mounts  Sinai  and  St.  Catherine  the  tallest  summits  of  the  same  mountain.  We  shall  not  in
this  place  examine  the  claims  of  these  or  any  other  appropriations  of  sacred  names :  we  have
done  this  in  another  work,a  where  the  accuracy  of  these  appropriations  are  questioned — and
possibly  a  future  page  may  give  occasion  for  some  further  remarks  on  the  subject.  But  we
are  now  describing  things  as  they  exist,  distinguishing  them  by  the  names  which  they
currently  bear,  without  pausing  to  inquire  how  properly  those  names  have  been  applied.
The  name  of  Sinai,  the  restricted  use  of  which  is  thus  stated,  is,  however,  applied  in  a
general  way,  as  we  have  seen,  to  all  these  mountains,  and,  indeed,  to  the  whole  of  the
peninsula.

The  summits  of  Mounts  Sinai  and  St.  Catherine  are  not  visible  from  the  valley  in  which
the  convent  stands ;  and,  unless  previously  prepared,  the  traveller  is  astonished  on  arriving  at
the  plain  at  the  top  of  Horeb,  to  see  the  formidable  ascents  which  rise  before  him.  A  steep
ascent  up  Mount  Horeb  commences  immediately  behind  the  walls  of  the  convent,  to  facilitate
which,  steps  (sai-d  to  be  14,000  in  number)  were  anciently  cut,  even  to  the  summit;  but
these  are  now  either  destroyed  or  so  much  damaged  by  the  winter  torrents,  as  to  be  of  very
little  use.  The  ascent  takes  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  exclusively  of  the  opportunity  which
the  traveller  may  have  taken,  after  twenty-five  minutes'  ascent,  of  breathing  a  short  time
under  a  large  impending  rock,  hard  by  which  is  a  well  of  water,  cold  as  ice.  At  the  top  of  this
ascent  is  a  large  open  space,  or  small  plain,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  mountains;  high
above  all  of  which  rises  the  lofty  summit  of  Sinai,  by  which,  from  this  place,  the  still  loftier
summit  of  St.  Catherine  is  concealed,  as  both  summits  had  been  concealed  by  Horeb  from
the  valley  below.  To  this  part  of  the  mountain  the  venerable  Scriptural  name  of  Horeb  is
now  more  especially  given ;  and  here  pilgrims  generally  pause  before  they  assay  the  difficult
enterprise  before  them.  In  the  centre  of  the  plain  stands,  enclosed  by  a  stone  fence,  the  only
tree  in  the  mountain — a  cypress,  planted  by  the  monks  upwards  of  100  years  since ;  and
near  this  is  a  tank  which  receives  the  winter  rains,  and  which  is  alleged  to  have  been  dug  by
the  prophet  Elias  during  his  sojourn  in  the  mountain.  This  name  is  also  borne  by  an  old
convent,  now  deserted,  containing  a  grotto  which  is  said  to  have  been  his  residence.

From  this  plain,  a  still  steeper  ascent  of  half  an  hour,  the  steps  of  which  are  also  in  ruins,
leads  to  the  summit  of  Mount  Sinai.  The  plain  at  the  top  of  the  mountain  does  not  exceed
sixty  paces  in  circumference,  and  on  this  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  church  are  still  to  be  seen,
and  near  this,  on  a  somewhat  lower  point,  is  a  mosque  also  in  ruins,  offering,  together,  rather

a  '  Pictorial  Bible ;'  note  on  Exod.  xix.  2.

Chap.  II.]

MOUNTAINS.

xlix

[Summit  of  Mount  Sinai.]

a  striking  testimony  of  the  concurrent  respect  with  which  both  Christians  and  Moslems
regard  the  holy  mountain.  The  Jews  make  no  pilgrimages  here,  nor  do  any  memorials  made
with  hands  attest  their  interest  in  these  mountains.  And  they  need  none :  the  rocks  them-
selves and  the  wildernesses,  the  valleys,  the  palm-trees,  the  bitter  waters,  and  the  bounding
gulf — all  bear  witness,  lasting  as  the  world,  of  the  close  and  marvellous  connection  of  their
history  with  the  scenes  which  this  wild  region  offers.

Some  recent  travellers  have  gratified  us  with  an  account  of  what  they  saw  from  the  summit
of  this  mountain,  a  view  which  Burckhardt  was  prevented  by  a  thick  fog  from  enjoying.  If
he  had  not  left  us  a  full  and  clear  account  of  what  he  afterwards  perceived  from  the  adjoining
and  higher  summit  of  St.  Catherine,  this  might  be  much  regretted,  as  few  travellers  equal  him
in  the  avoidance  of  vague  general  expressions  in  description,  and  in  the  precision  and  fulness
of  his  information.  In  the  present  instance,  Sir  Frederick  Henniker  tells  us  that  if  he  had  to
represent  the  end  of  the  world,  he  would  model  it  -from  Mount  Sinai :  and  afterwards  he  calls
it  "  a  sea  of  desolation  j"  adding,  "  it  would  seem  as  if  Arabia  Petrsea  had  once  been  an  ocean  of
lava,  and  that  while  its  waves  were  literally  running  mountains  high,  it  was  commanded  suddenly
to  stand  still."  Laborde,  on  arriving  at  the  summit,  was  surprised  at  the  briskness  of  the  air.
The  eye  sought  in  vain,  he  says,  to  catch  some  prominent  object  among  the  chaos  of  rocks
which  were  tumbled  around  the  base,  and  vanished  in  the  distance  in  the  form  of  raging  waves.
Nevertheless,  he  distinguished  the  Red  Sea,  the  mountains  of  Africa,  and  some  summits  of
mountains  which  were  easily  recognizable  by  their  shapes ;  as  Om  Shomar,  by  its  rounded
masses,  Serbal,  by  its  shooting  points,  and  El  Tyh,  by  its  immense  prolongation.  Mr.  Stephens,
the  recent  American  traveller,  also  gives  an  animated  glance  at  the  "bleak  solitudes  and
terrible  majesty  of  Sinai,"  and  is  particularly  impressed  by  the  sacred  associations  of  "the  holy
mountain."  That  this  was  really  the  "  holy  mountain  "  we  very  much  doubt :  but  whatever
truth  or  beauty  exists  in  the  feelings  which  are  excited  in  this  or  other  travellers  by  sacred  asso-
ciations, are,  here  at  least,  scarcely  affected  by  questions  respecting  the  identity  of  particular
mountains ;  for  while  these  do  not  considerably  differ  in  altitude  or  formation,  and  it  is  rather
vol.  i.  h

1  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  II.

by  the  whole  scene  than  by  the  particular  mountain  that  these  feelings  are  excited,  there  is
no  question  that  this  region  is  the  scene  of  the  wondrous  transactions  recorded  in  the  sacred
books ; — that  these  are  the  mountains  which  quaked  when  the  Lord  came  down  in  fire  upon
them ;  and  that  these  are  the  valleys  which  then  heard  his  voice.

None  of  these  travellers  whom  we  have  cited  thought  it  worth  their  while  to  ascend  to  the
neighbouring  and  somewhat  taller  summit  of  St.  Catherine — an  inappropriate  name,  which  it
takes  from  a  stupid  legend  about  a  female  "  saint "  so  called.  The  ascent  is  considerably  more
difficult  than  that  of  Mount  Sinai :  and  those  who  contemplate  the  ascent  usually  go  down  to
the  valley  which  separates  them,  and  remain  till  the  next  morning  in  the  small  convent  of  El
Erbayn,  or  the  Forty  [Martyrs].  Some,  however,  return  to  the  great  convent  at  the  foot  of
Mount  Horeb,  making  separate  expeditions  of  the  two  ascents.  Of  this  number  was  the
candid  old  traveller  Morison,  who,  with  others,  tells  us  that  this  mountain  is  not  only  higher
than  its  neighbour,  but  is  distinguished  from  it  by  having  no  ascending  pathway,  or  any  trace
of  the  course  by  which  it  is  usually  mounted ;  so  that,  without  such  experience  as  the  guiding
monks  possess,  the  pilgrim  might  stray  a  hundred  times  from  the  right  track.  One  of  his
party  lost  heart  at  a  third  of  the  ascent,  and  returned  to  the  convent ;  and  Morison  ingenuously
confesses  that,  as  he  proceeded,  he  weighed  three  or  four  times  in  his  mind  the  propriety  of
following  this  example,  rather  than  of  persisting  in  an  undertaking  of  apparently  so  much  peril
and  difficulty.  "  We  found,  in  fact,"  he  says,  "  certain  points  which  it  seemed  little  easier  to
surmount  than  to  scale  the  skies  ;  nevertheless,  animated,  in  the  end,  by  the  example  of  our
Greek  monks,  who  scrambled  up  like  cats,  and  finding  here  a  small  hollow  in  which  I  could  rest
the  point  of  my  foot,  and  there  a  ledge  which  I  could  grasp  with  my  hand,  I  at  last  reached
the  summit."  From  the  more  explicit  information  of  Burckhardt  it  appears  that  the  worst
part  is  on  approaching  the  highest  part  of  the  mountain,  which  consists  of  a  single  immense
block  of  granite,  the  surface  of  which  is  so  smooth  as  to  render  the  ascent  very  difficult.  This
mountain,  at  least,  is  not  steril.  The  ascent  takes  two  hours.  The  side  of  this  mountain  is
noted  for  its  excellent  pasturage ;  herbs  sprout  up  everywhere  between  the  rocks,  and,  as  many
of  them  are  odoriferous,  the  scent,  early  in  the  morning,  when  the  dew  falls,  is  delicious.  This
luxuriant  vegetation  reaches  up  to  the  granite  block  which  caps  the  mountain ;  which  thus,
upon  the  whole,  presents  a  verdure  which,  had  it  been  turf,  instead  of  shrubs  and  herbs,  would
have  completed  the  resemblance  which  it  bears  to  some  of  the  Alpine  summits.  The  summit
of  this  mountain,  like  that  of  Mount  Mousa,  terminates  sharply,  and  upon  it  there  is  nothing
remarkable  save  a  small  ancient  oratory,  built  of  loose  uncemented  stones,  and  hardly  high
enough  within  to  allow  a  person  to  stand  upright.

The  summit  of  Mount  St.  Catherine  commands  a  most  extensive  view  of  the  whole  region
in  which  it  stands.  The  details  comprehended  in  this  magnificent  view  have  been  laid  down
by  Burckhardt  with  admirable  precision ;  and  the  substance  of  his  statement,  with  contribu-
tions from  other  sources,  is  necessary  to  complete  the  picture  of  this  most  interesting  region,
with  which  we  are  endeavouring  to  furnish  our  readers.

From  this  elevated  peak  the  directions  of  the  different  surrounding  chains  of  mountains,  and
of  the  valleys  which  divide  and  intersect  them,  can  be  distinctly  traced.  It  is  from  hence  seen
that  the  upper  nucleus  of  the  Sinai,  which  is  composed  almost  entirely  of  granite  and  porphyry,
forms  a  rocky  wilderness  of  an  irregular,  circular  shape,  intersected  by  many  narrow  valleys,
and  from  thirty  to  forty  miles  in  diameter.  It  contains  the  highest  mountains  of  the  peninsula ;
and  their  shaggy  and  pointed  peaks,  and  steep  and  shattered  sides,  render  it  clearly  dis-
tinguishable from  all  the  rest  of  the  country  in  view.  It  is  upon  this  highest  region  of  the
peninsula  that  the  fertile  valleys  which  produce  fruit-trees  are  found ;  and  these  are  principally
at  the  distance  of  three  or  four  hours'  journey  from  the  convent,  to  the  west  and  south-west.
Water,  from  the  numerous  mountain  springs,  abounds  in  all  this  region ;  and  hence  the  com-
parative fertility  of  the  valleys ;  for  vegetable  mould  either  does  not  exist,  or  is  so  scanty,  that
the  gardens  of  the  convent  are  supplied  with  earth  brought  all  the  way  from  Egypt  on  the
backs  of  camels :  but  in  this  climate,  wherever  water  is  abundant,  the  very  rocks  will  produce
vegetation.    It  is  hence  the  refuge  of  all  the  Bedouins  of  the  peninsula  (about  4000  in  number)

Chap.  II.]  MOUNTAINS.  li

when  the  low  country  is  parched  with  consuming  droughts ;  and  hence  this  region  contrasts
advantageously  with  the  northern  part  of  the  peninsula,  which  is  an  absolute  desert ;  and  the
inhabitants  of  the  central  and  southern  parts,  from  the  comparisons  they  are  thus  led  to  make,
regard  their  country  as  the  happiest  under  heaven.  The  air  also  is  here  delightfully  pure  and
cool.  The  fell  simoom  never  reaches  to  this  high  region ;  and  at  the  convent,  at  the  foot  of
Horeb,  the  thermometer  may  be  at  75°,  while  in  the  low  country,  and  particularly  near  the
sea-shore,  it  will  be  at  from  102°  to  105°,  or  even  110°.  In  winter  the  whole  of  the  upper
Sinai  is  deeply  covered  with  snow,  which  choices  up  many  of  the  passes,  and  often  renders
the  mountains  of  Moses  and  St.  Catherine  inaccessible.  Upon  the  whole,  the  climate  is  so
different  from  that  of  Egypt  that  fruits  are  nearly  two  months  later  in  ripening  there  than  at
Cairo.

After  this  general  statement,  with  respect  to  this  upper  region,  we  can  the  better  attend  to
the  particulars  of  the  view  which  engages  our  attention  from  the  summit  of  Mount  St.
Catherine,  which  stands  nearly  in  the  centre  of  it.  The  characteristics  to  the  north  of  this
central  region  have  been  already  insufficiently  indicated  for  our  present  purposes.  We,  there-
fore, turn  at  once  to  the  east,  and  observe  that  the  slope  of  the  upper  mountains  is  much  less
abrupt  on  this  than  on  the  opposite  side.  The  mountains  in  this  direction,  beyond  the  high
district  of  Sinai,  run  in  a  lower  range  towards  one  of  the  principal  cross  valleys,  called  Wady
Sahl,  beyond  which,  to  the  east  and  north-east,  the  chains  intersect  each  other  in  many  inferior
masses  of  irregular  height,  till  they  reach  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  which  was  clearly  discernible  to
Burckhardt  from  Mount  St.  Catherine,  when  the  sun  was  just  rising  over  the  mountains  of  the
Arabian  side  of  the  gulf.  All  the  mountains  bordering  on  the  gulf  are  of  secondary  height,
except  in  the  short  extent  (in  about  the  centre  of  the  line)  between  Noweyba  and  Dahab,
where  they  rise  to  considerable  elevation.  The  country  to  the  south-east,  down  nearly  to  the
terminating  headland  of  the  peninsula,  is  also  occupied  by  mountains  of  minor  size,  and  the
valleys  are  so  narrow  that  few  of  them  can  be  distinguished  from  our  point  of  view ;  and  the
whole  country  in  that  direction  appears  an  uninterrupted  wilderness  of  barren  mountains.

Southward,  the  view  is  bounded  by  the  high  mountain  of  Om  Shomar,  which  forms  a
nucleus  of  itself,  apparently  unconnected  with  the  upper  Sinai,  though  bordering  close  upon  it.
To  the  right  of  this  mountain  the  sea  may  be  distinguished,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tor,  near
which  begins  a  chain  of  low,  calcareous  mountains,  called  Jebel  Hemam  [or  Death],  which  is
separated  from  the  upper  Sinai  by  a  broad,  gravelly  plain,  called  El  Kaa,  across  which  the
road  from  Tor  to  Suez  passes.  This  plain  terminates  to  the  W.N.W.  of  Mount  St.  Catherine,
and  nearly  in  the  direction  of  Mount  Serbal.  Toward  this  plain  of  El  Kaa  the  central  Sinai
mountains  are  very  abrupt,  and  have  no  secondary  intermediate  chain  between  them  and  the
plain  at  their  feet.  The  mountain  of  Serbal  is  separated  from  the  upper  plain  by  some  valleys,
especially  Wady  Hebran,  and  it  forms  with  several  neighbouring  mountains  a  separate  cluster
terminating  in  peaks,  the  highest  of  which  appears  to  be  as  high  as  Mount  St.  Catherine.  It
borders  on  the  valley  of  Feiran  [Faran,  Paran],  and  being  situated  to  the  north-west  of  the
great  central  cluster  of  mountains,  it  is  necessarily  the  first  high  mountain  at  which  travellers
coming  direct  from  the  head  of  the  gulf  arrive.

This  survey  indicates  a  few  objects  which  we  must  examine  a  little  more  particularly.

First,  there  is  the  southern  mountain  of  Om  Shomar,  which  we  do  not  know  that  any  tra-
veller but  Burckhardt  has  hitherto  visited ;  and  he  did  not  mount  the  highest  summit,  which
seemed  to  him  impossible  to  reach,  the  sides  being  almost  perpendicular,  and  the  rock  so
smooth  as  to  afford  no  hold  for  the  feet.  He  halted  200  feet  below  the  top,  and  there  a
beautiful  view  opened  upon  the  Gulf  of  Suez,  and  the  neighbourhood  of  Tor,  which  place  was
distinctly  visible,  while  the  wide  plain  of  El  Kaa  lay  extended  at  his  feet.  This  mountain
consists  of  granite,  the  lower  part  of  which  is  red,  while  the  top  is  almost  white,  so  as  to
appear  from  a  distance  like  chalk ;  this  arises  from  the  large  proportion  of  white  feldspath  in
it,  and  the  smallness  of  the  particles  of  hornblende  and  mica.  In  the  middle  of  the  mountain,
between  the  granite  rocks,  are  broad  strata  of  brittle,  black  slate,  mixed  with  layers  of  cpiartz
and  feldspath,  and  with  micaceous  schistus.     The  quartz  includes  thin  strata  of  mica,  of  the

h  2

lii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  II.

^=-5^P»

[Mount  Serbal.]

most  brilliant  white  colour,  which  is  quite  dazzling  in  the  sun,  and  forms  a  striking  contrast
with  the  blackened  surface  of  the  white  and  red  granite.

The  mountain  of  Serbal  seems  to  the  author  of  this  work  of  peculiar  interest,  from  the  con-
siderations which  in  another  place  a  led  him  to  conjecture  that  this,  and  not  the  so-called  Jebel
Mousa,  is  the  mount  on  which  the  law  was  delivered  to  Moses.  The  present  merely  descrip-
tive account  does  not  require  us  to  re-state  the  arguments  on  which  this  conclusion  was
founded,  or  to  add  those  further  considerations  which  we  may  adduce  in  a  subsequent  page.
It  is  sufficient  now  to  remind  or  apprise  the  reader  that  this  is  the  view  which  we  have  taken,
and  which  we  have  more  lately  seen  no  occasion  to  modify.

The  French  commissioners  seem  to  be  the  only  persons  who  mention  this  mountain  by
name,  prior  to  Burckhardt,  and  he  is  still  the  only  traveller  by  whom  it  has  been  ascended.  It
illustrates  the  singleness  of  object  of  the  old  pilgrim  travellers,  that  although  they  could  not
but  see  this  remarkable  mountain,  none  of  them  condescend  to  notice  it  in  their  books,  as  it
was  not  pointed  out  to  them  as  connected  with  any  of  the  circumstances  which  made  this  region
venerable  to  them.  The  only  notice  of  it  we  have  been  able  to  find  is  in  Morison,  who  men-
tions it  as  "  une  haute  montagne,"  without  naming  it  or  giving  any  description.  It  has  been
treated  with  rather  more  respect  since  Burckhardt  directed  attention  to  it ;  but  it  is  generally
despatched  in  a  few  lines,  in  which  its  general  aspect  is  stated ;  travellers  who  come  land-wise
from  Suez  being  careful  to  reserve  their  descriptive  resources  for  Mounts  St.  Catherine  and
Mousa ;  and  those  who,  having  come  by  water  to  Tor  and  returning  by  land,  have  already
been  at  those  mountains,  find,  by  the  time  they  get  to  Mount  Serbal,  that  their  resources  of
this  kind  are  exhausted.

The  mountain  has  in  all  five  peaks,  the  two  highest  of  which  are  those  to  the  east,  one  of
which  Burckhardt  ascended.  These  rise  like  cones,  and  are  distinguishable  from  a  great  dis-
tance, particularly  on  the  road  from  Suez.  The  ascent  is  very  difficult ;  and  Burckhardt  was
completely  exhausted  by  the  time  he  reached  the  lower  summit,  to  climb  to  which  took  him  not
less  than  four  hours.  Here  there  is  a  small  plain  with  some  trees,  and  the  ruins  of  a  small
reservoir  for  water.  After  reposing  here  for  a  while,  our  traveller  ascended  the  eastern  peak,
and  reached  its  top  in  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  after  great  exertion ;  for  the  rock  is  so  smooth

a  '  Pictorial  Bible ;'  note  on  Exod.  xix.  2.

Chap.  II.]  MOUNTAINS.  liii

and  slippery  as  well  as  steep,  that,  although  barefooted,  he  was  obliged  frequently  to  crawl
upon  his  belly  to  avoid  being  precipitated  below ;  and  had  he  not  casually  met  with  a  few
shrubs  to  grasp,  he  would  probably  have  been  obliged  to  abandon  the  attempt,  or  have  rolled
down  the  cliff.  The  summit  of  this  eastern  peak  consists  of  one  enormous  mass  of  granite,  the
smoothness  of  which  is  broken  by  only  a  few  partial  fissures,  presenting  an  appearance  not
unlike  the  ice-covered  tops  of  the  Alps.  The  sides  of  this  peak,  at  a  few  paces  below  its  top,
are  formed  of  large  insulated  blocks,  thirty  or  forty  feet  long,  which  appear  as  if  just  suspended
in  the  act  of  rushing  down  the  steep.  Near  the  top  there  are  steps  regularly  formed  with
large  loose  stones,  which  must  have  been  brought  from  below,  and  so  judiciously  are  they
arranged,  that  they  have  resisted  the  devastations  of  time,  and  may  still  be  used  for  the  ascent.
Burckhardt  was  afterwards  informed  that  these  steps  are  the  continuation  of  a  regular  path
from  the  bottom  of  the  mountain,  which  is  in  several  parts  cut  through  the  rock  with  great
labour.  The  eastern  peak,  which  from  below  looks  as  sharp  as  a  needle,  has  a  platform  on  its
summit  of  about  fifty  paces  in  circumference.  On  this  is  a  heap  of  small  loose  stones  about
two  feet  high,  forming  a  circle  about  twelve  feet  in  diameter.  Just  below  the  top,  every
granite  block  that  presents  a  smooth  surface,  offers  inscriptions,  the  greater  part  of  which  are
illegible.  Similar  inscriptions  are  found  on  the  sides  of  the  small  caverns,  large  enough  to
hold  a  few  persons,  which  exist  between  the  masses  of  stone.

As  the  eye  is  very  apt  to  be  deceived  in  estimating  the  relative  heights  of  mountains,  Burck-
hardt hesitates  to  give  any  positive  opinion  as  to  that  of  Mount  Serbal ;  but  it  seemed  to  him
to  be  higher  than  all  the  peaks,  including  Jebel  Mousa,  and  very  little  lower  than  Mount  St.
Catherine.

That  this  mountain  is  the  "  Mount  Paran  "  of  Scripture,  which  name  the  valley  below  it  still
bears ;  and  that  it  is  also  the  Sinai,  from  which  the  law  was  delivered,  we  entertain  no  manner
of  doubt;  but  as,  at  present,  we  can  hope  to  carry  only  the  readers  of  "  the  Pictorial  Bible"
with  us  in  that  conviction,  we  only  allude  to  it  in  order  to  explain  and  justify  the  attention  we
have  bestowed  on  this  mountain.

So  much  has  been  said  of  the  inscriptions  found  on  the  rocks  and  cliffs  of  Sinai,  that  we
also  may  be  expected  to  say  something  about  them.  It  is  remarkable  that  those  near  the
summit  of  Mount  Serbal  are  alone  those  which  are  found  on  the  higher  mountains,  or  which
are  engraved  on  granite,  if  we  except  those  which  are  found  in  the  valley  at  the  foot  of  Mount
St.  Catherine,  and  which  appear  to  have  been  the  work  of  pilgrims  visiting  the  rock  in
that  place  which  is  absurdly  alleged  to  be  that  which  was  stricken  by  Moses.  With  these
exceptions,  the  inscriptions  are,  in  general,  little  more  than  scratches  on  the  smooth  cliffs,  of
sandstone  and  other  comparatively  soft  rocks,  of  the  hills  and  sides  of  the  valleys  in  the  lower
region  of  Sinai.  They  consist  of  writing  in  characters  which  no  one  has  been  able  to  decipher,
and  of  rude  figures  of  animals.  When  the  existence  of  such  inscriptions  was  first  made  known
to  the  European  public,  some  sensation  was  excited  by  the  notion  that  they  were  the  work
of  the  Israelites  during  their  sojourn  in  this  region.  This  notion  has  long  been  relinquished ;
and  although  no  certainty  has  been  attained,  yet,  as  these  inscriptions  occur  exclusively
on  the  road  to  Mount  Serbal,  and  from  then?e  to  the  alleged  stone  which  Moses  struck  in
Rephidim,  and  from  other  considerations  which  we  need  not  now  state,  it  would  seem  that
they  were  the  work  of  pilgrims — probably  in  and  prior  to  the  sixth  century — at  a  time  when
Mount  Serbal  was  regarded,  as  we  still  believe  it  to  be,  as  the  true  Sinai  of  the  sacred  writings.
The  animal  figures,  interspersed  or  detached,  we  are  disposed  to  regard,  with  Burckhardt,  as
not  traceable  to  the  same  source,  but  as  being  the  work  of  the  Bedouin  shepherds  of  the  penin-
sula :  for  while  these  figures  are  executed  in  a  ruder  manner  and  with  a  less  steady  hand  than
the  inscriptions,  they  exclusively  represent  such  animals  as  are  natives  of  the  peninsula, — as
camels,  mountain  and  other  goats,  and  gazelles,  but  principally  the  two  first;  and  it  is  an
ascertained  fact,  that  the  present  Bedouins  of  the  peninsula  are  in  the  habit  of  carving  the
figures  of  goats,  at  least,  upon  rocks  and  in  grottos.  Speaking  of  the  inscriptions  which
appear  on  the  rocks  lying  near  what  always  appears  to  have  been  a  resting-place  for  pilgrims
and  travellers,  Burckhardt  observes,  "  they  have  evidently  been  done  in  great  haste  and  very

liv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  II.

rudely,  sometimes  with  large  letters  and  sometimes  with  small,  and  seldom  in  straight  lines.
The  characters  appear  to  be  written  from  right  to  left,  and  although  mere  scratches,  an  instru-
ment of  metal  must  have  been  employed,  for  the  rock,  although  of  sandstone,  is  of  considerable
hardness.  Some  of  the  letters  are  not  larger  than  half  an  inch;  but  they  are  generally  about
fifteen  lines  in  height  and  four  lines  in  breadth.  The  same  character  is  seen  at  the  beginning
of  almost  every  line,  whence  it  appears  that  none  of  the  inscriptions  are  of  any  length,  but  that
they  consist  merely  of  short  phrases,  all  similar  to  each  other,  in  the  beginning,  at  least.
They  are,  perhaps,  prayers,  or  the  names  of  pilgrims,  on  their  way  to  Mount  Sinai,  who  had
rested  under  this  rock."

But  the  principal  display  of  such  inscriptions  is  found  in  the  Wady  Mokatteb  or  the  Written
Valley,  which  lies  on  the  most  frequented  road  to  Serbal  and  Sinai,  and  where  the  cliffs  are  so
situated  as  to  afford  a  fine  shelter  to  travellers  during  the  mid-day  hours,  to  which  circum-
stances may,  doubtless,  be  attributed  the  numerous  inscriptions  found  in  the  valley.  This
valley  extends  for  about  three  hours'  march  in  the  direction  N.W. ;  in  the  upper  part  it  is  three
miles  across,  having  to  the  left  (coming  from  Sinai)  high  mountains ;  and  to  the  right,  a  chain
of  lower  sandstone  hills.  Half  way  down  it  becomes  narrower,  and  then  takes  the  name  of
Seyh  Szeder.  In  most  places  the  sandstone  rocks  present  abrupt  cliffs,  twenty  or  thirty  feet
high.  Large  masses  have  separated  themselves  from  these  cliffs,  and  lie  at  their  feet  in  the
valley.  The  cliffs  and  rocks  are  thickly  covered  with  inscriptions,  which  are  continued,  with
intervals  of  a  few  hundred  paces  only,  for  at  least  six  miles ;  and  similar  inscriptions  are  found,
in  the  lower  part  of  the  valley,  where  it  narrows,  upon  the  sandstone  rocks  of  the  opposite  or
north-eastern  side  of  the  valley.  They  are  exactly  of  the  same  kind  as  those  which  have
already  been  mentioned.  Some  of  them  are  cut  at  the  height  of  twelve  or  fifteen  feet,  which
must  have  required  a  ladder  to  ascend  to  them.  They  are  in  general  cut  deeper  than  those  in
the  granite  of  the  upper  country,  but  in  the  same  careless  style.  Among  these  many  are
evidently  Greek,  containing,  probably,  like  the  others,  the  names  of  those  who  passed  here  in
their  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  mountain.     Some  of  the  latter  contain  Jewish  names  in  Greek

[Wady  Mokatteb.]

Chap.  II.]

MOUNTAINS.

lv

characters.  There  is  a  vast  number  of  drawings  of  mountain  goats  and  camels,  the  latter  being
sometimes  represented  as  laden  and  with  riders  on  their  backs.  Crosses  are  also  seen,  indi-
cating that  the  inscribers  were  Christians.

We  have  seen  that  Burckhardt  calls  the  stone  of  Wady  Mokatteb,  sandstone.  Laborde
describes  it  as  a  crumbly  freestone;  and  M.  de  Roziere,  viewing  and  figuring  it  as  a  mineralo-
gist, more  precisely  indicates  it  as  psammite — "  the  psammite  of  Mokatteb,"  and  describes  it
as  composed  of  small  quartzose  grains,  rather  unequal,  feebly  aggregated,  and  strewn  with
micaceous  spangles.  With  this  correction  as  to  the  nature  of  the  stone,  Laborde's  account  of
the  manner  in  which  nature  appears  to  have  prepared  these  vast  tablets  to  receive  the  writings
which  they  bear,  deserves  attention.  The  effect  of  running  waters,  as  well  as  of  the  humidity
of  the  atmosphere,  is  to  undermine  the  base  of  the  crumbly  rocks  in  which  the  bed  of  this
valley  is  hollowed  out.  Having  then  no  support,  they  fall  away,  leaving  behind  them  a  smooth
and  uniform  surface.  The  rocks  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  thus  undermined  at  the
base  when  one  of  those  earthquakes,  of  which  evident  traces  remain,  disturbed  them  with
sufficient  violence  to  cause  the  whole  of  the  covering  so  unsupported  to  fall  to  pieces.  The
walls  of  the  valley  then  appeared  such  as  they  are  at  the  present  day, — uniform  throughout
their  whole  extent,  and  defended  at  bottom  by  the  masses  which  had  been  detached  from
them.  The  pilgrims  who  passed  found  these  immense  tablets  too  inviting  not  to  multiply
upon  them  their  names,  their  wishes,  and  the  usual  exclamations  of  travellers ;  and  the  rocks,
not  having  then  been  hardened  by  the  air,  easily  received  the  short  inscriptions  they  wished
them  to  bear.a

a  The  authorities  which  have  been  consulted  for  the  preceding  account  of  Siuai  are,  Morison,  M.  de  Roziere  (in  Description  de
1'Egypto),  Burckhardt,  Henniker,  Laborde,  Stephens,  Lord  Lyndsay,  &c.

SUPPLEMENTARY     NOTES.

C)  Height  of  Lebanon,  p.  xxxii. — The
mountains  of  Lebanon  being  the  highest  in
the  whole  chain  of  the  Syrian  mountains,  and
Jebel  Essheikh  being  the  highest  in  Lebanon,
it  follows  that  it  is  also  the  highest  of  the  entire
range.

That  Lebanon  is  the  highest  part  of  all  Syria
is  proved  by  the  course  of  its  two  principal
rivers,  the  Orontes  and  the  Jordan,  which,
arising  at  the  opposite  extremities  of  the
range,  are  compelled,  by  the  declivities,  to
shape  their  courses,  the  one  to  the  extreme
north,  and  the  other  to  the  extreme  south,  of
Syria.  The  port  of  Larneca,  in  Cyprus,  is  dis-
tant thirty  leagues ;  but  the  traveller  scarcely
leaves  it  before  he  discovers  the  higher  sum-
mits of  Lebanon  capped  with  clouds.  None  of
the  mountains  of  Libanus  or  Anti-Libanus  have
been  measured ;  but  an  approximating  estimate
may  be  formed  from  a  comparison  of  facts  fur-
nished by  Volney,  Burckhardt,  and  Clarke.
During  winter,  the  mountains,  throughout  the
whole  extent  from  Scanderoon  to  northern  Pa-
lestine, are  covered  with  snow ;  and  its  disap-
pearance or  continuance  on  the  advance  of
summer  of  course  affords  a  test  of  comparative
elevation  with  reference  to  the  point  of  per-
petual congelation,  which,   in    this   latitude,

may  be  taken  at  11,000  feet.  Now,  in  and
after  the  month  of  March  all  this  snow  dis-
solves, except  in  the  higher  regions  of  Leba-
non. The  range  of  Anti-Libanus  generally
must  not  be  included  in  this  exception:  for
when  Burckhardt  reached  the  summit,  so
early  as  March  22,  he  observes  that  not  only
had  the  heavy  rains,  usual  at  the  season,  dis-
solved the  greater  part  of  the  snow,  but  that
he  found  there  some  stunted  oaks;  circum-
stances which  evidently  demonstrate  that  this
must  be  considerably  below  the  point  of  per-
petual snow ;  and  probably  the  estimate  of
9000  feet,  which  we  have  seen,  may  be  correct.
Even  on  the  higher  summits  of  the  Western
Lebanon,  where  the  snow  continues  later,  it
disappears  as  the  season  advances,  unless  in
the  highest  cavities,  and  towards  the  north-
east, where  it  is  sheltered  from  the  sea-winds,
and  the  rays  of  the  sun.  "  In  such  a  situation,"
says  Volney,  "  I  saw  it  still  remaining  in  1784,
at  the  very  time  that  I  was  almost  suffocated
with  heat  in  the  valley  of  Baalbec.''  As,
therefore,  it  is  only  under  a  combination  of
favourable  accidents  that  snow  remains  all  the
year  on  the  very  highest  points  of  Western
Lebanon,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  their
elevation  exceeds,  even  if  it  barely  reaches,  the

lvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE,

[Chap.  II.

limit  of  11,000  feet.  The  southern  part  of
Anti-Libanus,  which  bears  the  distinct  name
of  Jebel  Essheikh  (Mount  Hermon),  is  the
only  portion  of  the  whole  that  appears  to  be
unquestionably  above  that  limit;  but  how
much  above  it  our  information  does  not
enable  us  to  state.  In  one  of  the  best  maps  of
the  Holy  Land  (Palmer's),  the  height  is  given
as  "  12,000  or  15,000  feet."  This  loose  way  of
stating  heights  will  not  do  ;  but  it  results,  ap-
parently, from  the  above  considerations,  that
the  height  of  Jebel  Essheikh  cannot  well  be
less  than  12,000  feet.  Elliot  says  of  this  moun-
tain that  it  is  "  considered  the  most  elevated
peak  of  Syria,  and  thought  to  rival  Mount
Blanc,  though  the  high  land  on  which  it  stands
detracts  considerably  from  its  apparent  alti-
tude, and  makes  it  a  less  imposing  object  than
the  king  of  European  mountains,  as  seen  from
the  Italian  valley  of  Aosta."  Dr.  Clarke,  ob-
serving this  mountain  in  July  from  the  plain
of  Esdraelon,  says,  "  This  summit  was  so  lofty
that  the  snow  entirely  covered  the  upper  part
of  it,  not  lying  in  patches  as,  during  summer,
upon  the  tops  of  some  very  elevated  moun-
tains, but  investing  all  the  higher  part  with
that  perfect  white  and  smooth  velvet-like
appearance  which  snow  only  exhibits  when  it
is  very  deep."  Elliot  tells  us  that  the  mount
takes  its  name  of  Jebel  Essheikh,  or  Old
Man's  Mountain,  from  the  resemblance  which
the  vivacious  fancy  of  the  Orientals  have  traced
in  the  summit  of  the  mountain  topped  with
snow,  which  sometimes  lies  in  lengthened
streaks  upon  its  sloping  ridges,  to  the  hoary
head  and  beard  of  a  venerable  Sheikh.

(2)  The  Mount  of  Beatitudes,  p.  xxxv. —
The  hill  which  bears  this  name  is  of  too  little
geographical  consequence  to  claim  a  place
where  the  principal  mountains  alone  are  pro-
fessed to  be  noticed.  But  its  celebrity,  as  the
hill  on  which  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is
supposed  to  have  been  delivered,  will  not  per-
mit us  to  pass  it  altogether  unobserved.  It  is
about  thirteen  miles  to  the  south  of  Safet,  the
road  from  which  descends  for  two  hours,  and
then  crosses  several  of  the  other  mountains  of
Upper  Galilee  before  it  arrives  at  the  foot  of
this  mountain.  The  Mount  of  Beatitudes,
with  two  projecting  summits  on  one  of  its  ex-
tremities, bears  some  resemblance  to  the  back
of  a  camel,  and  is  itself  low,  although  the  plain
on  which  it  stands  is  of  considerable  elevation,
and  commands  a  beautiful  prospect.  "  In
front,"  says  Mr.  Elliot,  "there  are  several
ranges  of  hills  rising  one  above  another ;  the
mountains  of  Upper  and  Lower  Galilee,  and
the  city  of  Safet,  elevated  above  all,  like  a  sen-

tinel on  a  post  of  observation:  on  the  left  is
Tabor;  on  the  north-west  is  the  long,  high
range  of  Lebanon  ;  and  on  the  right  the  sea  of
Tiberias,  with  the  hills  of  Ituraea  and  Gaulo-
nitis."  And,  with  reference  to  Safet,  as  the
city  to  which  Christ  is  supposed  to  have  di-
rected attention  from  the  Mount  of  Beatitudes,
the  same  traveller  observes,  "  Such  is  the
height  of  Safet,  that  from  every  point  where  it
is  seen  it  cannot  fail  to  form  the  most  remark-
able feature  in  the  landscape  ;  and  if  the  posi-
tion assigned  to  our  Lord,  when  delivering  his
unparalleled  discourse,  be  correct,  Bethulia,
the  ancient  Safet,  rose  in  unrivalled  majesty
immediately  before  him."

(3)  Carmel,  p.  xxxviii. — "  Padre  Camillo  (one
of  the  monks  of  the  convent  on  Mount  Car-
mel) was  unwilling  to  leave  his  cave,  and,  as
the  rain  had  again  commenced,  we  remained
there  for  an  hour  or  two  longer.  '  What  a  place
for  uninterrupted  contemplation !'  cried  he.
'  Here,  indeed,'  spouting  out  a  passage  from
his  favourite  historian,  he  continued,  '  the
plants,  the  rugged  rocks,  the  moaning  of  the
wind,  the  prospect  of  the  ocean,  the  murmur-
ing of  the  streams,  the  lowing  of  the  herds,
the  frisking  of  the  flocks,  the  shady  valley,  the
singing  of  the  birds,  the  delightful  clime,  the
variety  of  flowers,  the  odour  of  the  aromatic
herbs,  how  they  refresh  the  soul !'  This
sounded  very  sweetly  in  Italian;  and  as  he  de-
livered it  with  all  his  heart,  standing  in  the
mouth  of  the  cave  as  if  he  had  been  before  an
altar,  from  the  very  spot  where  so  much  was
in  reality  assembled,  too,  it  came  with  great
force,  for  the  catalogue  is  not  overcharged."
— Skinner,  i.  103.

(4)  Levels  in  Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.  xli.
— Since  the  first  portion  of  this  chapter  was
printed,  we  have  seen  in  the  '  Athenaeum'  (No.
600)  a  report  of  the  proceedings  at  a  meeting
of  the  Geographical  Society,  when  an  abstract
was  read  of  Mr.  Russegger's  journey  from  Sinai
to  Hebron  and  Jerusalem.  The  notice,  though
short,  is  exceedingly  valuable,  from  the  inform-
ation which  it  gives  on  a  subject  which  has
been  entirely  overlooked  by  the  mass  of  tra-
vellers. We  therefore  transcribe  nearly  the
whole  of  it  :—

"  On  his  return  from  Egypt  at  the  close  of
1838,  Mr.  Russegger  went  to  Suez,  and  from
that  point  set  out,  in  a  south-east  direction,  to
ascend  Mount  Sinai ;  and  he  gives  a  series  of
barometrical  levels,  from  the  shores  of  the  Red
Sea  to  the  summit  of  Mount  St.  Catherine,
which,  by  his  measurements,  rises  8168  French
feet  above  the  sea.     From   Mount   Sinai   he

Chap.  II.]

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

lvii

crossed  the  desert  of  El  Tyh,  in  a  direct  north
line  to  Hebron,  and  obtained  twenty-two  levels
on  this  route  also :  from  Hebron  he  went  to
Bethlehem,  and  found  its  elevation  to  be  2528
feet ;  and  thence  to  Jerusalem,  which  he  states
at  2479  French,  or  2640  English  feet.

"  Mr.  Russegger  devoted  much  attention  to
the  barometric  measurements  of  the  level  of
the  Dead  Sea ;  and,  after  other  observations,
on  hanging  up  his  barometer  on  the  shores  of
that  sea,  he  could  no  longer  continue  his  obser-

vations, for  the  quicksilver  rose  to  the  top  of
the  tube.  He  then  calculates  the  following
depressions: — village  of  Rihhah  (supposed  Je-
richo), in  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  774  feet ;
bathing-place  of  the  pilgrims  in  the  Jordan,
1269  feet ;  and  the  Dead  Sea,  at  its  northern
end,  1319  French  feet,  or  nearly  1400  English
feet  below  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean  !"
We  shall  await  with  impatience  the  more  ex-
tended information  which  Mr.  Russegger  must
be  prepared  to  give.

VOL.  I.

CHAPTER  III.

GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY.

[Rock  of  Moses.]

Our  information  concerning  the  geology  and  mineralogy  of  Palestine  is  remarkably  imperfect
and  indistinct :  for  these  were  matters  which  the  older  travellers  entirely  overlooked ;  and  the
dispersed  and  incidental  notices  with  which  we  have  more  lately  been  supplied  are  found  to  be
very  defective,  when  an  attempt  is  made  to  combine  their  facts  in  one  connected  statement.
Hasselquist,  Shaw,  Volney,  De  Roziere,  Seetzen,  Clarke,  Burckhardt,  Irby  and  Mangles,  and
Buckingham,  furnish  nearly  all  the  information  which  can  be  obtained  ;  and  that  is  only  such
as  will  supply  materials  for  the  statement  which  we  have  now  to  offer.  That  it  is  a  very
imperfect  one  we  know ;  but  are  persuaded  that  it  comprises  the  substance  of  all  existing
information,  and  that  nothing  of  any  consequence  has  escaped  our  researches.

Some  geological  information  has  been  given  in  the  preceding  chapter,  particularly  as  regards
the  mountains  of  Seir  and  Sinai ;  and  indeed  all  the  information  which  we  are  now  about  to
supply  might  have  been  incorporated  with  that  chapter,  had  it  not  seemed  more  desirable  to
separate,  when  it  could  conveniently  be  managed,  the  descriptive  from  the  scientific  details.
This  chapter,  therefore,  must  necessarily  assume  the  form  of  a  scientific  appendix  or  sequel  to
the  preceding ;  while  we  shall  endeavour,  as  far  as  possible,  to  divest  the  statements  we  have
to  offer  of  that  technical  character  which  might  perhaps  exclude  them  from  the  attention  of
the  general  reader.

Limestone  is  the  prevailing  constituent  of  the  mountains  of  all  Syria,*  as  well  as  of  Asia

a  As  somfi  writers  distinguish  Palestine  and  Phcenicia/rom  Syria,  we  take  this  opportunity  of  stating  that,  wherever  we  use  the
name  "  Syria/'  without  clearly  expressing  or  implying  such  a  distinction,  we  use  it  as  a  proper  and  convenient  general  name  for
all  that  region  extending  from  Asia  Minor  to  the  borders  of  Arabia  and  Egypt,  of  which  Palestine  and  Phoenicia  are  but  parts.

Chap.  III.]  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY.  lix

Minor  and  Greece.  The  general  character  of  the  stone  of  the  mountains  which  compose  the
great  central  ridges  of  Syria,  or  which  ramify  from  them,  is  that  of  a  hard  calcareous  rock,
sonorous  when  struck,  and  of  a  whitish  or  pale  yellow  colour.  It  is,  in  short,  a  very  hard  kind
of  limestone,  disposed  in  strata  variously  inclined,  and,  like  all  limestone  strata,  affording  a
great  number  of  caverns,  to  which  frequent  allusion  is  made  in  the  Scriptures.  Some  of  them
are  capable  of  containing  1500  men,  and  there  is  one,  near  Damascus,  which  will  even  afford
shelter  to  4000.  In  mountains  of  this  construction  it  is  not  unusual  for  huge  masses  of  rock  to
take  the  shape  of  ruins  of  towns  and  castles.  This  is  remarkably  observed  in  the  road  from
Aleppo  to  Hamah,  but  scarcely  in  any  part  of  Palestine.*

The  prevailing  character  of  the  constituent  rock  undergoes,  of  course,  various  modifications
of  texture,  colour,  form  and  intermixture,  in  different  parts  of  the  country ;  and,  commencing
at  the  north,  it  may  be  useful  to  specify  some  of  the  appearances  which,  in  different  localities,
it  exhibits,  and  some  of  the  more  remarkable  changes  which  it  sustains.  But  it  is  to  be  re-
gretted that  the  travellers  who  notice  such  particulars  seldom  mention  the  extent  in  which
their  statement  is  to  be  understood ;  so  that  it  is  seldom  possible  to  distinguish  whether  the
recorded  appearance  is  strictly  local  or  of  extensive  range.

In  the  far  north — that  is,  in  the  hills  which  bound  on  the  north  the  plain  in  which  stood
the  ancient  Hamath — the  calcareous  rock  is  noticed  by  Burckhardt  as  being  "of  considerable
hardness,  and  of  a  reddish  yellow  colour."

That  the  name  "  Lebanon  "  is  formed  from  a  word  signifying  whiteness  is,  we  imagine,  not
because  of  the  snow  which,  during  part  of  the  year,  covers  the  summits,  but  on  account  of
that  whitish  colour  which  has  been  described  as  one  of  the  general  characteristics  of  these
mountains.  This  may  be  exemplified  by  the  observation  of  Buckingham,  who,  in  his  ascent
from  the  sea-shore  (at  Tripoli)  to  the  cedars,  rested  on  Jebel  Ainneto,  and  there  noted  that  the
mountain  on  which  he  stood  was  wholly  composed  of  white  limestone  of  different  qualities ;
and  that  the  lower  mountains  over  which  he  had  passed,  and  which  now  lay  under  his  view,
seemed  very  much  to  resemble  the  white  hills  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  as  seen  from
the  Mount  of  Olives,  near  Jerusalem.  This  comparison  is  valuable.  At  a  point  more
elevated  in  the  same  quarter,  but  some  miles  more  to  the  south,  at  the  point  where  the  name
of  Jebel  Libnan  noiv  terminates,  Burckhardt  observes  that  the  rocks  are  all  in  perfectly
horizontal  layers,  some  of  which  are  thirty  or  forty  yards,  while  others  are  only  a  few  yards,
in  thickness.13

From  carefully  comparing  the  different  authorities  on  the  subject,  it  appears  to  us  that  the
texture  of  the  rock  which  lines  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes  is  much  less  dense  than
that  of  Lebanon,  or  even  of  that  in  the  central  parts  of  Palestine.  It  appears  also  that,  along
this  valley,  the  density  of  the  rock  diminishes  as  we  proceed  southward,  at  least  as  far  as  the
Dead  Sea.  We  know  certainly  that  the  texture  of  the  rock  is  more  loose  and  light  along  the
valley  of  the  Jordan  than  it  is  in  Lebanon  or  in  the  heart  of  Palestine  :  we  know  also  that  the
stone  which  lines  the  basin  of  the  Dead  Sea  is  of  still  less  density  than  this ;  and,  although  we
know  not  exactly  whether  the  stone  of  Mount  Seir,  still  more  to  the  south,  is  more  or  less
dense  than  that  of  the  Dead  Sea,  we  do  know  that  it  is  a  stone  easily  wrought,  and  that  its
texture  is  very  loose.

Buckingham  speaks  of  the  rock  at  the  ruins  near  Om  Keis  as  of  "  coarse  grey  limestone,"
and  it  probably  extends  throughout  this  district,  as  Burckhardt  speaks  of  the  uniform  appear-
ance of  the  calcareous  stone  in  all  the  country  between  the  rivers  Mandhour  and  Zerka.  In
this  neighbourhood — that  is,  off  the  south-east  of  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth — there  is  a  con-
siderable display  of  that  black  basaltic  rock  which  we  shall  hereafter  have  much  occasion  to
notice.  The  river  Mandhour,  which  passes  to  the  north  of  the  high  plain  of  Om  Keis,  towards
the  Jordan,  flows  through  a  deep  bed  of  it :  the  western  declivities  of  the  same  plain  are  also
basaltic  ;  and  eastward,  in  the  way  from  Hebras  to  Om  Keis,  Burckhardt  saw  alternate  layers
of  calcareous  and  basaltic  rock,  with  thin  layers  of  flint.  None  of  this  appears  in  the  higher
mountains  southward  to  the  Zerka,  which  are  entirely  calcareous ;  but  the  mountain  inime-

»  Clarke,  iv.  202.    Volney,  i.  280.  b   Buickhardt,  145,  25.    Buckingham's  'Ar;ib  Tribes,'  468.

i  2

lx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  III.

diately  to  the  south  of  that  river  exhibits  the  calcareous  stone  with  layers  of  various  coloured
sandstone,  and  large  blocks  of  the  black  basaltic  stone  of  the  Haouran.  Mr.  Buckingham,  who
crossed  the  mountains  of  Gilead  a  few  miles  to  the  south  of  the  same  river,  notes  that  the  first
range  of  hills,  from  the  Jordan,  was  generally  of  white  limestone,  but  the  second  had  a  mixture
of  various  kinds  of  rock, — showing  that  the  diversified  appearance  which  is  observed  near  the
bank  of  the  Zerka  is  prolonged  to  some  distance  southward.a

On  the  west,  approaching  the  Dead  Sea  from  Jerusalem,  the  hard  light-coloured  limestone
of  the  hills  near  that  city  is  exchanged  for  a  limestone  of  looser  texture,  sometimes  white  and
sometimes  greyish,  between  which  are  layers  of  a  reddish  micaceous  stone,  or  Saxum  purum
micaceum ;  the  shore  of  the  lake  exhibits,  in  several  places,  perpendicular  strata,  formed  of
reddish  brittle  earth,  which  would  doubtless  in  time  become  slate  enclosed  in  limestone.b

Returning  to  the  east,  and  ascending  southward  from  the  bed  of  the  river  Arnon,c  we  find,
in  the  upper  part  of  the  calcareous  mountains,  the  ground  covered  with  large  blocks  of  the
black  Haouran  stone.  Lower  down,  small  pieces  of  mica  and  petrified  shells  are  also  found.
Still  more  to  the  south,  the  mountains  are  all  calcareous  with  flint,  and  abound  in  petrified
shells.  Here  also  are  met  with  fine  specimens  of  calcareous  spath,  which  the  Arabs  honour  with
the  name  of  Hadjar  Ain  el  Shems,  the  Sun's  eye.d

The  mountains  of  Seir,  or  those  which  extend  southward  between  the  Dead  Sea  and  the
iElanitic  Gulf,  need  not  engage  our  attention  further  in  this  place,  as  the  separate  notice  which
we  have  given  to  them  embodies  all  the  mineralogical  information  we  have  been  able  to  obtain.

But  the  Sinai  mountains  must  again  engage  our  attention  ;  and  in  turning  to  them  we  may
again  remind  the  reader  that,  while  the  inclusion  of  this  Arabian  region  in  our  account,  and  the
space  we  are  allowing  to  it,  is  amply  justified  by  the  superior  interest  in  Hebrew  history,  and
the  unquestionably  superior  geological  interest,  of  this  region  to  any  which  the  proper  limits  of
Palestine  include,  our  information  concerning  it  is  far  more  ample  and  precise  than  we  possess
concerning  any  other  region  of  south-western  Asia.  If,  therefore,  the  confessedly  dispropor-
tionate attention  we  afford  to  it  gives  occasion  for  question  or  remark,  it  may  be  sufficient  to
answer,  that  the  disproportion  arises  less  from  any  redundance  in  the  account  of  this  region
than  from  the  aspect  of  meagre  brevity  which  the  want  of  adequate  materials  obliges  us  to  give
to  the  account  of  districts  which  would  in  themselves  be  entitled  to  an  equal  measure  of
attention.

Before  proceeding  to  furnish  the  additional  information  contained  in  this  chapter  concerning
the  geological  characteristics  of  Sinai,  it  gives  us  great  pleasure  to  introduce  some  reflections  of
M.  de  Roziere,  which  he  makes  in  the  course  of  his  observations  on  the  engraved  representa-
tions of  mineralogical  specimens  which  are  given  in  the  '  Description  de  l'Egypte,'  and  which
offer  very  many  examples  of  the  Sinai  rocks.  "  The  rocks  of  Arabia,  those  of  Horeb  and
Sinai,  excite  another  sort  of  curiosity — a  curiosity  not  arising  from  their  employment  in  the
arts,  but  from  their  association  with  the  famous  deeds  of  the  sacred  history  and  the  sojourn  of
the  Israelites.  The  Greek  monks,  who  since  the  first  ages  of  Christianity  have  constantly
dwelt  in  this  region,  profess  to  have  preserved  the  traditional  knowledge  of  all  the  places  and
of  every  point  which  is  mentioned  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish  people ;  and  it  is  this  [alleged]
power  of  identification  which  has  excited  towards  this  country  the  veneration  of  the  Oriental
Christians,  and  the  fervour  of  pilgrimages.  The  traveller  of  every  sect,  of  every  communion,
visits,  even  to  this  day,  with  a  respectful  admiration,  the  spots  in  which  the  might  of  God  was
once  manifested  by  so  many  miracles.  These  monuments  are  doubtless  viewed  under  differing
impressions,  by  reason  of  the  diversities  of  religious  opinion ;  but  they  inspire  in  all  men  a
certain  interest,  which  makes  them  desire  to  possess  or  to  retain  a  clear  idea  not  only  of  their
forms  but  of  their  nature."  On  such  grounds  he  explains  and  vindicates  the  very  particular
attention  he  gives  to  this  region,  when  his  proper  subject  was  Egypt ;  and  on  similar  grounds,
and  with  greater  propriety,  we,  whose  proper  subject  is  Palestine,  explain  and  justify  the
attention  which  we  also  give  to  the  Sinai  mountains.

*  Biuckhardt,  272,  273,  347.     Buckingham's  '  Palestine,'  ii.  103.  b  Hasselquist,  126,  130.

c  Now  IVady  Modjeb.  d  Burckhardt,  374,  394.

Chap.  III.]  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY.  lxi

Having  viewed  the  mountains  of  the  extensive  region  which  our  inquiries  embrace  in  what
may  be  called  the  historical  direction,  from  north  to  south,  it  may  be  well  to  reverse  this  order
for  a  while ;  and  this  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  the  Sinai  mountains,  that  we  may  see  clearly,  as
at  both  ends,  the  connections  of  the  general  system  in  which  Palestine  is  involved.

The  mechanical  connection  of  the  Sinai  mountains,  as  the  culminating  mass  of  the  great
Lebanon  chain,  is  manifest ;  but,  although  the  mechanical  connection  of  these  mountains  with
those  of  Egypt,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  gulf,  is  broken  by  the  bed  of  the  Red  Sea,  the
physical  connection — the  connection  of  homogeneity — still  remains  most  evident,  and  requires  to
be  noticed  here,  though  not  prominently  adduced.

It  is,  then,  observed  that  all  the  mountains  of  the  principal  chain,  from  the  south-west  of  the
cataracts  of  the  Nile  to  the  north-east  of  the  deserts  of  Sinai,  are  primitive.  In  the  southern-
most part  they  belong  principally  to  the  granitic  formation ;  in  the  middle  part  to  the  schistose,
and  in  the  northern  to  the  porphyritic.  Between  the  two  last  we  find  numerous  rocks  pertain-
ing to  this  very  interesting  formation,  composed  essentially  of  feldspath,  in  confused  laminae,
and  of  a  large  quantity  of  amphibole  (or  hornblende),  without  quartz  or  mica.  This  is
very  improperly  called  syenite  by  the  German  geologists ;  for  it  is  absolutely  foreign  to  the
mountains  of  Syene  and  the  neighbourhood  (which  certainly  belong  to  the  granite  formation),
although  it  constitutes  the  principal  mountains  of  Arabia  Petraea,  and  particularly  of  Mount
Sinai,  and  all  the  neighbouring  summits.  For  this  reason  the  French  scientific  commissioners
thought  it  unadvisable  to  continue  to  apply  to  the  stone  of  these  mountains  the  name  {syenite')
which  should  properly  belong  to  the  granite  of  Syene,  but  chose  rather  to  modify  the  name
slightly,  to  bring  it  into  conformity  with  that  of  its  proper  country,  calling  it  Sinaite,  and  which
is  in  all  cases  to  be  understood  as  the  specific  name  of  the  principal  constituent  of  the  moun-
tains, which  travellers  unacquainted  with  terms  of  more  precise  distinction  describe  under  the
general  name  of  granite.

M.  de  Roziere  draws  a  line  which  divides  the  primitive  from  the  secondary  formation.  It
commences  in  the  mountains  to  the  west  of  Elephantine,  and  is  afterwards  found,  more  to  the
north,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Nile,  increasing  its  distance  from  that  river  as  it  proceeds
northward.  It  traverses,  in  a  very  oblique  direction,  the  Troglodytic  deserts,  and  is  subse-
quently met  with  following  the  same  course  in  Arabia  Petraea.  It  cuts  the  axis  of  the  Sinai
peninsula  at  about  three  short  days'  journey  to  the  north  of  Mount  Sinai,  beyond  the  valley  of
Feiran;  and  appears  to  be  prolonged,  in  the  same  direction,  to  join  the  mountains  of  Syria.
On  this  last  point  M.  de  Roziere  was  doubtful;  but  his  conjectural  statement  has  since  been
confirmed  by  the  actual  observations  of  Laborde,  which  demonstrate — as  shown  in  the
account  which  we  gave  in  the  preceding  chapter — that  the  primitive  formation  extends  into
the  mountains  of  Seir.

All  the  mountains  to  the  south  of  this  line  are  of  primitive  formation ;  while  all  to  the
north  of  it,  to  the  Mediterranean,  are  of  secondary  formation,  and  principally  calcareous,  with
the  exception  of  a  band,  of  varying  breadth,  composed  of  mountains  of  sandstone  and  pudding-
stone,  which  are  almost  always  found  interposed  between  the  primitive  and  secondary  forma-
tions. There  are,  indeed,  long  ridges  of  quartzose  pudding-stone  in  the  midst  of  the  cal-
careous region,a  and  calcareous  mountains  are  found  upon  the  borders  of  the  Red  Sea,  in  the
southernmost  of  the  divisions  to  which  this  statement  applies ;  but  these  and  other  exceptions
do  not  interfere  with  the  accuracy  of  the  general  definition.15

We  have  been  accustomed  to  conclude,  on  the  authority  of  Irby  and  Mangles,  that  the  first
traces,  however  faint,  of  ignigenous  rocks  were  to  be  met  with  on  the  southern  borders  of  the

a  Speaking  of  this  phenomenon  in  another  place,  M.  de  Roziere  remarks  that  it  is  difficult  to  render  a  reason  for  the  existence
of  mountains  of  pudding-stone  in  the  midst  of  a  region  entirely  calcareous.  The  causes  which  have  produced  these  masses  of  si-
liceous matter  are,  doubtless,  the  results  of  those  grand  and  later  catastrophes  which  have  left  multiplied  traces  over  all  the  globe,
and  the  existence  of  which  is  recognised  at  every  step  by  those  naturalists  who  have  observed  these  sorts  of  grounds.  As  to  the
causes,  the  manner  in  which  they  operated,  and  the  means  by  which  these  incongruous  masses  were  brought  to  the  situations  in
which  they  are  found,  we  have  little  but  a  large  number  of  doubtful  conjectures.  We  know  only  that  these  rocks  are  posterior  to
those  by  which  they  are  surrounded,  and  that  calcareous  beds,  now  destroyed,  have  furnished,  at  least,  a  part  of  the  silex  of  which
they  arc  composed.

*>  '  Description  de  l'Egypte,'  xx.  319-21.

lxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  III.

Dead  Sea,  although  they  are  not  found  elsewhere  till  we  approach  the  Gulf  of  Akaba.  These
valuable  travellers,  in  their  unpublished  book,  tell  us  that  towards  the  southern  extremity  of
the  lake,  the  low  plain  between  its  edge  and  the  foot  of  the  eastern  mountains  presents
innumerable  fragments  of  red  and  grey  granite ;  grey,  red,  and  black  porphyry ;  serpentine,  a
beautiful  black  basalt,  breccia,  and  other  kinds  of  stone  from  the  neighbouring  mountains.  On
the  other  hand,  Mr.  Russegger,  in  a  recent  communication  to  the  Geographical  Society,11
expressly  declares  that  he  sought  in  vain,  around  the  basin  of  the  Dead  Sea,  for  any  trace  of
volcanic  or  plutonic  rocks,  porphyry,  granite,  trachyte,  &c,  or,  indeed,  any  rock  at  all  resem-
bling them.  But,  as  it  does  not  appear  that  he  visited  the  southern  extremity  of  the  lake,  to
which  alone  the  statement  of  Irby  and  Mangles  refers,  we  consider  that  it  leaves  their  testi-
mony unimpeached,  while  it  serves  to  show  that  the  appearances  which  they  noticed  do  not
extend  to  the  northern  borders  of  the  lake.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  higher  or  central  region  of  Sinai  is  entirely  composed  of
ignigenous  or  plutonic  rock,  granite,  or,  more  precisely,  sinaite,  forming  the  principal  consti-
tuent of  the  higher  mountains.

The  prevailing  characteristic  of  this  rock  has  already  been  explained  to  consist  in  its  being
almost  entirely  composed  of  amphibole  and  feldspath  ;  and  the  object  of  the  present  chapter
does  not  require  us  to  enter  into  the  detail  of  minute  variations.  Those  who  seek  such
information  as  we  withhold,  may  find  it  abundantly  in  the  letter-press  explanations  of  the
mineralogical  plates  (xi.  to  xv.)  of  the  '  Description  de  l'Egypte.'  It  may,  however,  be
proper  to  introduce  a  few  particulars,  which  seem  to  us  the  most  remarkable  or  important.

In  one  of  the  mountains  which  enclose  a  small  oasis  in  the  interior  of  the  Sinai  peninsula,
between  the  valley  of  Feiran  and  the  desert  of  Nasb,  the  sinai'te  is  superposed  on  beds  of
melaphyre.b  Of  this  last-named  species  of  primitive  rock,  there  are  extensive  banks  at  about
three  hours'  march  to  the  north  of  Mount  Sinai.

In  another  part  of  the  mountains  about  this  desert  (which  seems  the  seat  of  many  noticeable
details)  the  banks  of  porphyry* and  sinai'te  are  surmounted  by  beds  of  ancient  transition  lime-
stone. The  most  remarkable  of  these  is  of  a  fine  lilac  colour,  very  compact,  of  great  hardness,
and  a  crystalline  texture.  It  contains  cavities,  generally  round  or  elliptical,  holding  a  white  pow-
der, which  appears  to  proceed  from  the  decomposition  of  small  shells,  though  on  this  point  our
author  does  not  feel  assured.  Among  the  primitive  mountains  which  border  on  this  same
desert  of  Nasb,  we  also  sometimes  observe  thick  and  perfectly  horizontal  beds  of  a  beautiful
violet  sinai'te,  found  reposing  on  banks  of  porphyry.  We  have  already,  in  the  preceding
chapter,  mentioned  the  immense  block  which  forms  the  summit  of  Mount  St.  Catherine.  It
is  composed  of  one  of  the  varieties  of  sinai'te,  and  is  distinguished  by  clear  colour  and  neat
crystallization  from  the  porphyritic  and  sinaitic  rocks  which  compose  the  principal  mass.
The  monks  who  dwell  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  are  thoroughly  persuaded  that  the  tables  of
the  law  which  God  delivered  to  Moses  were  composed  of  this  rock.  In  the  sinai'te  of  the
neighbouring  summit — that  of  Mount  Sinai — the  crystallization  of  the  feldspath  is  more  con-
fused, the  crystals  of  amphibole  are  smaller,  and  those  of  quartz  are  more  numerous,  but  also
smaller  than  in  the  other  :  mica,  of  which  there  are  some  traces  in  most  of  the  varieties,  is
wanting  in  both  of  these.c

Burckhardt  informs  us  (though  without  strict  correctness  in  the  comparison)  that  the
granite  of  this  peninsula  presents  the  same  numberless  varieties  as  that  above  the  cataract
of  the  Nile  and  near  Assouan ;  and  the  same  beautiful  specimens  of  red,  rose-coloured,  and
almost  purple  may  be  collected  here  as  in  that  part  of  Egypt.  The  transition  from  primitive
to  secondary  rocks,  partaking  of  the  nature  of  what  he  calls  griinstein  or  grauwacke,  or
hornstein  and  trap,  presents  also  an  endless  variety  in  every  part  of  the  peninsula.  Masses  of
black  trap,  much  resembling  basalt,  compose  several  insulated  peaks  and  rocks.     On  the

a  Reported  in  the  '  Athenaeum,'  April  27,  1839.

b  This  is  a  black  small-grained  diabase,  much  charged  with  amphibole.     It  is  strewn  with  crystals  of  grey  feldspath  of  different
sizes,  and  containing  small  irregular  masses  of  pyrites.
c  '  Description  de  l'Egypte,'  Xxi.  307—309,  311.

Chap.  Ill]  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY.  lxiii

shore,  the  granite  sand,  carried  down  from  the  higher  mountains,  has  been  formed  into
cement  by  the  action  of  the  water,  and,  mixed  with  fragments  of  the  other  rocks,  already  men-
tioned, has  become  a  very  beautiful  breccia.3

The  remarkably  polished  surface  which  the  sinai'te  in  this  peninsula  frequently  offers  has
been  attributed  to  the  action  of  minute  particles  of  quartz  sand  moved  over  it  by  the  winds
during  a  long  succession  of  ages.  The  alleged  cause  is  certainly  in  operation,  and  is  known
to  be  adequate  to  produce  the  observed  effect.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  enormous  granitic  masses  which  stand  isolated  in  the  valleys  of  the
upper  Sinai  have  been  observed  to  be  not  of  the  same  kind  with  any  of  the  beds  in  the  neigh-
bouring mountains,  from  which  they  might  be  supposed  to  have  been  detached.  They  are
composed  almost  entirely  of  feldspath  in  very  distinct  red  crystals,  intermixed  with  large
crystals  of  quartz,  with  the  slightest  possible  indications  of  micaceous  laminae.  One  of  the
most  remarkable  of  these  detached  masses  is  the  rock  said  to  have  been  that  struck  by  Moses
in  Rephidim.  [See  head  of  Chapter.]  The  mica  joined,  in  a  small  quantity,  to  feldspath  and
to  quartz,  gives  to  this  rock  a  place  among  the  true  granites.11  Its  very  abundant  feldspath  is
of  a  pale  rose  colour.  Other  particulars  respecting  the  rock  itself  are  reserved  for  another
page.

In  the  region  of  Sinai,  the  granite  appears  with  its  customary  companions,  under  various  cir-
cumstances of  association.  Greenstone  is  frequent.  The  traveller  from  the  mountain  of  Moses
to  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  advances  to  its  shore  through  a  valley  hemmed  in  by  a  chain  of  high  and
perpendicular  greenstone  rocks,  and  finds  that  this  stone  and  the  granite  reach  all  the  way
down  to  the  sandy  beach.  Towards  the  opposite  extremities  of  the  iElanitic  Gulf,  and,  in  both
instances,  at  nearly  the  same  height  above  the  sea  level,  the  greenstone  is  found  with  red
porphyry  and  granite.  Porphyry  is  conspicuous  in  other  parts  of  this  interesting  region.  At
Tabakat  very  beautiful  porphyry  is  seen  with  large  slabs  of  feldspath,  traversed  by  layers  of
white  and  rose-coloured  quartz.  Mountains  entirely  composed  of  porphyritic  diabase  are  met
with  about  a  day's  journey  to  the  north  of  Mount  Sinai.  The  crystals  of  feldspath,  which
appear  so  prominent  in  the  prevailing  porphyry,  are  very  rare  or  altogether  wanting  in  this.
The  prevailing  colour  of  this  mass  is  a  greyish  green,  which  sometimes  passes  into  a  dark
green.     Pyrites  are  disseminated  in  it,  sometimes  in  considerable  masses.

Epidote  forms  part  of  many  of  the  rocks  of  Arabia  Petrsea,  and  is  sometimes  united  with  a
feldspath  white  with  slight  streaks  of  red.  These  two  substances  are  frequently  associated  in
the  country  to  the  south  of  Mount  Sinai,  and  principally  in  the  environs  of  Ras  Mohammed,
which  forms  the  point  of  the  peninsula.

The  remarks  of  Burckhardt  upon  the  construction  and  succession  of  the  lower  ranges  of
primitive  mountains  form  a  very  instinctive  sequel  to  the  preceding  statement.  His  observa-
tions refer,  first,  to  the  mountains  which  enclose  Wady  Sal,  but  admit  of  a  more  extended
application.  "  On  the  top  I  found  the  rock  to  be  granite  :  somewhat  lower  down,  greenstone
and  porphyry  began  to  appear :  further  on,  granite  and  porphyry  cease  entirely ;  and  the  rock
consists  solely  of  greenstone,  which,  in  many  places,  takes  the  nature  of  slate.  Some  of  the
layers  of  porphyry  are  very  striking.  They  run  perpendicularly  from  the  very  summit  of  the
mountain  to  the  base,  in  a  band  of  about  twelve  feet  in  width,  and  projecting  somewhat  from
the  other  rocks  on  the  mountain's  side.  I  had  observed  similar  strata  in  Wady  Genne,  but
running  horizontally  along  the  whole  chain  of  mountains,  and  dividing  it,  as  it  were,  into  two
equal  parts.  The  porphyry  I  have  met  with  in  Sinai  is  usually  a  red  indurated  argillaceous
substance  :  in  some  specimens  it  had  the  appearance  of  red  feldspath.  In  the  argill  are  im-
bedded small  crystals  of  hornblende  or  of  mica,  and  thin  pieces  of  quartz  at  most  two  lines
square.  I  never  saw  any  large  fragments  of  quartz  in  it.  Its  universal  colour  is  red.  The
lower  mountains  of  Sinai  are  much  more  regularly  shaped  than  the  upper  ones  :  they  are  less
rugged,  and  have  no  insulated  peaks,  and  their  summits  fall  off  in  smooth  curves."

One  of  the  specimens  of  rock  from  Sinai,  which  make  the  most  beautiful  appearance  in  the

a  Burckhardt,  521,  572.  b  '  Description  de  l'Egypte,'  xxi.  312.

lxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  III.

plates  of  the  '  Description  de  l'Egypte,'  is  named,  by  M.  de  Roziere,  talcose  quartz ;  and
we  are  told  that  it  forms  very  extensive  beds  towards  the  middle  of  the  route  which  leads
from  Mount  Sinai  to  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula.  This  quartz  offers  some  slight  lamellar
appearances,  and  there  are  several  varieties  of  it.  Sometimes  feldspath  is  associated  with  the
quartz.  The  rocks  in  which  the  quartz  most  predominates  divide  themselves  into  cuneiform
fragments,  the  greenish  surfaces  of  which,  clouded  with  red  and  yellow,  are  ornamented  with
beautiful,  dark,  and  thickly-tufted  dendrites.  We  do  not  know  that  we  have  met  with  any
notice  of  simple  quartz,  as  comprehended  within  the  range  which  our  inquiry  embraces,
except  in  Hasselquist,  who  tells  us  that  all  the  stones  on  the  shore,  at  the  north-western
extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea,  were  quartz  of  different  colours  and  sizes,  of  which  those  pieces
nearest  the  water's  edge  were  encrusted  with  an  impure  salt.a

The  presence  or  absence  of  mica  has  frequently  been  mentioned  in  describing  the  compo-
sition of  the  granites  of  Sinai ;  but,  excepting  the  thin  strata  of  brilliantly  white  mica  which
occurs  in  the  quartz  layers  of  Om  Shomar,  as  mentioned  in  the  account  of  that  mountain
which  is  given  in  the  preceding  chapter,  we  find  no  notice  of  it,  otherwise  than  in  such  com-
position, within  the  whole  range  of  our  inquiry,  saving  that  Burckhardt  found  small  pieces  of
it  at  the  foot  of  the  calcareous  mountains  on  the  south  of  the  river  Arnon.b

Gneiss  is  found  abundantly  in  every  part  of  the  Sinai  peninsula  ;c  but  we  do  not  find  its
presence  indicated  by  travellers  in  any  other  part  of  the  region  over  which  our  inquiry
extends.

Sandstone,  which  sometimes  occurs  with  the  common  calcareous  stone,  which  is  the  more
general  constituent  of  the  mountains,  as  well  as  with  the  black  stone  of  the  Haouran,  is  very
frequently  met  with,  particularly  in  the  eastern  country,  and  more  especially  in  the  south.
Burckhardt  observes  that  the  whole  coast  of  Syria,  from  Tripoli  to  Beirout,  appears  to  be
formed  of  sand,  accumulated  by  the  prevailing  westerly  winds  and  hardened  into  rocks.  If
it  were  not  indispensable  to  adhere  to  ascertained  facts,  it  might  be  presumed  that  the  same
cause  produced  the  same  effect  in,  at  least,  some  portions  of  the  coast  to  the  south  of  Tripoli.
Sandstone  also  abounds  on  the  shores  and  among  the  lower  mountains  of  the  Sinai  peninsula.
To  the  north-east  of  the  higher  mountains  the  calcareous  and  sand  rocks  succeed  simulta-
neously to  granite  of  the  grey,  small-grained  species,  in  a  valley,  the  bottom  of  which  is
covered  with  deep  sand.  Farther  on  (E.N.E.),  travellers  pursue  their  way  between  sandstone
rocks,  which  present  their  smooth,  perpendicular  sides  to  the  road.  Some  of  them  are  red,
others  of  a  white  colour ;  the  ground  being  still  deeply  covered  with  sand.  In  these  rocks,
the  traces  of  torrents  are  observable  as  high  as  three  or  four  feet  above  the  present  level  of
the  plain.  In  a  barren  valley,  more  eastward,  sandstone  is  seen  again  to  alternate  with
granite;  and  another  valley  (Wady  Boszeyra),  farther  on,  is  wholly  enclosed  by  grey  granitic
rocks,  which  the  Arabs  hew  for  mill-stones.  Sandstone,  red  and  white,  forms  some  of  the
cliffs  on  the  Sinai  shore  of  the  Gulf  of  Akaba.d  In  like  manner,  sandstone  succeeds  to  granite
on  the  road  leading  from  the  upper  mountains  of  Sinai  to  the  Gulf  of  Suez,  on  the  way  to
the  town  of  that  name.  At  the  place  where  the  granite  finishes  and  the  sandstone  begins,
rock  salt  is  found  among  the  latter.  Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  a  sandstone  region
succeeds  to  the  primitive  region  of  the  Sinai  peninsula,  and  separates  it  from  the  calcareous
region  of  the  north  and  north-east.  Its  ridges  are  of  no  great  elevation ;  and  where  it  lines
the  great  valley  (of  Mokatteb),  on  the  road  to  Egypt,  and  other  transversal  valleys  of  the
peninsula,  it  presents  long  escarpments,  covered  with  a  prodigious  number  of  those  inscrip-
tions, in  different  languages  and  characters,  which  engaged  our  attention  at  the  end  of  the
preceding  chapter.  Sandstone  continues  to  be  very  common  northward  from  Sinai,  till  we
reach  the  Wady  el  Ahsa,  near  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  rock  of  that
valley  is  chiefly  composed  of  this  stone;  but  to  the  north  of  that  point  it  is  met  with  very
rarely .e     One  of  those  rare  instances  of  its  occurrence  in  the  mountains  south  of  the  Zerka,

a  Burckhardt,  498,  526,  537,  493;  '  Description  de  l'Egypte,'  xxi.  303,  316,  314;  Hasselquist,  284.

b  Burckhardt,  375.  c  Burckhardt,  487-  *  Burckhardt,  178,  494—497,  501,  619.

e  Burckhardt,  178,  401,  494—497,  501,  619,  620;  '  Description  de  l'Egypte,'  xxi.  307.

Chap.  III.]  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY.  lxv

in  connection  with  calcareous  rock  and  the  black  basaltic  stone  of  the  Haouran,  has  already
been  noticed ;  and  in  connection  with  the  latter  it  is  also  found  so  far  north  as  Jebel  Heish,
to  the  east  of  the  lake  Houle.a

In  the  present  chapter  we  have,  in  general,  enumerated  the  subjects  which  have  engaged  our
notice  in  that  order  which  the  natural  conditions  and  associations  of  the  region  examined
seemed  to  render  most  expedient,  without  paying  minute  regard  to,  or  altogether  overlooking,
the  principles  of  a  scientific  arrangement.  Thus  we  first  noticed  limestone,  as  the  principal  cha-
racteristic of  Syria,  and  then  proceeded  to  the  primitive  or  igneous  rocks  of  Sinai,  these  being
the  two  principal  subjects  of  attention ;  and  we  have  just  noticed  the  sandstone,  because  it  is
in  the  third  degree  important,  as  supplying  the  connecting  link  between  the  limestone  of  Syria
and  the  granites  of  Sinai.  In  a  stricter  arrangement,  the  black  and  apparently  igneous  rock,
which  figures  more  or  less  conspicuously  along  the  whole  eastern  margin  of  the  region
passing  under  our  review,  should  have  engaged  our  earlier  notice ;  but,  being  so  irregularly
connected  with  the  local  system,  it  seemed  better  to  reserve  it  for  this  place,  at  the  head,  as  it
were,  of  the  somewhat  miscellaneous  notices  which  will  occupy  the  remainder  of  this  chapter.
This  stone  occurs  so  far  north  as  El  Bara,  forty  miles  south  by  west  from  Aleppo,  and  extends,
as  we  have  seen,  to  the  peninsula  of  Sinai.  It  is  the  principal  constituent  of  the  hilly  and
rocky  districts  eastward  in  the  Haouran ;  and,  in  the  country  nearer  the  Jordan,  through  the
defined  extent,  it  occurs  in  masses,  generally  detached.  Burckhardt  calls  this  stone  by  various
names,  as  tufwacke,  basalt,  black  trap,  and  black  stone  of  the  Haouran.  Seetzen  uniformly
calls  it  "  basalt."  On  which  Burckhardt  observes,  that  he  rather  conceives  this  black  and
heavy  stone  to  belong  to  the  species  called  tufwacke  by  the  Germans.  He  adds  that  this  stone
gave  occasion  to  the  ancient  opinion  that  there  were  mountains  of  iron  on  the  east  side  of  the
Jordan ;  and  even  now  the  Arabs  believe  that  these  stones  consist  chiefly  of  iron ;  and  tra-
vellers are  often  asked  if  they  know  any  process  by  which  it  may  be  extracted.  It  is  to  be
regretted  that  in  his  various  geological  notices  he  does  not  adhere  to  one  denomination  for
this  stone ;  so  that  it  is  not  always  easy  to  distinguish  his  intimations.  On  the  upper  part  of
the  calcareous  mountains  which  border  the  river  Modjeb  (Arnon)  on  the  south,  large  blocks
of  it  are  found,  of  a  more  porous  texture  than  in  most  other  places.  The  mountain  which
borders,  on  the  south,  the  river  Zerka  (Jabbok),  is  composed  of  calcareous  stone,  with  layers
of  various  coloured  sandstone  and  large  blocks  of  this  same  black  stone.  The  more  northern
river  of  Mandhour  is  described  as  flowing  through  a  bed  of  tufwacke ;  but  whether  the  black
Haouran  stone  is  intended,  we  cannot  distinguish.  This  stone  is  sometimes  exhibited  in  alter-
nate layers  with  other  strata.  Thus  at  Szalkhat,  in  the  Haouran,  Burckhardt  notes,  "  the  hill
upon  which  the  castle  stands  consists  of  alternate  layers  of  the  common  black  tufwacke  of  the
country,  and  of  a  very  porous,  deep  red,  and  often  rose-coloured  pumice-stone.  In  some
caverns  formed  of  the  latter,  saltpetre  collects  in  great  quantities."13

In  the  district  west  of  the  lake  of  Gennesareth — or  on  the  route  from  Nazareth  to  Tooran,
and,  more  particularly,  between  Cana  and  the  latter  place — "  basaltic  phenomena "  were
noticed  by  Dr.  Clarke.  The  extremities  of  columns,  prismatically  formed,  penetrate  the
surface  of  the  soil,  and  render  the  journey  rough  and  unpleasant.  The  learned  traveller
adds,  "  These  marks  of  regular  or  of  irregular  crystallization  generally  denote  the  vicinity  of  a
bed  of  water  lying  beneath  their  level.  . . .  Nothing  is  more  frequent  in  the  vicinity  of  very
ancient  lakes,  in  the  bed  of  considerable  rivers,  or  by  the  borders  of  the  ocean.  Such  an
appearance,  therefore,  in  the  approach  to  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  is  only  a  parallel  to  similar
phenomena  exhibited  by  rocks  near  the  Lakes  of  Locarno  and  Bolsenna  in  Italy ;  by  those  of
the  Wenner  lake  in  Sweden ;  by  the  bed  of  the  Rhine,  near  Cologne,  in  Germany ;  by  the
valley  of  Ronca,  in  the  territory  of  Verona ;  by  the  Giant's  Causeway  of  the  Pont  du  Brindon
in  Venice ;  and  by  numerous  other  examples  in  the  same  country  ;  not  to  enumerate  instances
which  occur  over  all  the  islands  between  the  north  coast  of  Ireland  and  Iceland,  as  well  as  in
Spain,  Portugal,  Arabia,  and  India."0

*  Burckhardt,  314.  b  Burckhardt,  34,  375,  347,  273,  103;  Seetzen,  passim.  c  '  Travels,'  vol.  iv.  i>v>.  191—193.

VOL.   I.  k

lxvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  III.

On  the  other  side  of  the  river,  at  a  point  to  the  south-east  of  the  lake,  where  the  high
eastern  plain  terminates  at  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  the  cliffs  are  entirely  basaltic.  Ranges
of  black  basaltic  cliffs  appear  also  on  the  western  coast  of  the  ^Elanitic  Gulf,  in  some  of  which
the  sea  has  worked  creeks  appearing  like  so  many  little  lakes,  with  very  narrow  openings
towards  the  sea,  and  full  of  fish  and  shells.a

We  have  scarcely  found  any  notices  of  the  presence  of  slate,  excepting  about  the  Dead  Sea.
Hasselquist  mentions  that  slate  is  seen  in  the  bordering  mountains,  and  declares  it  to  be
asphalte  changed  into  slate ;  by  which  description  we  suppose  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  bitu-
minous shale.  He  also  notes  that  there  are  perpendicular  layers  of  a  lamellated  brown  clay
in  the  common  clay  of  the  banks,  and  asks,  "  Is  this  imperfect  slate?"  If  so,  as  seems
likely  enough,  there  are  two  formations  of  slate  going  on  in  this  neighbourhood — one  from
asphalte  and  the  other  from  clay.  The  same  traveller  also  observes  that  he  saw  "  schistus, — ■
slate  resembling  flint,  scattered  here  and  there  on  the  banks."  b  Some  slight  appearances  of
mica  slate,  in  the  primitive  region  of  Sinai,  have  already  been  indicated.

In  many  places  along  the  coast  of  Syria,  including  Palestine,  the  hard  calcareous  stone  is
surmounted  by  rocks  of  a  soft,  chalky  substance,  which  includes  a  great  variety  of  corals,  shells,
and  other  marine  exuviae.  Upon  the  Kesrouan  mountains,  above  Beirout,  there  is  another
curious  bed,  likewise  of  whitish  stone,  but  of  the  slate  kind,  every  flake  of  which  enfolds  a
great  number  and  variety  of  fishes.  These,  for  the  most  part,  lie  exceedingly  flat  and  com-
pressed, like  the  fossil  fern-plants ;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  they  are  so  well  preserved,  that  the
smallest  fibres  and  lineaments  of  their  fins,  scales,  and  other  specific  distinctions,  are  easily
distinguished.  Among  these  are  specimens  of  the  squilla,  which,  although  one  of  the  ten-
derest  of  the  crustaceous  family,  has  not  sustained  the  least  injury  from  pressure  or  friction.
Dr.  Shaw,  to  whom  we  owe  this  information,  adds,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  mountains  of
Carmel,  and  those  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  and  Bethlehem,  offer  the  like  chalky
strata.     In  the  chalky  beds  which  surround,  in  some  parts,  the  summit  of  Carmel,  are  found

a  great  many  hollow  stones,  lined  in  the  inside
with  a  variety  of  sparry  matter,  which,  from
some  distant  resemblance,  are  supposed  by  the
natives  to  be  petrified  olives,  melons,  peaches,
and  other  fruit.  These  are  commonly  bestowed
upon  pilgrims,  not  only  as  curiosities,  but  as
antidotes  against  several  distempers.  Those
which  bear  some  likeness  to  the  olive  have
been  honoured  with  the  title  of  lapidesjudaici,
and  superstitiously  regarded  as  a  sovereign
remedy  against  the  stone  and  gravel,  when  dis-
solved in  the  juice  of  lemons.  These  supposed
petrified  fruits  are,  however,  as  the  Doctor
states,  only  so  many  different  sizes  of  round,
hollow,  flint-stones,  beautified  within  by  a
variety  of  sparry  and  stalagmitical  knobs,
which  are  made  to  pass  for  as  many  seeds  and
kernels.0

That  very  marked  and  conspicuous  feature  of  the  coast,  the  White  Cape,d  below  Tyre,
derives  its  name  from  the  whiteness  which  it  owes  to  the  chalky  character  we  have  described.
Flints  are,  as  usual,  found  embedded  in  the  chalk.e

Inland,  there  are  manifestations  of  chalk  as  far  north  as  the  sources  of  the  Jordan.  Thus
the  mountain  of  Bostra  is  of  chalk,  over  the  surface  of  which  pieces  of  feldspath  of  various
colours  are  strewed.  But,  southward  from  this,  we  find  little  more  of  it  till  we  come  to  about
the  parallel  of  the  northern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea,  almost  twenty  miles  from  which,  east-

a  Burckhardt,  273,  507.  *>  Hasselquist,  284.  c  Shaw,  ii.  135—155.

*  The  Album  Promontorium  of  the  ancients,  now  called  Ras  el  Abaid  ;  both  names  of  the  same  signification.

e  Buckingham's  '  Palestine,'  i.  92.

[Lapides  Judaici.]

Chap.  III.]  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY.  lxvii

ward,  large  indications  of  chalky  strata  appear.  It  there  forms  the  soil  of  the  plain,  and,
proceeding  southward,  the  soil  is  alternately  chalky  and  flinty.  In  much  of  the  early  part  of
its  course  the  river  Arnon  has  worn  its  bed  through  the  chalky  rock.  Beyond  this  the
mountain  over  which  the  traveller  from  the  north  must  pass  before  he  reaches  Kerek,  is
entirely  composed  of  chalk  and  flint.  These  cretaceous  indications  occur  occasionally  in
the  further  progress  southward,  and  abound  in,  and  on  the  approach  to,  the  peninsula  of  Sinai.
In  one  place  Burckhardt  speaks  of  the  "  lower  chalk  mountains  all  around  the  peninsula,"  as
distinguished  from  the  high  primitive  mountains  of  the  interior,  in  such  a  manner  as  to
intimate  their  frequency  in  the  lower  country  and  on  the  borders  of  the  coast.  The  eastern
coast  of  that  peninsula,  on  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  consists  of  a  succession  of  bays,  separated  from
one  another  by  projecting  headlands  or  promontories.  Some  of  these  headlands  are  of  chalk.
Burckhardt  mentions  one  (Abou  Burko)  which  he  was  an  hour  in  doubling,  as  he  travelled
along  the  beach,  and  which  was  entirely  a  chalky  rock,  whose  base  was  washed  by  the  sea.
This  traveller  first  arrived  at  the  sea-side,  about  eighteen  miles  to  the  south  of  this  point,  and
there  he  observes  that  the  grunstein  and  granite  rocks  reach  all  the  way  down  to  the  sandy
beach;  but,  at  the  very  foot  of  the  mountain,  a  thin  layer  of  chalk  appears  just  above  the
ground.  On  approaching  this  part  of  the  coast  from  the  interior,  he  had  to  pass  through  a
valley  of  deep  sand  covered  with  blocks  of  chalk  rock.  Similar  indications  are  afforded  on
the  opposite  side  of  this  peninsula,  towards  the  Gulf  of  Suez,  as  well  as  in  the  level  soil  of  the
desert  which  occupies  its  northern  part.  Thus  the  hills  which  enclose  the  barren  valley  of
Wady  Amara,a  consist  of  chalk  and  silex  in  irregular  strata — the  silex  sometimes  quite  black,
at  other  times  taking  a  lustre  and  transparency  much  resembling  agate.  In  the  northward
desert,  the  present  name  of  which  (El  Tyh)  commemorates  the  "  wanderings"  of  the  children
of  Israel  therein,  low  hills  of  chalk  occur,  as  well  as  frequent  tracts  of  chalky  soil,  for  the
most  part  overspread  with  flints.

Indeed,  flints  abound  in  nearly  all  the  plains  and  valleys  through  which  the  Hebrew  host
marched  during  the  forty  years  which  passed  away,  from  the  time  that  they  departed  from
the  land  of  Egypt  until  they  encamped  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  before  crossing  the  river
Jordan.  The  preceding  notice  of  the  chalky  districts  also  serves  to  indicate  the  localities  of
flint ;  for  here,  of  course,  as  elsewhere,  chalk  and  flint  occur  in  constant  connection.  The
flinty  nodules  are,  however,  not  confined  to  the  chalky  tracts,  but  appear  also  in  sandy  plains
and  valleys.     The  presence  of  siliceous  strata  in  the  chalk  hills  of  Sinai  has  just  been  noticed.

We  have,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  mentioned  the  chains  of  hills  which  bound,  on  the
east  and  west,  the  great  valley  that  extends  from  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Gulf  of  Akaba.  The
western  hills  were  crossed  by  Burckhardt  at  a  point  about  thirty-five  miles  from  the  head  of
the  gulf,  where  he  observes, — the  chain  "  is  intersected  by  numerous  broad  wadys,  in  which
the  talh-tree  grows  :  the  rock  is  entirely  siliceous,  of  the  same  species  as  that  of  the  desert
which  extends  from  hence  to  Suez.  I  saw  some  large  pieces  of  flint  perfectly  oval,  three  to
four  feet  in  length,  and  about  a  foot  and  a  half  in  breadth,"  Passing  these  hills,  the
western  desert  presents  to  the  traveller's  view  its  immense  expanse  of  dreary  country,  covered
with  black  flints,  with  here  and  there  some  hilly  chains  rising  from  the  plain.b  It  is  a
remarkable  circumstance  that  the  presence  of  loose  flints  in  this  very  desert  is  noticed,  in-
cidentally, in  the  Scriptural  account  of  the  journey  of  Moses  from  the  land  of  Midian  to  Egypt.

"  Coal "  is  a  word  which  sometimes  occurs  in  our  translation  of  the  Bible ;  but  it  must
always  be  understood  to  denote  charcoal,  as  distinguished  from  raw  wood  for  fuel.  The
ancients,  including  the  Hebrews,  if  they  knew  the  combustible  properties  of  mineral  coal,
never  appear  to  have  thought  of  using  it  for  fuel ;  nor  do  the  Orientals  use  it  to  this  day.  In-
dications of  coal  are  exhibited  in  various  parts  of  the  Lebanon  mountains.  Here  and  there  a
narrow  seam  of  this  mineral  protrudes  through  the  superincumbent  strata  to  the  surface  ;  and
we  learn  from  Mr.  Elliot  that  the  enterprise  of  Mohammed  Ali  has  not  suffered  even  this
source  of  national  wealth  to  escape  his  notice.     At  Cornale,  eight  hours  east  from  Beirout,

a  Probably  the  Marah  of  the  Hebrew  pilgrimage,
b  Buckingham's  '  Arab  Tribes,'  98 ;  Burckhardt,  47,  502,  498,  495,  472,  449,  450,  444,  445.

k  2

lxviii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  III.

and  2500  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  where  the  coal-seams  are  three  feet  in  thickness,
Mr.  Brettel,  an  English  engineer,  is  employed,  under  his  orders,  in  excavating  the  coal,  which
is  of  a  good  quality,  and  mixed  with  iron  pyrites  in  large  quantities.  It  is  now  transported  to
the  sea-coast  on  mules ;  hut  to  obviate  the  expenses  of  this  mode  of  carriage  it  is  said  to  be
in  contemplation  to  make  a  railroad  to  convey  it  to  Beirout,  and  there  to  establish  a  depot.a

The  lately  preceding  notice  of  the  cretaeeous  formations  of  this  country  have  given  occasion  for
the  mention  of  various  petrifactions  which  they  contained.  We  now  proceed  to  register  such
facts,  relating  to  petrifactions,  as  have  not  thus  been  anticipated.  The  whole  subject  has  been
much  neglected  by  travellers,  or  attended  to  so  slightly,  that  even  those  who  do  make  some
reference  to  it,  rarely  state  to  what  species  the  organized  remains  belong.  We  have  little
to  add  respecting  the  petrified  matters  found  on  the  Mediterranean  coast.  Volney,  indeed,
mentions  a  quarry  of  schisteous  stone  in  the  Kesraoun,  at  a  little  distance  from  the  sea,  between
Batroun  and  Jebail — the  flakes  of  which  bear  the  impression  of  plants,  fishes,  shells,  and
especially  the  sea-onion.  They  seem,  as  we  have  already  intimated,  to  be  most  abundant  about
the  seaward  bases  of  the  Kesraoun  and  Lebanon  mountains,  and  particularly  in  places  to  the
north  of  Beirout.     At  the  base  of  that  range  of  Lebanon  mountains  to  the  north-east  of

Tripoli,  which  bears  the  name  of  Jebel  Turbul,
and  near  the  fountain  of  Bedoowee,  are  found
numerous  stones,  white  and  soft,  but  compact
and  moderately  heavy ;  and  when  these  are
opened  they  exhibit  the  impressions,  and  even
the  skeletons,  of  different  sorts  of  fishes.
D'Arvieux  opened  several  pieces,  and  in  some
he  found  most  perfect  and  delicate  skeletons  of
fishes,  exhibiting  the  head,  the  body,  the  tail,
the  fins,  entire  in  the  finest  parts ;  and  the
whole  easily  separable  from  the  substance  in
which  they  were  entombed ;  while  the  rest,
without  the  least  trace  of  the  bones,  offered  im-
pressions of  the  same  parts  as  clear  and  perfect
as  if  graven  with  the  burin.1'  Mr.  Elliot,  also,
procured  from  the  village  of  Hakil,  four  miles
to  the  north-east  of  Jebaile,  and  from  Boobda
two  hours  south-east  of  Beirout,  some  beautiful  spars  and  fossil  shell-fish,  with  a  box  full  of
fish  embedded  in  lime,  like  those  found  at  Lyme  Regis,  on  the  coast  of  Dorsetshire.0  Volney
says  that  he  never  saw,  or  heard  it  said,  that  there  were  petrified  shells  in  the  higher  regions
of  Lebanon :  nor  do  we  find  any  notice  of  such ;  unless  it  be  that  Burckhardt,  in  ascending
to  the  higher  summits,  found  a  small  petrified  shell,  and  discovered  a  similar  petrifaction  on
breaking  a  stone,  which  he  picked  up  on  the  very  summit,  before  descending  to  the  cedars.

We  are  also  informed  by  Volney  that  the  bed  of  the  torrent  at  Ascalon  is  lined  with  a  heavy
stone,  porous  and  salt,  which  contains  a  great  number  of  small  volutes  and  bivalves  of  the
Mediterranean.  Pococke  found  a  large  quantity  of  them  in  the  rocks  which  border  on  the
Dead  Sea.  The  quantity  of  shells  in  various  states  around  this  lake,  but  not  near  its  waters,
seems  indeed  to  be  very  remarkable.  Not  to  mention  the  myriads  of  small  unpetrified  shells
which  are  strewn  over  the  plain  at  its  northern  extremity,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  cal-
careous mountains  which  are  near  Kerek,  to  the  east  from  the  southern  extremity  of  the
Asphaltic  lake,  abound  in  petrified  shells ;  and  some  of  the  rocks  consist  entirely  of  small
shells.  Such  shells  are  also  found  in  great  numbers  in  the  ascent,  southward,  from  the  deep
valley  of  the  river  Arnon  (now  Modjeb)  to  the  high  plains.

In  the  far  southward  prolongation  of  the  same  line,  that  is,  on  the  Sinai  shore  of  the
yElanitic  Gulf,  shells  are  found  in  precisely  similar  combinations.     The  largest  plain  on  this

■  Elliot,  ii.257.  b  '  Memoires  du  Chev.  d'Arvieux,'  tome  ii.  p.  393.

c  Volney,  ii.  280;  D'Arvieux,  ii.  393;  Elliot,  ii.  256.

[Petrified  Fish,  embedded.]

Chap.  Ill]  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY.  lxix

coast  is  that  between  Sherm  and  Nakb,  towards  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula.  The  whole  of
this  plain  appears  to  be  alluvial ;  and  many  petrified  shells  are  found  embedded  in  the  chalky
and  calcareous  soil.  Alluvial  deposits,  in  a  state  more  fresh  and  recent,  are  found  in  an
opposite,  quarter  of  the  peninsula,  that  is,  in  the  desert  somewhat  to  the  north  by  east  of  the
present  head  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez.  Here  Burckhardt  notes,  "The  plain  was  covered  with  a
saline  crust,  and  we  crossed  a  tract  of  ground  about  five  minutes  in  breadth,  covered  with  such
a  quantity  of  small  white  shells  that  it  appeared  at  a  distance  like  a  strip  of  salt.  Shells  of
the  same  species  are  found  on  the  shores  of  the  lake  of  Tiberias.  Once,  probably,  the  sea
covered  the  whole  of  this  ground."  We  notice  this  here,  as  every  geological  or  other  indica-
tion of  alteration  at  the  head  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez,  is  of  high  importance  in  regard  to  the
passage  of  the  Hebrew  host  through  its  waters.1

There  are  many  traces  of  fossil  shells  on  the  eastern  borders  of  the  Red  Sea ;  and  they  are
nearly  all  such  as  still  exist  in  the  sea  itself.  Several  hours'  journey  to  the  south  of  Suez,
there  are  extensive  beds  composed  principally  of  the  large  shell  known  to  naturalists  by  the
name  of  cama  cigas.  The  beds  in  which  it  is  found  are  elevated  several  feet  above  the  edge
of  the  sea,  embedded  in  a  fine  calcareous  gravel,  the  particles  of  which  had  acquired  a  certain
degree  of  adhesion.  On  the  same  coast,  in  the  route  from  the  bay  of  Gharandel  to  the
thermal  fountains  of  Faroun,  and  at  the  height  of  150  feet  above  the  water-mark,  quantities  of
two  species  of  echinite  are  found  reposing  on  a  bed  of  compact  limestone,  with  which,  how-
ever, they  are  not  in  adhesion.  It  would  seem  that  they  were  formerly  retained  in  some
friable  bed  which  has  been  destroyed, — the  usual  cause  of  the  isolation  of  echinites.

The  promontory  which  detaches  itself  from  the  point  of  the  peninsula  to  form  the  port  of
Ras  Mohammed,  where  sometimes  the  vessels  anchor  which  come  from  Mocha  and  Yemen,  is
a  rock  formed  of  petrified  madrepores ;  some  parts  of  which  have,  however,  still  preserved
their  natural  state.  Even  in  the  parts  which  are  completely  petrified,  it  is  often  easy  to  dis-
tinguish the  tissue  of  the  madrepores  of  which  they  are  formed,  although  their  cells  are  filled
with  calcareous  infiltrations.

In  the  deserts  bordering  on  the  Isthmus  of  Suez,  and  particularly  in  those  parts  where  the
hills  are  of  friable  strata,  the  soil  is  principally  of  a  quartzose  gravel,  produced  by  their  detrition.
In  this  gravelly  soil,  which  envelopes  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  are  found  many  fragments,
and  even  entire  trunks,  of  petrified  trees,  of  upwards  of  ten  or  twelve,  feet  in  length.  It  is
readily  perceived  that  these  trees  belong  to  different  species ;  but  the  palm-tree  and  the  seyal,
or  desert  acacia,  alone  can  be  identified ;  all  the  others  offering,  in  their  petrified  state,  charac-
teristics too  equivocal  to  allow  their  species  to  be  determined.  The  perfect  preservation  and
the  size  of  the  petrified  trunks,  thus  found  enveloped  in  the  sands,  not  embedded  in  or  forming
part  of  any  rocks,  as  well  as  various  other  circumstances  enumerated  by  M.  de  Roziere,  appear
very  clearly  to  intimate  that  they  were  not  brought  from  any  distance,  but  that  they  pre-existed
and  were  entire  on  the  arrival  of  the  petrifying  influence  in  the  place  where  they  grew.  That
these  trees  were  produced  in  the  desert  posterior  to  the  formation  of  mountains  of  pudding-
stone,  is  not  in  itself  very  likely ;  for  in  these  countries,  where  vegetation  is  so  rare,  it  is  only
in  deep  valleys,  or  in  places  which  are  rendered,  by  the  disposition  of  the  surrounding  soil,
the  receptacles  of  water,  that  we  now  find  any  living  trees ;  and  no  doubt  it  has  been  the
same  in  all  ages.  With  respect  to  the  acacia,  it  should  be  observed  that  it  still  grows  in  the
deserts  adjoining  and  forming  the  isthmus  of  Suez,  where  petrified  specimens  of  its  wood
very  frequently  occur.  Among  the  other  petrified  specimens,  some  appear  to  be  those  of
the  aloe  and  sycamore ;  but  on  this  point,  and  from  the  causes  we  have  stated,  no  certainty
is  realised.b

Palestine  is  abundantly  supplied  with  salt  from  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  of  the  Medi-
terranean. Remembering  that  Moses  describes  the  borders  of  the  Dead  Sea  as  a  land  of  "  salt
and  burning,"  attention  is  naturally  turned  to  that  quarter  in  the  first  instance.  The  intense
saltness  of  the  water  of  that  lake  has  been  supposed  to  proceed  from  strata  or  masses  of  rock-
salt  within  its  basin.  This  conjecture,  as  far  as  regards  the  bottom  of  the  lake,  cannot  of
course  be  verified.     But  there  are  indications  on  the  shore  by  which  it  is  favoured.     Captains

a  Volney,  ii.  280 ;  Elliot,  ii.  479  ;  Burckhardt,  394,  530,  454.  b  '  Description  tic  l'Egypte,'  xxi.  298,  317,  318,  277,  193.

Ixx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  III.

Irby  and  Mangles  found  several  large  fragments  of  rock-salt  on  the  plain  southward  of  the
lake  ;  and  being  led  by  this  to  examine  the  hill  to  the  right  of  the  ravine  by  which  they  had
descended  to  the  shore,  they  found  it  to  be  composed  partly  of  salt,  and  partly  of  hardened
sand.  The  salt  was  seen  in  many  places  to  be  hanging  from  the  cliffs  in  clear  perpendicular
points,  resembling  icicles.  Strata  of  salt  of  considerable  thickness  were  observed,  mixed  with
very  little  sand,  and  generally  in  perpendicular  lines.  There  were  also  appearances  which
seemed  to  indicate  that,  during  the  rainy  season,  the  torrents  bring  down  immense  masses  of
the  mineral.  Altogether,  that  which  the  travellers  here  witnessed  seemed,  to  their  minds,  to
divest  of  improbability  the  account  of  Strabo,  who  states  that,  to  the  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,
there  were  towns  and  villages  built  entirely  of  salt.

Strata  of  rock-salt  are  also  found  southward,  in  the  desert  of  El  Tyh,  and,  still  more  to  the
south,  even  in  the  valleys  of  Sinai.  In  several  parts  of  the  road  through  the  former  the
traveller  observes  holes  out  of  which  rock-salt  has  been  dug ;  and  in  the  cliffs  which  bound
some  of  the  latter,  rock-salt  is  seen  among  the  sandstone.  In  this  last  neighbourhood  it  is
also  obtained  by  excavation.  It  is  white,  and  perfectly  clean :  "  They  showed  us  some,"  says
Lord  Lyndsay,  "  fit  for  the  table  of  an  emperor."  a

Salt  is  abundantly  deposited  by  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  water  encroaches  more
or  less  upon  the  shore  according  to  the  season,  and  dries  off  into  small  shallows  and  small
pools,  which  in  the  end  deposit  a  salt  as  fine  and  as  well  bleached  as  that  of  regular  salt-pans.
A  solid  saline  surface,  sometimes  several  inches  thick,  is  often  thus  formed.  As  much  of  this
salt  as  the  market  requires,  is  collected  and  taken  away  on  the  backs  of  asses.  Irby  and
Mangles  saw  several  persons  thus  employed.  The  briny  waters  of  this  lake  leave  a  saline
crust  on  whatever  they  receive  or  cover ;  the  drift  wood  is  so  impregnated  with  salt  that  it
cannot  be  made  to  burn;  the  loose  stones  on  the  shore  become  covered,  as  in  the  salt-pans,
with  a  calcareous  and  gypseous  incrustation ;  and  the  crumbly  clay  of  the  shore  is  also  deeply
impregnated  with  salt.b

Sea-salt  may  of  course  be  obtained,  by  the  proper  measures,  on  the  Mediterranean  coast ;
and  it  appears  that  this  source  of  supply  was  not  in  ancient  times  neglected.  The  rocks  in
several  places  along  the  shore  were  hollowed  into  a  great  number  of  troughs,  two  or  three
yards  long,  and  of  a  proportionate  breadth ;  intended  originally  for  as  many  salt-pans,  where,
by  continually  throwing  in  the  sea-water  to  evaporate,  a  large  quantity  of  salt  would  be  gra-
dually concreted.  In  most  cases  now,  however,  the  rocks,  notwithstanding  their  hardness,
have  in  the  course  of  ages  been  so  worn  down  by  the  waves,  that  the  bottoms  of  the  pits  are
scarcely  below  the  general  level.  Salt  is  also  spontaneously  deposited  in  proper  situations.
Some  of  the  people  with  Rauwolff  collected  near  Zib  (Achzib)  as  much  as  filled  a  large  sack,
while  others  were  employed  in  catching  fish  and  seeking  oysters.  As  the  salt-pans  mentioned
were  exclusively  found  on  the  coasts  of  Phoenicia  and  Syria,  and  not  on  those  of  the  proper
Jewish  territory,  we  may  perhaps  collect  that  the  Hebrews  were  sufficiently  supplied  with
salt  from  the  Dead  Sea.c  Q)

Saltpetre  is  produced  abundantly  in  the  eastern  country  of  the  Haouran,  particularly  in  and
about  the  Ledja.  It  is  found  in  the  caverns  of  those  rocks  of  "  black  tufwacke  "  which  have
been  so  often  mentioned  in  the  notices  of  this  part  of  the  country.  All  the  houses  of  the
Haouran — the  greater  part  of  which  are  of  ancient  date — are  built  with  this  stone;  and  in  the
earth  dug  up  among  their  ruins  saltpetre  is  abundantly  found.  The  saline  earth  from  which
it  is  extracted  is  also  found  in  the  open  plains,  to  the  productive  spots  in  which  the  people  are
guided  by  the  appearance  of  the  ground  in  the  morning  before  sunrise.  Wherever  the
surface  then  appears  the  most  wet  with  dew,  the  soil  is  found  to  be  impregnated  with  the
salt.d  It  will  be  recollected  that  captains  Irby  and  Mangles  also  found  lumps  of  nitre  on  the
south-east  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea.

The  existence  of  natron,  or  carbonate  of  soda,  is  not  confined  to  the  deserts  on  the  west  of
Egypt.  On  the  eastern  border  of  the  Red  Sea  some  traces  of  it  may  be  found  in  the  tepid
waters  of  the  Fountains  of  Moses,  and  in  the  hot  waters  of  Hammam  Faroun,  and  some

a  Burckhardt,  450,  G19;  Lord  Lyndsay,  i.  315.  *>  Irby  and  Mangles,  ii.;  Hasselquist,  284;  Seetren,  41.

c  Shaw,  ii.  153;  Rauwolff,  262.  d  Burckhardt,  9,  102,  114,  214.

Chap.  III.]  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY  lxxi

efflorescences  of  natron  may  be  found  at  Tor,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Sherm :  but  we  do  not
find  it  accumulated  in  any  considerable  quantities ;  but  only  such  traces  of  it  as  these,  in  places
where  the  calcareous  soil  has  been  impregnated  with  marine  salt.  The  interior  of  the  deserts,
in  the  northern  part  of  Sinai,  towards  Egypt  on  the  one  hand,  and  towards  Palestine  on  the  other,
offers  here  and  there,  after  rains,  slight  efflorescences  of  natron  intermixed  with  marine  salt.

In  declaring  to  the  Israelites  the  benefits  and  rich  endowments  of  that  Promised  Land  of
which  they  were  about  to  take  possession,  their  great  leader  informed  them  that  it  was  "  a
land  whose  stones  were  iron,  and  out  of  whose  hills  they  might  dig  copper."  a  And  that  such
proved  to  be  the  case  may  be  inferred  from  the  frequent  mention  of  these  metals  in  the
history  of  the  Jews,  and  the  abundance  in  which  they  appear  to  have  been  possessed.  But  in
the  later  condition  of  the  country,  in  which,  for  ages,  the  treasures  hid  in  the  earth  have  not
been  sought  after,  but  little  information  concerning  its  metals  can  be  expected.

Volney  assumed  the  existence  of  iron  in  Judea,  and  knew  that  it  abounded  in  Lebanon.  It
is  indeed,  he  says,  the  only  metal  which  is  found  abundantly  in  those  mountains.  The  moun-
tains of  Kesraoun  and  of  the  Druses  are  full  of  it ;  and,  every  summer,  some  mines,  which
were  simply  ochreous,  continued,  in  his  time,  to  be  worked  by  the  inhabitants.  Burckhardt
also  mentions  the  iron  of  Shouair  in  the  Kesrouan,  and  adds  the  curious  fact  that,  as  the
place  of  the  mines  affords  no  fuel,  the  iron  ore  is  carried,  on  the  backs  of  mules  and  asses,
one  day's  journey  and  a  half  to  the  smelting  furnaces  at  Nabae  el  Mouradj,  where  the  moun-
tains abound  in  oak.  There  is  no  doubt  that  iron-works  were  anciently  carried  on  in  this
quarter  very  much  in  the  same  fashion,  as  large  quantities  of  scoria  are  occasionally  dis-
covered at  a  distance  from  the  mines,  and  generally  near  forests  of  evergreen  oak,  the  wood
of  which  was  probably  used  for  smelting.  This  is,  probably,  more  from  ignorance  of  the  pre-
sence or  use  of  coal,  than  from  any  preference  of  wood,  although  it  is  now  well  known  that
the  ore  prepared  with  wood  is  superior  to  that  subjected  to  coal  fires,  because  the  metal  be-
comes partially  carbonated,  and  is  therefore  with  less  difficulty  converted  into  steel,  a  purer
carbonate  of  iron ;  and  that  it  is  from  this  use  of  wood  rather  than  coal  which  renders  the
Swedish  iron  so  much  more  valuable  than  any  other.  However,  the  recent  discovery  of  coal
in  Lebanon  may  be  expected  to  operate  importantly  on  the  production  of  iron  in  Lebanon,  if
Syria  remains  under  its  present  government ;  and  our  latest  information  (Elliot's)  acquaints
us  that  the  discovery  was  about  to  be  turned  to  account  by  the  erection  of  a  furnace  for
smelting  the  ore.

Mr.  Buckingham,  crossing  Lebanon  from  Tripoli  to  Baalbec,  went  over  a  mountain  called
Jebel  Ainneto,  which  is  composed  of  white  limestone  of  different  qualities,  and  exhibits,  in
parts,  streaks  or  layers  of  red,  as  if  coloured  by  the  oxide  of  iron,  or  some  other  metal.  In
the  valley  below  this  mountain  he  observed  several  masses  of  a  deep  brown  purplish  rock,
and  was  informed  that  this  was  the  stone  from  which  iron  was  procured,  and  that  there  was
a  mine  still  worked  a  few  hours'  journey  to  the  south.b

We  do  not  know  that  any  travellers  have  noticed  the  presence  of  iron  in  Palestine  west  of  the
Jordan ;  but  so  few  travellers  have  been  in  the  habit  of  attending  to  such  matters,  that  their
silence  concerning  this  or  any  other  mineralogical  product,  scarcely  supplies  even  a  negative
argument  against  its  existence.

Josephus  mentions  a  mountain  called  the  Iron  Mountain,  on  the  other  side  Jordan ;  and,
from  his  indication  of  locality,  it  appears  to  have  been  one  of  those  bounding  the  valley  of  the
Jordan  on  that  side,  somewhere  not  greatly  to  the  north  of  the  Dead  Sea.  In  a  correspond-
ing situation  Mr.  Buckingham  probably  found  this  mountain  and  the  cause  of  the  name  it
bore.  Crossing  the  Jordan  about  nine  miles  above  the  Dead  Sea,  and  then  journeying  in  a
north-east  direction,  the  first  range  of  hills  was  found  to  be  generally  of  white  limestone ;  but
the  second  had  a  mixture  of  many  other  kinds  of  rock ;  among  these  was  a  dark  red  stone,
which  broke  easily,  and  had  shining  metallic  particles  in  it,  like  those  of  iron  ore.c

a  Dent.  viii.  9.  b  Volney,  i.  281 ;  Burckhardt,  27 ;  Buckingham's  '  Arab  Tribes,'  468-9 ;  Elliot,  ii.  258.

c  *  Travels  in  Palestine,'  322.

lxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  III.

Iron  is  catalogued  among  the  metals  wrought,  long  before  the  Deluge,  by  Tubal-Cain ;  and
this  just  suffices  to  show  that  it  was  known  very  early.  But  in  practical  use,  copper  is  known
to  have  been  employed  much  earlier,  and  long  to  have  been  in  more  general  use,  even  for
purposes  (such  as  arms,  tools,  and  instruments)  to  which  no  one  thinks  of  applying  it  now.
The  priority  of  use  is  claimed  also  by  gold  and  silver, — metals  which,  with  copper,  are,  as
Robertson  observes,  "  found  in  their  perfect  state  in  the  clefts  of  rocks,  in  the  sides  of  moun-
tains, or  the  channels  of  rivers.  They  were  accordingly  first  known,  and  first  applied  to
use.  But  iron,  the  most  serviceable  of  all,  and  to  which  man  is  most  indebted,  is  never  dis-
covered in  its  perfect  form  ;  its  gross  and  stubborn  ore  must  feel  twice  the  force  of  fire,  and
go  through  two  laborious  processes,  before  it  becomes  fit  for  use.  Man  was  long  acquainted
with  the  other  metals  before  he  acquired  the  art  of  fabricating  iron,  or  attained  such  ingenuity
as  to  perfect  an  invention  to  which  he  is  indebted  for  those  instruments  wherewith  he  subdues
the  earth  and  commands  its  inhabitants."  a

An  inquiry  into  the  state  of  the  metallurgic  arts  among  the  Hebrews  belongs  to  another
place.  It  may  suffice  here  to  observe  that  besides  the  slight  intimation  respecting  Tubal-Cain,
which  we  have  already  mentioned,  there  is  no  mention  of  iron  in  the  Pentateuch  until  after  the
departure  of  the  Israelites  from  Egypt ;  but  Job,  whose  history  evidently  belongs  to  patriarchal
times,  speaks  of  iron  on  more  than  one  occasion,  alluding  to  it  as  "  dug  out  of  the  earth,"  and  as
proverbial  for  its  strength.  The  Egyptians  were  celebrated  for  their  skill  in  extracting  various
metallic  ores  from  the  mines  between  the  Nile  and  the  Red  Sea,  and  for  the  fabrication  of
metals :  and  there  is  evidence  that  the  Hebrews  picked  up  a  fair  degree  of  knowledge  of  the
latter  branch  of  the  art,  while  among  that  people ;  but  it  appears  to  us  that  it  was  long  after  they
became  a  nation  before  they  sought  for  metals  in  their  own  soil  or  were  able  to  extract  them
when  found.  They  seem  long  to  have  obtained  from  Egypt,  on  the  one  hand,  or  from
Phoenicia  on  the  other,  such  articles  of  metal  as  they  required  ready  made,  or  the  metal  for
making  them  in  a  state  fit  for  use.  It  is  remarkable  that  iron  is  not  once  mentioned  among
the  materials  employed  in  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle,  or  of  the  many  utensils  belonging
to  it  for  which  that  metal  may  seem  to  have  been  very  suitable.  And  although  David  laid
up  "  iron  in  abundance  "  for  the  service  of  the  temple  to  be  built  by  his  son,  the  account  of
the  actual  construction  does  not  inform  us  how  the  metal  was  employed.  When  the  Israelites
defeated  the  Midianites,  iron  occurs  among  the  spoil  obtained  by  the  conquerors,  and  is,  with
the  more  precious  metals,  directed  to  be  purified  (from  its  ceremonial  uncleanness)  by  being
passed  through  the  fire.  Upon  the  whole,  it  seems  doubtful  that  the  Hebrews  ever  worked
the  mines  of  their  own  country  to  any  important  extent,  if  at  all ;  and  although  iron  may,  in
later  times,  have  been  plentifully  in  use  among  them  as  compared  with  other  metals,  such
plenty  would  be  scarcity,  and  is  so  even  now  in  Western  Asia,  compared  with  the  abundance
in  which  this  metal  is  possessed  by  ourselves.

Of  copper  we  can  find  no  information.  Volney,b  indeed,  heard  a  vague  report  that  there
was  anciently  a  copper-mine  near  Aleppo,  but  which  must  long  since  have  been  abandoned.
This,  besides,  was  far  beyond  the  limits  of  Palestine.  The  ancient  application  of  this  metal
to  all  purposes  for  which  iron  is  now  employed  has  been  noticed  in  the  preceding  paragraphs ;
and  this  went  so  far,  that  even  tools  for  cutting  stone  were  made  with  this  metal  hardened  by
an  alloy  of  tin.c  But  the  ancient  uses  of  copper  is  a  subject  which  has  largely  engaged  our
attention  elsewhere ; d  and  what  we  may  further  have  to  say  respecting  it  does  not  belong  to
this  place.  We  shall,  therefore,  only  remark,  that  although  Moses  expressly  tells  of  the
existence  of  copper  (not  "  brass,"  which  is  a  factitious  metal)  in  the  Holy  Land,  the  metal
appears  to  have  been  principally  obtained  from  the  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians,  both  of  whom
had  it  abundantly — the  former  from  mines  and  the  latter  by  traffic.  The  Jews  were  certainly
not  a  people  to  take  the  trouble  of  seeking  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  for  that  which  they  could
obtain,  easily  and  cheaply,  in  exchange  for  the  produce  of  their  fields  and  flocks.  The
Phoenicians  were  particularly  noted  for  their  manufactures  in  this  metal,  as  appears  even  from

H  'America,'  book  iv.  125.  *>  'Travels,'  i.  281.  c  Wilkinson,  i.  241.

d  '  Pictorial  Bible,'  note  to  Exotl.  xxxi.  4.

Chap.  Ill]  GEOLOGY  AND  MINERALOGY.  lxxiii

the  Bible ;  and  Ezekiel  intimates  that,  at  least,  a  portion  of  their  supply  was  brought  from
the  neighbourhood  of  the  Black  Sea.

As  we  have  mentioned  the  use  of  tin  in  alloying  copper,  we  may  properly  add  that  although
tin  is  not  found  in  the  Holy  Land,  the  use  of  it  was  known  to  the  Hebrews  very  early ;  for
we  find  it  mentioned  among  the  spoils  which  they  won  from  the  Midianites  before  they
entered  the  Land  of  Promise.  From  what  source  it  came  at  this  early  date,  unless  from
India,  it  is  not  easy  to  discover ;  but  ultimately  our  own  islands  furnished  the  chief  supply
to  the  Phoenicians.  The  prophets  more  than  once  allude  to  its  use  in  alloying  more  precious
metals.

Lead  is  also  mentioned  on  the  occasion  to  which  we  have  just  adverted ;  but  it  had  pre-
viously been  mentioned  by  the  patriarch  Job  as  a  substance  on  which  writings  were  graven.
And  if  he  lived  in  the  land  of  Edom,  he  was  not  very  far  from  one  of  the  sources  from  which
this  metal  might  be  supplied;  for  lead  is  said  to  exist  at  a  place  called  Sheff,  near  Mount
Sinai.  Another  source  of  supply  is  indicated  in  the  recent  discovery,  by  Mr.  Burton,  of
ancient  lead-mines,  in  some  of  which  the  ore  has  been  exhausted  by  working,  in  the  moun-
tains between  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Nile.a  We  have  not  found  any  notice  of  this  metal  within
the  proper  limits  of  Palestine.

No  traveller  in  Palestine  makes  any  mention  of  gold,  except  Dr.  Clarke.  At  the  lake  of
Tiberias  he  takes  occasion  to  observe, — "  Native  gold  was  found  here  formerly.  We  noticed
an  appearance  of  the  kind,  but,  on  account  of  its  trivial  nature,  neglected  to  pay  proper  atten-
tion to  it,  notwithstanding  the  hints  given  by  more  than  one  writer  upon  the  subject."b  We
believe,  however,  that,  for  every  practical  purpose,  it  may  be  said  that  Palestine  has  no  gold.
It  is  always  spoken  of  by  the  Jewish  writers  as  a  foreign  product.  As  gold  was  very  common,
relatively,  in  Egypt,  where  extensive  mines  of  it  were,  worked  at  a  very  early  date,  much  of
that  in  the  hands  of  the  Hebrews  was  probably  obtained  from  thence.  In  fact,  the  first  gold
of  which  we  read,  historically,  was  obtained  from  the  Egyptians.  But  the  supplies  obtainable
from  this  source  became,  ultimately,  inadequate  to  the  demand ;  and  Solomon  and  some  of
his  successors  obtained  larger  quantities  from  southernmost  Arabia,  the  east  of  Africa,  and
the  coasts  of  other  countries  bordering  the  Indian  Ocean  and  Red  Sea.

The  Scriptures  do  not  mention  that  Palestine  afforded  any  silver ;  yet  some  traces  of  that
metal  appear  to  have  been  found.  When  Volney  was  among  the  Druses,  it  was  mentioned
to  him  that  an  ore  affording  silver  and  lead  had  been  discovered  on  the  declivity  of  a  hill  in
Lebanon;  but  as  such  a  discovery  would  have  ruined  the  whole  district  by  attracting  the
attention  of  the  Turks,  much  haste  was  made  to  destroy  all  appearance  of  its  existence.0  It
is  observable  that  of  the  four  principal  metals — gold,  silver,  iron,  and  copper — silver  is  by
much  the  latest  which  is  mentioned.  It  is  not  noticed  in  Genesis  during  the  period  before
the  Deluge ;  and,  after  that  event,  it  does  not  occur  in  the  account  of  Abraham's  visit  to
Egypt,  nor  until  the  same  patriarch's  purchase  of  a  burial-ground  for  his  family,  for  which
he  paid  in  silver.  Thus,  although  so  comparatively  late  to  be  noticed,  it  must  then  long  have
been  known  and  in  use,  it  having  already  become  a  medium  of  exchange  and  a  standard  by
which  value  was  estimated.  Whence  the  Jews  got  their  principal  supplies  of  silver  is
not  very  clear,  unless  from  the  Phoenicians.  This  metal  might  be  obtained  in  some  quan-
tities, one  would  think,  from  the  lead  mines  of  Egypt,  if  there  were  no  proper  mines  of  silver;
and  the  Hebrews  appear  to  have  been  in  possession  of  a  great  deal  of  it  when  they  were  in
the  desert  after  leaving  that  country.  Yet  it  is  thought  that  silver  was  scarce  in  that  country
— Belzoni  says,  scarcer  than  gold — and  the  rarity  of  the  colour  of  silver  in  the  paintings  of
utensils  and  ornaments,  and  of  the  actual  metal  in  the  numerous  articles  which  have  been
found,  affords  much  sanction  to  this  conclusion.

The  neighbourhood  of  Hasbeya,  near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,  is  noted  for  its  mines  of
asphaltum.  Burckhardt  was  told  by  a  priest  that  in  this  same  neighbourhood  a  metal  was
found,  of  which  no  one  knew  the  name  or  made  any  use.     Accordingly,  on  digging  about,

a  '  Egyptian  Antiquities,'  ii.  327;  '  Library  of  Entertaining  Knowledge.'
b  Travels,  iv.  224;  he  cites  Hegesippus  de  Excid.  Urb.  Hiero.  lib.  iii.  c.  26,  &c.  c  Volney,  i.  281.

VOL.    I.  1

lxxi

IV

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  III.

the  traveller  found  several  small  pieces  of  a  metallic  substance,  which  he  took  to  be  a  native
amalgam  of  mercury.  According  to  the  description  given  him,  cinnabar  is  also  found  there ;
but,  after  digging  for  an  hour,  no  specimens  of  it  were  found. a

It  is  not  in  the  nature  of  things  that  we  should  have  any  information  concerning  precious
stones  found  in  Palestine.  The  treasures  of  the  earth  are  not  now  in  that  unhappy  country
sought  after  by  any ;  so  much  otherwise,  indeed,  that  any  trace  of  their  existence,  which  is
incidentally  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  inhabitants,  is  st\idiously  obliterated  or  concealed.
If  any  of  the  more  precious  stones  are  found,  it  must  often  happen  that  they  are  not  heeded,
or  their  value  recognised,  in  the  natural  state,  by  the  finder.  And,  from  their  general  pro-
ceeding in  such  matters,  we  know  that  any  one  who  might  find  a  precious  jewel,  the  value  of
which  he  knew,  would  be  most  careful  to  conceal  the  fortune  which  had  befallen  him,  lest  its
disclosure  should  bring  utter  ruin  upon  himself  and  his  house.  In  this  state  of  things  no  one
will  expect  to  obtain  information  concerning  precious  stones  found  in  Palestine.  Almost
every  kind  of  precious  stone  is  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures,  although  there  is  no  passage
which  intimates  that  they  were  of  native  produce.  But  from  the  mineralogical  character  of
the  country,  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  that  it  should  afford  such  stones  as  the
topaz,  the  emerald,  the  crysoberyl,  rock  crystals,  and  some  of  the  finer  jaspers.  Pliny
mentions  a  species  of  amethyst  which  was  found  southward  in  Paran,  whence  it  took  the  name
of  Paranites.b

a  Syriu,  33.

b  Nat.  Hist.,  lib.  xxxvii.  c.  9.

SUPPLEMENTARY    NOTE.

(')  Saltpetre  in  Old  Houses,  p.  lxx. —
In  one  of  the  notes  of  the  '  Pictorial  Bible,'
(Lev.  xiv.  34)  it  has  been  supposed  that  the
"  house-leprosy,''  concerning  which  various
minute  regulations  were  made  by  Moses,  con-
sisted in  a  deposit  of  saltpetre  upon  the  walls.
It  may,  perhaps,  be  taken  as  an  interesting  cor-
roboration of  this  view,  that  the  houses  beyond
Jordan,  where  the  law  on  this  subject  was
delivered,  were,  from  the  character  of  the  soil
on  which  they  stood,  or  from  the  nature  of  the
stone  with  which  they  were  built,  particularly
liable  to  this  visitation.  Assuming  the  ex-
planation in  the  '  Pictorial  Bible'  to  be  correct,
it  seems  most  interesting,  at  this  distance  of
time,  to  find  in  the  actual  state  of  the  habitations
of  this  region,  a  satisfactory  and  unexpected
reason  for  so  peculiar  a  set  of  minute  regula-
tions.

Saltpetre  for  use  is  collected  as  well  from
the  old  houses  as  from  the  other  sources
indicated  in  the  text.  Burckhardt's  account
is  this  :— "  The  earth  in  which  the  saltpetre

is  found  is  collected  in  great  quantities  in  the
ruined  houses,  and  thrown  into  large  wooden
vessels  perforated  with  small  holes  on  one  side
near  the  bottom.  Water  is  then  poured  in,
which  drains  through  the  holes  into  a  lower
vessel,  from  whence  it  is  taken  and  poured  into
large  copper  kettles :  after  boiling  in  these  for
twenty-four  hours  it  is  left  in  the  open  air,
when  the  sides  of  the  vessels  become  covered
with  crystals,  which  are  afterwards  washed  to
free  them  from  all  impurities."  It  appears
that,  by  this  process,  100  pounds  of  the  saline
earth  yield  one  and  a  half  of  saltpetre.  The
production  is  so  abundant,  that  one  person
engaged  in  the  manufactures  informed  Burck-
hardt  that  he  alone,  on  his  own  account,  sent
100  cwt.  of  saltpetre  to  Damascus  every  year.
From  this  and  the  other  sources  of  supply  in
the  same  districts,  all  Syria  is  furnished  with
the  article.  At  no  greater  distance  than  the
lake  of  Tiberias,  our  traveller  saw  it  sold  at
double  the  price  for  which  it  might  be  obtained
on  the  spot.

CHAPTER  IV.

VOLCANIC  INDICATIONS  AND  EARTHQUAKES.

[Hot-Springs  and  Ruined  Bath  near  the  Hieromax.]

In  the  country  which  we  are  now  describing,  the  traces  of  volcanic  action  are  abundant;  but
are  nearly  confined  to  the  basin  and  enclosing  hills  of  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes.  "  The  bitu-
minous and  sulphureous  sources  of  the  Lake  Asphaltites,"  says  Volney,  "  the  lava,  the  pumice-
stones  thrown  upon  its  banks,  and  the  hot-baths  of  Tiberias,  demonstrate  that  the  valley  has
been  subject  to  volcanic  eruptions,  and  the  seat  of  a  subterraneous  fire  which  is  not  yet  ex-
tinguished. Clouds  of  smoke  are  often  observed  to  issue  from  the  lake,  and  new  crevices  to
be  formed  upon  its  shore."  The  same  writer  elsewhere  says  that  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  as
viewed  from  Mount  Tabor,  looks  as  if  enclosed  in  the  crater  of  a  volcano,  and  other  travellers
allow  the  fitness  of  this  comparison.  (])

The  hot-springs  thus  alluded  to,  as  affording  evidence  of  still  existing  means  which  it  pleased
God  in  former  times  to  employ  in  producing  effects  which  are  still  very  apparent,  are  found
on  the  western  shore  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  to  the  north  of  the  town  which  bears  the  same
name.  The  most  important  of  them  rises  at  the  base  of  a  mountain  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile
from  the  town,  and  a  pistol-shot  distant  from  the  margin  of  the  lake.  Hasselquist  describes
the  stream  as  equal  in  diameter  to  a  man's  arm,  where  it  issues  from  the  mountain.  "  The
water  is  so  hot,"  he  continues,  "that  the  hand  may  be  put  into  it  without  scalding,  but  it
cannot  be  kept  there  long ;  consequently  it  is  not  boiling  hot,  but  the  next  degree  to  it.  It
has  a  strong  sulphureous  smell.     It  tastes  bitter,  and  somewhat  like  common  salt.     The

1  2

Ixxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  IV.

sediment  deposited  by  the  water  is  black,  as  thick  as  paste,  smells  strong  as  sulphur,  and  is
covered  with  two  skins  or  cuticles,  of  which  that  beneath  is  of  a  fine  dark  green  colour,  and
the  uppermost  of  a  light  rusty  colour ;  at  the  mouth,  where  the  water  formed  little  cascades
over  the  stones,  the  first-mentioned  cuticle  alone  was  found,  and  so  much  resembled  a  con-
ferva, that  one  might  easily  have  taken  this,  which  really  belongs  to  the  mineral  kingdom,
for  a  vegetable  production ;  but  nearer  the  river,  where  the  water  stood  still,  one  might  see
both  skins,  the  yellow  uppermost,  and  under  it  the  green."  According  to  Robinson,  the  water
runs  from  the  bath  in  a  strong  sulphureous  stream  into  the  lake,  leaving  a  yellow  incrustation
upon  the  stones  over  which  it  passes.

The  spring  which  we  have  described  is  not  the  only  one  of  the  kind  in  this  neighbourhood.
There  are  several  others,  all  rising  near  to  the  edge  of  the  lake,  and  all  equally  hot,  finely
transparent,  and  slightly  sulphureous,  resembling  extremely  the  spring  already  described.  All
these  are  in  the  same  neighbourhood,  which  from  them  takes  the  name  of  El  Hamam,  the
generic  name  for  baths,  corresponding,  in  sound  and  signification,  to  that  of  Emmaus,  which
it  anciently  bore.

Mr.  Buckingham  discovered  three  other  tepid  baths,  considerably  to  the  north  of  these,
that  is,  about  a  league  distant  from  Tiberias.  He  here  found  three  ancient  cisterns,  open,
circular,  eighty  paces  in  circumference,  and  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet  deep.  They  are  about
a  hundred  yards  from  each  other,  ranging  along  the  beach  of  the  lake,  and  each  being  sup-
plied by  an  aqueduct  from  its  own  separate  spring.  The  water  in  all  of  them  was  beautifully
transparent,  of  a  slightly  sulphureous  taste,  and  of  a  light  green  colour,  as  at  the  bath  near
Om  Keis ;  but  the  heat  of  the  streams  at  this  place  was  scarcely  greater  than  that  of  the
atmosphere,  as  the  thermometer  in  the  air  stood  at  84°,  and  only  rose  to  86°  when  immersed
in  the  water.

Continuing  to  journey  northward,  along  the  edge  of  the  lake,  Mr.  Buckingham  found,  at  a
place  which  he  calls  Tahhbahh  (probably  the  Ain  Tabegha  of  Burckhardt),  at  the  distance  of
nine  miles  from  Tiberias,  and  three  from  the  baths  just  mentioned,  several  other  hot  springs,
resembling  those  at  Om  Keis,  but  still  more  copious.  (2)  Around  them  are  remains  of  four
large  baths,  each  supplied  by  its  separate  spring,  and  each  having  an  aqueduct  for  carrying  its
superfluous  waters  into  the  lake,  from  which  they  are  distant  about  three  hundred  yards.

The  hot-springs  at  Om  Keis,  to  which  comparative  allusions  have  here  been  made,  belong
also  to  the  basin  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  in  an  opposite  quarter  to  those  already  described,
being  about  three  miles  east  by  south  from  its  southern  extremity,  and  on  the  northern  bank
of  the  river  Jarmuth,a  Om  Keis  being  opposite  to  it,  to  the  south  of  the  same  river.  The
springs  at  this  spot,  and  the  other  indications  which  it  offers,  may  be  considered  as  completing
a  chain  of  volcanic  exhibitions  around  the  lake  of  Tiberias.  Crossing  the  river  at  this  place,
Mr.  Buckingham  found  a  black  soil  with  some  little  cultivation ;  and  a  few  yards  up  from
the  stream,  on  the  north-western  side,  came  to  the  ruins  of  a  Roman  building  enveloped  in
the  steam  of  the  springs  on  which  it  stood.  On  approaching  nearer,  this  edifice  was  found
to  be  an  extensive  and  complete  ancient  bath  in  tolerable  preservation.  He  proceeds : — "  The
springs  which  rose  here  presented  to  us  a  deep  and  capacious  basin  of  beautifully  transparent
water,  of  the  colour  of  those  precious  stones  called  aqua-marines,  and  more  purely  crystal-like
than  any  fountain  I  had  ever  beheld.  It  rose  in  bubbles  from  the  bottom;  but  though  deeper
than  the  height  of  a  man,  a  pin  might  have  been  distinguished  at  the  bottom,  or  the  inscrip-
tion of  a  medal  read,  so  unusually  clear  was  the  whole  mass.  The.  odour  emitted  in  its
steam  was  highly  sulphurous,  but  its  taste  was  considerably  less  so.  Its  heat  at  the  fountain-
head  was  such  as  to  render  it  painful  to  the  hand,  if  immersed  beyond  a  few  seconds ;  but  a
fact,  for  which  we  could  not  account,  was,  that  at  a  few  yards  distant  from  its  source  it  was
sensibly  hotter.  From  the  fine  transparent  green  of  its  central  and  deepest  parts,  the  shade
grew  lighter  as  it  approached  the  edges ;  and  around  the  immediate  rim  of  its  natural  basin,
as  well  as  on  a  little  cataract  formed  by  fallen  masses  of  the  ruined  bath,  the  water  had
deposited  a  coating  of  the  purest  white,  which  gave  an  additional  beauty  to  the  appearance  of

8  Jarmuth,  Hieromax,  and  Slieirat  el  Mandhnur  are  the  Jewish,  classical,  and  modern  names  of  the  same  river.

Chap.  IV]  VOLCANIC  INDICATIONS  AND  EARTHQUAKES.  lxxvii

the  whole.  The  quantity  of  the  water  and  the  force,  of  its  stream  were  sufficient  to  turn  the
largest  mill;  and  it  made  a  sensible  addition  to  the  waters  of  the  Hieromax,  where  it  joined
that  river  only  a  few  yards  below."  a

It  appears  from  this  traveller's  further  account,  that  by  gradual  immersion  the  heat  of  the
water  can  be  borne.  Though  the  Roman  edifice  is  a  ruin,  and  no  modern  convenience  supplies
its  place,  the  healing  virtues  of  the  spring  are  held  in  high  reputation  among  the  Arabs ;  and
those  who  have  sought  benefit  from  its  waters  rarely  depart  without  leaving  in  front  of  the
southern  wall  some  humble  votive  offering,  in  the  shape  of  hair,  nails,  teeth,  and  old  rags
of  every  kind  and  colour.  The  day  following,  the  same  traveller  crossed  the  river  at  a
lower  point,  and  observed  here  that  the  dark  masses  of  rock,  over  which  it  wound  its  course,
resembled  a  stream  of  cooled  lava,  when  contrasted  with  the  lighter  soil  by  which  it
was  edged  on  both  sides.  The  stones  of  its  bed  here  were  equally  porous  with  those  seen
above;  the  ground  also  showed  patches  of  sulphur  in  many  places,  and  "we  were  of
opinion,"  continues  Mr.  Buckingham,  "  that  the  hot  springs  we  had  visited  yesterday,  the
lakes  of  Ceesarea  and  Tiberias,  the  stone  already  described,  the  sulphureous  and  infertile
nature  of  the  plain  of  Jericho  in  many  parts,  and  the  whole  phenomena  observed  of  the  Dead
Sea,  were  sufficient  indications  of  a  volcanic  effect,  perhaps  on  the  whole  range  of  the  long
valley,  from  near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan  to  beyond  the  point  of  its  issue  in  the  great
asphaltic  lake."b

In  a  district  the  volcanic  character  of  which  is  indicated  by  such  hot-springs  as  those
which  we  have  described,  we  may  expect  similar  manifestations  in  the  mountains  among  or
near  which  they  occur.  Such  are  accordingly  afforded.  Speaking  of  the  mountain  at  whose
base  the  only  hot  spring  which  he  knew — that  nearest  to  Tiberias — rises,  Hasselquist  says
that  it  consists  of  "  a  black  and  brittle  sulphureous  stone,  which  is  only  to  be  found  in  large
masses  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tiberias ;  but  occurs  in  loose  stones  also  on  the  coasts  of  the
Dead  Sea,  as  well  as  here  at  the  Lake  Gennesareth."  Elsewhere  he  says  that  the  same  stone  of
which  the  Tiberian  mountains  consist  begins  in  the  plain  of  Esdraelon.  This  stone  is  doubt-
less the  same  which  Buckingham  mentions  in  describing  the  hot  springs  near  Om  Keis,  and
that  in  such  a  manner  as,  in  connection  with  Burckhardt's  intimations,  abundantly  proves  that
it  exists  around  the  lake,  and  in  the  eastern  country,  far  more  extensively  than  Hasselquist
could  know.  After  mentioning  the  ruins  of  the  Roman  bath  at  the  Hieromax,  Mr.  Bucking-
ham notices,  that  "the  whole  of  the  edifice  was  constructed  of  the  black  stone  of  which  we  had
lately  seen  so  much,  and  which  appeared  to  us  to  be  volcanic ;  and  we  could  now  perceive  that
the  cliffs  above,  through  which  the  Hieromax  makes  its  way,  as  well  as  on  the  upper  part  of
the  opposite  hills,  this  stone  formed  a  deep  layer  on  a  basis  of  white  stone,  almost  like  chalk.
The  whole  bed  of  the  river  was  one  singular  mixture  of  these  black  rocks,  worn  smooth  and
round  by  the  passage  of  the  water,  but  still  as  porous  as  pumice-stone,  and  equal  masses  of  the
white  stone,  which  was  nearly  as  hard,  but  of  smoother  surface."  He  subsequently  tells  us
that  he  met  with  the  same  "black  porous  stone"  in  the  plain  approaching  Tiberias  from
Nazareth,  thus  unintentionally  enabling  us  to  identify  it  with  that  which  is  the  subject  of
Hasselquist's  observation. c

The  porous  stone  so  much  mentioned  in  the  preceding  statement  is  distinctly  called  lava  by
Maddox,  as  it  is  also  by  Mr.  Caiman,  in  his  account  of  the  earthquake  of  1837 ;  and  the
testimony  of  the  latter,  while  it  is  entitled  to  particular  respect,  as  that  of  an  eminently  pious
man  and  a  missionary,  evinces  more  clearly  than  any  other  single  statement,  the  volcanic  cha-
racter of  this  region.  It  was  here  that  the  earthquake  just  mentioned  exhibited  its  utmost
violence  ;  and  Mr.  Caiman,  in  his  account  of  that  awful  visitation,  is  led  thus  to  describe  the
natural  characteristics  which  the  country  previously  exhibited  : —

"  It  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  give  some  description  of  the  appearance  of  the  country
which  has  suffered  most,  namely,  about  Gish,  Safet,  Tabereah,  and  Lubia.  All  these  neigh-
bourhoods abound  with  lava.   With  the  exception  of  Safet,  the  buildings  in  all  are  composed  of

a  •  Travels  in  Palestine,'  ii.  208—301,  334,  346.  »>  ■  Travels  in  Palestine,'  ii.  307.

c  Hasselquist,  234, 15/  ;  Buckingham's  '  Palestine,'  ii.  298,  323.

lxxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  IV

that  material.  Two  places  bear  every  mark  of  extinguished  volcanoes.  One  is  situated  in  the
elevated  plain  half-way  between  Gish  and  Safet.  At  this  season  of  the  year  its  appearance  is
that  of  a  small  lake,  being  about  a  mile  in  diameter,  perfectly  circular,  and  filled  with  water,
having  round  its  edges  an  accumulation  of  lava  to  the  height  of  many  feet.  The  plain  is
covered  with  the  same  stones ;  they  gradually  diminish  as  one  approaches  Safet,  and  are  no
longer  seen  from  that  neighbourhood  till  near  the  lake  of  Tiberias,  two  hours  to  the  south  of
the  former  place.  Here  again  the  mountains,  which  evidently  once  formed  the  boundary  of
the  lake,  are  covered  with  lava,  or  rather  in  some  cases  composed  of  it.  There  is  indeed  a
fertile  plain,  from  one  to  two  hours  in  width,  intervening  between  these  mountains  and  the
lake  ;  but  this  is  evidently  alluvial,  and  the  lava  accordingly  makes  its  appearance  in  the  bed
of  the  lake  itself."

Pursuing  our  way  southward,  along  the  course  of  the  Jordan,  we  do  not  meet  with  any
marked  volcanic  indications  till  we  arrive  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  eastern
border  of  that  lake,  towards  its  northern  extremity,  offers  the  only  other  hot-springs  which  we
shall  be  required  to  notice.  We  are  quite  sensible  that  we  should  have  no  right  to  regard  hot
springs  in  themselves  as  volcanic  indications.  But  their  character  as  such  is  indisputable  when
they  exist  in  close  association  with  other  and  less  disputable  volcanic  exhibitions.  Such  ex-
hibitions may  be  found,  in  the  country  under  our  view,  without  the  presence  of  hot-springs ;
but  the  springs  are  nowhere  to  be  found  apart  from  such  other  indications.  We  have  therefore
given  to  them  their  proper  place.

The  springs  to  which  we  have  just  alluded  occur  in  the  ravine  through  which  flows  the
rivulet  of  Zerka  Mayn.  Their  direct  distance  east  from  the  Dead  Sea  may  be  about  three
miles ;  but  by  the  course  of  the  ravine  at  least  a  mile  more.  We  are  indebted  for  the  first
modern  account  of  these  springs  to  the  unpublished  '  Travels '  of  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles,
who,  hearing  of  them  on  their  journey  from  Kerek  to  Szalt,  made  an  excursion  to  view  them.
On  looking  down  the  valley  into  which  these  springs  flow,  it  was  found  to  present  some  grand
and  romantic  features.  The  rocks  vary  between  red,  grey,  and  black,  and  have  a  bold  and
imposing  appearance.  The  whole  bottom  is  filled  and,  in  a  manner,  choked  with  a  crowded
thicket  of  canes  and  aspines  of  different  species,  intermixed  with  the  palm,  which  is  also  seen
rising  in  tufts  in  the  recesses  of  the  mountain  sides,  and  in  every  place  whence  the  springs
issue.  In  one  place  a  considerable  stream  of  hot  water  is  seen  precipitating  itself  from  a  high
and  perpendicular  shelf  of  rock,  which  is  strongly  tinted  with  the  brilliant  yellow  of  sulphur
deposited  upon  it.  On  reaching  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  the  travellers  found  themselves  in
what  might  be  termed  the  bed  of  a  hot  river,  so  copious  and  rapid  was  it,  and  its  heat  so  little
abated.  This  heat  of  the  stream  continues  as  it  passes  downward,  from  its  receiving  constant
supplies  of  water  of  the  same  elevated  temperature.  In  order  to  visit  these  sources  in  succes-
sion, they  passed  over  to  the  right  (northern)  bank,  and,  ascending  the  mountain  side,  passed
four  abundant  sources,  all  within  the  distance  of  half  a  mile,  and  discharging  themselves  into
the  stream  at  right  angles  with  its  course.  The  travellers  had  no  thermometer,  but  the  degree
of  heat  in  the  water  seemed  very  great ;  near  the  source  it  scalds  the  hand,  which  cannot  be
kept  in  it  for  the  space  of  half  a  minute.  The  deposit  of  sulphur  is  very  great  j  but  the  water
is  tasteless  to  the  palate. a

There  are  two  places  of  hot-springs  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Thus  in  the  valley
of  Beni-Hammad  (which  Burckhardt  conjectures  to  be  "the  brook  Zared"  of  Num.  xxi.  12)
such  wells  are  found,  with  some  ruined  buildings  near  them.  And,  still  more  to  the  south,  the
valley  of  the  stream  El  Ahsa,  which  enters,  from  the  south-east,  the  southern  back-water  of  the
Dead  Sea,  not  only  offers  masses  of  volcanic  rock,  but  the  water  of  the  rivulet  is  tepid,  caused
by  a  hot  spring  which  empties  itself  into  the  Ahsa  from  a  side  valley,  higher  up  than  where
Burckhardt  crossed  the  Wady  El  Ahsa.b

In  concluding  this  notice  of  the  thermal  springs  of  the  country,  we  shall  only  recall  attention
to  the  fact  that  they  are  all  found  near  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes.

Of  the  lake  commonly  called  the  Dead  Sea,  near  which  the  springs  last  described  are  found,

a  *  Travels,'  p.  467-  *>  Burckliaidt,  390,  400.

Chap.  IV]  VOLCANIC  INDICATIONS  AND  EARTHQUAKES.  lxxix

we  shall  soon  have  occasion  to  speak  more  fully,  and  shall  now  only  notice  some  of  those
volcanic  indications  which  it  so  abundantly  offers.  Mr.  Russegger  observes  that  the  mountains
between  Jerusalem  and  the  Jordan,  in  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  itself,  and  those  around  the
basin  of  the  Dead  Sea,  bear  unequivocal  evidence  of  volcanic  agency,  such  as  disruptions,  up-
heavings,  faults,  &c. ;  proofs  of  which  agency  are  still  notorious  in  the  continual  earthquakes,
hot  springs,  and  formations  of  asphalt. a

As  in  the  case  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  some  travellers  have  thought  that  the  bed  of  the
Dead  Sea  exhibited  the  appearance  of  the  crater  of  a  volcano.  This  Chateaubriand  denies.
He  says, — "  I  cannot  concur  in  the  opinion  of  those  who  suppose  that  the  Dead  Sea  is  no  other
than  the  crater  of  a  volcano.  I  have  seen  Vesuvius,  Solfatara,  Monte  Nuovo  in  the  lake  of
Fusino,  the  Peak  of  the  Azores,  the  Mameliff  opposite  Carthage,  and  the  unextinguished
volcanoes  of  Auvergne ;  and  I  have  remarked  in  all  of  them  the  same  characteristics, — that  is
to  say,  mountains  excavated  in  the  form  of  a  tunnel,  lava,  and  ashes,  which  exhibited  incon-
testable proofs  of  the  agency  of  fire.  But  the  Dead  Sea,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  long  lake,  curved
like  a  bow,  enclosed  between  two  chains  of  mountains,  which  exhibit  no  coherence  of  form  or
homogeneity  of  structure.  These  chains  do  not  unite  at  the  two  extremities  of  the  lake  :  they
continue,  in  one  direction,  to  border  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and,  in  the  north,  expand  to
enclose  the  Lake  of  Tiberias ;  while,  on  the  other,  they  are  seen  to  separate,  and  lose  them-
selves in  the  sands  of  Yemen.b  It  is  true  that  bitumen,  hot  springs,  and  phosphoric  stones,
are  found  in  the  eastern  mountains,  but  there  are  none  in  the  mountains  opposite  :  nor  does
the  presence  of  thermal  waters,  sulphur,  and  asphaltum,  alone  suffice  to  attest  the  anterior
existence  of  a  volcano."  c

We  have  quoted  this,  because  it  has  been  re-produced  by  later  travellers,"1  and  may  hence
chance  to  stand  for  more  than  it  is  worth.  We  have  also  thought  the  whole  subject,  as  con-
nected with  an  event  which,  in  the  other  division  of  this  work,  has  passed  historically  under
our  notice,  claimed  the  somewhat  extended  attention  which  we  have  given  to  it  in  a  note  at
the  end  of  this  chapter  (3),  to  which  we  now  refer.  In  this  place  we  shall  now  continue  our
own  course.

In  the  region  to  which  our  attention  is  now  directed — that  of  the  Dead  Sea — it  is  interesting
to  note  how  exactly  present  appearances  coincide  with  the  intimations  which  the  Scriptures
offer.  The  mines  and  sources  of  asphaltum,  the  "  slime  pits,"  which,  according  to  the  Bible,
existed  there  before  the  Vale  of  Siddim  was  desolated,  are  still  there,  and  have  given  to  the
lake  one  of  the  most  common  of  its  names.  There  also  we  find  the  traces  of  that  terrible
convulsion  by  which  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  overthrown,  in  the  same  "  brimstone,  and
salt,  and  burning,"  the  same  "  salt-pits,  and  perpetual  desolation, "e  to  which  the  sacred  writers
allude.

One  instance  of  the  occurrence  of  sulphur,  which  is  so  conspicuously  mentioned  in  the
Scriptural  accounts,  has  just  been  noticed  in  Captain  Mangles'  account  of  the  hot-springs  of
the  river  Arnon.  Not  only  the  borders  of  the  lake,  but,  in  different  parts,  the  plains  and
valleys  to  the  east  of  it,  exhibit  remarkable  sulphureous  appearances.  At  a  place  about
twenty-five  miles  eastward  from  the  head  of  the  lake,  Buckingham  remarked  that  the  surface
of  the  soil  was  "  covered  with  patches  of  a  yellowish  white  substance  like  powder  of  brimstone
or  sulphur,  a  fact  remarked  also  in  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  near  the  head  of  the  Dead  Sea,
and  almost  in  a  line  with  this  to  the  westward,  at  the  distance  of  about  thirty  miles.  The  taste
and  smell  of  this  powder  was  highly  sulphureous ;  and  my  guide  observed  that  the  same  sub-
stance was  found  in  abundance  all  around  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea.  It  is  beyond  a  doubt
that  these  regions,  from  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  southward,  to  the  termination  of  the  Lake  of
Asphaltes,  have,  at  some  very  remote  period,  been  subject  to  volcanic  convulsions;  and  it  is
probable  that  the  hot-springs  of  Tiberias,  the  bitumen  of  the  Sea  of  Lot,  and  the  sulphuric
powder  of  the  plains  near  it,  all  owe  their  existence  to  one  common  origin."     In  continuation,

a  'Athcuauim,'  No.  600.

b  This  is  not  correct :  hut  the  reader  is  aw  are  that  the  southern  mountains  were  unknown  when  Chateaubriand  wrote.

r  Itineraire,  tome  ii.  180,  edit.  Brux.  1826.  d  Lord  Lynclsay,  Sec.  c  Dent.  xxix.  23:  Zcph.  ii.  9.

Ixxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  IV.

he  thinks  that  the  swallowing  up  of  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  may,  even  from  the
local  appearances,  well  be  concluded  a  historical  fact,  and  accomplished  probably  by  means  of
some  great  "  volcanic  operation,"  of  which  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  the  river  Jordan,  and  the
Dead  Sea,  bear  so  many  indications.*

To  the  various  notices  of  the  presence  of  sulphur  which  we  have  adduced  in  the  preceding
paragraphs,  we  shall  only  add  the  information  of  Burckhardt,  that  on  the  shore  of  the  Dead
Sea,  towards  the  north,  pieces  of  native  sulphur  are  found  at  a  small  depth  beneath  the  surface,
and  are  used  by  the  Arabs  to  cure  diseases  in  their  camels.1'  This,  however,  is  not  by  any
means  confined  to  the  north.  At  the  opposite,  or  southern,  extremity  of  the  lake,  lumps  of
nitre  and  fine  sulphur,  from  the  size  of  a  nutmeg  up  to  that  of  a  small  hen's  egg,  were  found
by  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles,  in  such  a  situation  as  rendered  it  clear  to  them  that  they  had
been  brought  down  by  the  rain,  and  that  their  deposits  must  be  sought  in  the  cliffs.  Dr.  Shaw,
observing  that  sulphur  is  found  promiscuously  with  bitumen  upon  the  shore,  thought  it  possible
that  they  had  come  up  together  from  the  bottom.  But  it  now  appears  that  if  this  be  at  all
correct,  it  can  only  be  so  with  reference  to  a  portion  of  the  sulphur  which  is  found.

The  bitumen  of  this  part  cannot  be  more  fitly  noticed  than  in  this  place.  The  interest
attached  to  it,  from  its  being  mentioned  in  the  most  ancient  book  in  the  world,  in  alluding  to
the  state  of  the  country,  before  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  was  attended  with  the  effects  which  we
now  notice,  has  on  more  than  one  occasion  been  indicated.

As  this  substance  is  found  in  lumps  upon  the  surface  and  western  shore  of  the  lake,  it  has
been  thought  that  it  rose  in  a  fluid  state  from  sources  at  the  bottom,  and  became  hard  by
exposure  to  the  air  on  the  surface.  "  /  was  informed"  says  Shaw,  "  that  the  bitumen  for
which  this  lake  has  been  always  remarkable  is  mixed,  at  certain  times,  from  the  bottom  of
the  lake  in  large  hemispheres,  which,  as  soon  as  they  touch  the  surface,  and  are  thereby  acted
upon  by  the  external  air,  burst  at  once  with  great  smoke  and  noise,  like  the  pulvis  fulminans  of
the  chemists,  and  disperse  themselves  into  a  thousand  pieces.  But  this  only  happens  near  the
shore ;  for  in  greater  depths,  the  eruptions  are  supposed  to  discover  themselves  in  such  columns
of  smoke  as  are  now  and  then  observed  to  arise  from  the  lake.  And,  perhaps,  to  such  erup-
tions as  these  we  may  attribute  that  variety  of  pits  and  hollows,  not  unlike  the  traces  of  many
of  our  ancient  lime-kilns,  which  are  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  this  lake."  c  Remembering
the  bitumen-pits  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  this  last  circumstance  is  very  observable.  Pococke
thinks  it  probable  that  there  are  subterraneous  fires  which  throw  up  the  bitumen  at  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  where  it  may  form  itself  into  a  mass,  which  may  be  broken  by  the  motion  of  the
water  occasioned  by  high  winds.  All  that  is  stated  by  both  these  authorities  is  very  possible,
excepting  the  last  circumstance,  for  the  lake  is  little  visited  by  high  winds,  and  the  water  is
too  dense  and  the  basin  too  deep  to  allow  any  superficial  agitation  to  exert  any  appreciable
influence  at  the  bottom.  Other  causes  may,  however,  operate  in  detaching  from  the  bottom
any  masses  of  bitumen  which  may  have  been  there  deposited  from  sub-aqueous  sources.

But  the  information  obtained  by  Seetzen  and  Burckhardt  ascribes  a  different  origin  to  the
asphaltum  of  the  Dead  Sea.  They  were  both  informed  by  the  natives  of  Kerek  that  the  sub-
stance originates  in  the  rocks  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  lake.  The  latter  traveller  was  informed
that  it  came  from  the  mountain  which  blocked  up  the  passage  along  the  eastern  border  of  the
lake,  at  a  distance  of  about  six  miles  south  of  the  Arnon.  The  Arabs  pretend  that  it  oozes  from
the  fissures  of  the  cliff  of  this  mountain,  and  collects  in  large  pieces  in  the  rocks  below,  where
it  gradually  increases,  and  hardens,  until  it  is  rent  asunder  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  with  a  loud
explosion,  and,  falling  into  the  water,  is  carried  by  the  waves,  in  considerable  quantities,  to  the
opposite  shores.  The  information  which  Seetzen  obtained,  some  years  before,  at  Kerek,  does
not  differ  from  this  in  any  important  point.  He  learnt  that  the  bitumen  oozed  from  certain
rocks  on  the  eastern  shore,  forming  gradually  a  thick  crust,  which,  being  detached  by  the
wind,  is  carried  along  the  surface  of  the  water,  to  the  western  shore,  where  it  is  gathered  by
the  Arabs,  and  conveyed  in  large  lumps  to  Jerusalem.  These  lumps  are  so  large,  as  to  furnish
a  load  to  several  camels.     But  Seetzen  understood  that  the  production  in  this  way  is  slow,  and

a  Arab  Tribes,  p.  90.  b  Tr;u  els,  393.  *  Travels,  ii.  158  ;  edit.  1808.

Chap.  IV.]  VOLCANIC  INDICATIONS  AND  EARTHQUAKES.  lxxxi

that  it  is  only  after  an  interval  of  some  years,  that  any  considerable  quantity  of  asphaltum  can
be  procured  from  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  specimens  thus  collected  differ  from  those
obtained  from  the  mines  of  Hasbeya,  in  the  north,  in  being  considerably  more  porous,  and  as
having  been  apparently  in  a  fluid  state.  In  the  state  in  which  the  asphaltum  is  usually  found,
it  feels  cold,  like  stone,  but  is  as  black  as  jet,  and  of  exactly  the  same  shining  appearance.
It  is  used  as  pitch,  and  also  occupies  a  conspicuous  place  in  the  pharmacy  of  the  country.
The  appearances  which  mummies  offer  confirm  the  testimonies  of  Pliny  and  other  ancient
writers,  that  the  asphaltum  of  the  Dead  Sea  was  much  used  in  the  embalming  of  bodies  in  Egypt.

As  to  the  local  origin  of  this  substance,  it  will  be  noticed  that  the  accounts  which  have  been
given  are  either  conjectural,  or  from  the  information  of  the  natives.  It  appears  to  us  that  these
accounts  are  not  incompatible,  and  that  all  of  them  may  be  true.  But  if  one  account  were
to  be  preferred  to  the  exclusion  of  the  others,  we  should  be  inclined  to  rely  most  upon  the
information  which  such  men  as  Seetzen  and  Burckhardt  obtained  at  such  a  place  as  Kerek.

As  here,  near  the  Dead  Sea,  we  are  anxious  to  notice,  not  only  traces  of  volcanic  action,  but
also  of  the  combustible  materials  which  Scripture  itself  teaches  us  to  look  for  in  this  neigh-
bourhood,— this  seems  as  proper  a  place  as  any  for  the  mention  of  the  igneous  stones  which
are  found  on  the  shores  of  the  lake.  These  are  mentioned  in  such  different  terms  by  different
travellers,  that  one  is  not  always  sure  that  they  are  speaking  of  the  same  substance.  Van
Egmont  and  Heymann,  who  travelled  together,  alone  distinguish  two  sorts  of  combustible  stone  ;
for  which  reason  we  must  give  their  account  first.  Along  the  northern  shores  of  the  Dead
Sea,  they  picked  up  "  several  pieces  of  a  kind  of  black  flint,  which  burnt  in  the  fire  without
any  diminution  in  their  size,  though  they  lost  considerably  in  weight;  and,  in  burning,  emitted
a  considerable  stench.  They  are  used  in  the  country  for  fumigation  against  the  plague."
Other  travellers  either  do  not  notice  this  stone,  or  confound  it  with  that  which  Van  Egmont
and  Heymann  proceed  to  notice,  as  follows : — "  Among  the  mountains,  near  this  sea,  is  also
found  a  blackish  stone,  very  much  resembling  the  touchstone,  and  nearly  of  the  same  qualities.
This  is  also  inflammable,  and  as  nauseous  as  that  met  with  on  the  shore.  The  church  of  the
holy  sepulchre  is  paved  with  it."  It  is  a  pity  that  the  descriptions,  in  both  instances,  are  not
more  clear.  As  one  of  these  stones  is  found  upon  the  beach,  and  the  other  upon  the  moun-
tains, it  might  be  presumed  that  both  were  really  the  same  stone  in  different  situations, — first,
in  its  natural  state  on  the  mountains,  and,  next,  as  washed  down  to  the  beach  by  rains,  and
there  rounded  by  the  action  of  the  waves,  and  superficially  modified  by  the  deposits  of  the
lake,  were  it  not  that  the  stone  first  noticed  is  compared  to  flint,  and  the  other  to  touchstone.
As,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  collect  a  satisfactory  distinction  from  mere  differences  of  situation
— between  the  shore  and  the  mountain — in  which  stones  are  found,  the  stone  which  Hassel-
quist  found  on  the  shore  may  be  identified  with  that  which  Van  Egmont  obtained  in  the
mountains,  if  a  better  agreement  is  found  between  them  and  those  which  both  travellers  found
on  the  beach.  Hasselquist  says  that  the  stones  along  the  north-western  shore  are  all  of  quartz,
of  different  sizes  and  colours.  "Here,"  he  continues,  "I  found  quartz  stones  in  the  form
of  a  slate,  which  is  one  of  the  rarest  natural  curiosities  which  I  got  in  my  travels.  If  it  was
burnt,  it  smelt  like  bitumen ;  which  proves  that  it  had  its  origin  from  it,  like  all  the  slate  of
this  country."

Without  being  well  able  to  account  for  the  confusion  of  names  applied  to  this  remarkable
product,  we  must  at  present  suppose  that  the  stone  mentioned  by  Hasselquist,  and  at  least
one  of  the  two  mentioned  by  Van  Egmont  and  Heymann,  are  the  same  which  other  writers
notice  under  a  singular  variety  of  names, — such  as,  the  Stone  of  Moses  (the  native  name),
fetid  limestone,  stinkstone,  swinestone,  and  other  equally  agreeable  appellations.

Pococke,  describing  it  as  "  the  Stone  of  Moses,"  observes  that  it  burns  like  a  coal,  and
turns  only  to  a  white  stone — not  to  ashes ;  and  the  fact  that  it  smells,  in  burning,  like  the
asphaltum,  does  not  lead  him  to  conclude,  with  Hasselquist,  that  it  originated  from  that  sub-
stance, but  that  the  bitumen  proceeded  from  it.  He  ingeniously  supposes  that  a  stratum  of
this  stone  under  the  Dead  Sea  is  one  part  of  the  matter  that  feeds  the  subterraneous  fires,  and
that  the  bitumen  boils  up  out  of  it.  Perhaps  this  matter  might  be  set  at  rest  if  some  traveller
vol.  i.  m

lxxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  IV.

would  take  the  trouble  to  ascertain  the  character  of  the  rock,  from  which  the  asphaltum  is
alleged  to  ooze,  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  lake.

Dr.  Clarke,  who  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  pieces  of  this  stone  which  were  brought
to  Jerusalem  to  be  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  rosaries  and  amulets,  to  which  purposes  it
is  largely  applied.  In  this  form  it  is  worn  as  a  charm  against  the  plague ;  and  the  Doctor
considers  that  a  similar  superstition  prevailed  in  very  early  ages  is  proved  by  the  fact  of  his
having  found  amulets  of  the  same  substance  in  the  subterranean  chambers,  below  the  pyramids
of  Sakkara  in  Upper  Egypt.  He  describes  it  as  "  black  fetid  limestone."  From  his  account
it  appears  that  the  fetid  effluvia  are  excited  not  only  by  burning,  but,  when  partially  decom-
posed, by  friction,  which  is  now  known  to  be  owing  to  the  presence  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen.
All  bituminous  limestone  has  not  this  property  ;  but  that  of  the  Dead  Sea  possesses  it  in  a
remarkable  degree.

The  asphaltic  mines  of  Hasbeya,  to  Avhich  allusion  has  lately  been  made,  adjoin  the  remoter
source  of  the  Jordan,  and  therefore  may  be  regarded  in  connection  with  the  phenomena  which
the  valley  of  that  river  and  its  borders  and  extremities  exhibit.a  In  the  neighbourhood  in
question,  the  mountains  are,  for  the  most  part,  calcareous,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  hills  are
seen  strata  of  trap.  The  mine  of  asphaltum  is  at  the  distance  of  a  league  W.S.W.  from
Hasbeya.  It  is  situated  on  the  declivity  of  a  chalky  hill,  and  the  bitumen  is  found  in  large
veins  at  about  twenty  feet  below  the  surface.  The  pits  are  from  six  to  twelve  feet  in  dia-
meter. The  workmen  descend  by  means  of  a  rope  and  wheel ;  and  in  hewing  out  the  bitumen
leave  columns  of  that  substance  at  different  intervals,  to  support  the  earth  above.  Pieces  of
several  rotolasb  in  weight  each  are  brought  up.  There  are  upwards  of  twenty-five  of  these
pits,  but  the  greater  part  of  them  are  abandoned,  and  overgrown  with  shrubs.  The  workmen
are  only  employed  during  the  months  of  summer,  and  Burckhardt  noticed  only  one  pit  that
appeared  to  have  been  recently  worked.  The  people  of  the  neighbourhood  employ  the  bitumen
to  secure  their  vines  from  insects ;  but  the  greater  part  of  the  produce  is  sold  to  the  merchants
of  Damascus,  Beirout,  and  Aleppo.  The  bitumen  is  called  Hommar,c  and  the  pits  or  wells
Biar  el  Hommar.d

Returning  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Dead  Sea,  we  may  observe  that  the  most  southward
volcanic  indications  which  that  neighbourhood  offers,  are  those  which  occur  in  the  Wady  El
Ahsa,  and  which,  on  account  of  the  hot-springs  there,  have  been  noticed  in  a  preceding  page.

The  region  of  the  great  valley  which  extends  from  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  has
been  too  partially  explored  to  enable  us  to  speak  positively  as  to  the  presence  or  absence  of
volcanic  indications.  We  know  not  that  any  have  been  noticed  by  travellers,  nor,  from  what
has  been  noticed,  are  we  led  to  expect  that  any  will  be  found.

Proceeding  farther  to  the  south, — into  the  peninsula  of  Sinai, — however,  volcanic  indications
are  again  discovered.  No  dependence  can  be  placed  upon  such  expressions  occurring  in
travellers  as  "black  volcanic-looking  mountains,"  and  so  forth, — for  mountains  which  are
not  volcanic  may  look  black,  and  seem  to  exhibit  the  action  of  fire.  We  have  seen  such
misleading  expressions  applied  to  mountains  which  we  know,  from  other  sources,  to  have
nothing  volcanic  in  their  nature,  however  black  may  be  their  looks.  Burckhardt,  who  is  still,
and  is  likely  long  to  remain,  the  first  and  most  trustworthy  authority  in  all  that  relates  to  the
peninsula  of  Sinai,  observes  that  there  are  no  traces  of  volcanic  action  in  the  more  elevated
regions  of  Sinai ;  but  his  attention  was  attracted  to  some  striking  appearances  in  the  lower
region,  on  the  eastern  shore  towards  the  point,  or  southern  extremity  of  the  peninsula.  Sherm
is  about  nine  miles  to  the  north  of  the  terminating  point,  Ras  Mohammed ;  and  here  the
traveller  states, — "  From  Sherm  we  rode  an  hour  and  a  quarter  among  low  hills  near  the
shore.     Here  I  saw,  for  the  first  and  only  time  in  this  peninsula,  volcanic  rocks.     For  a  dis-

a  Burckhardt,  394.     Seetzen,  44.  b  The  rotola  is  about  five  pounds.

c  This  is  just  the  word  by  which  bitumen  is  designated  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  ;  and  the  original  of  the  "  slime-pits"  in  the
Vale  of  Siddim  is  *^J"T  J"^}$-)T  beeruth  chamar ,— the  apparent  difference  is  merely  a  difference  in  pronouncing  the  same
words.  The  same  things  are  thus  called  by  the  same  names  now  as  they  were  four  thousand  years  ago.  The  same  name,
Hommar,  is  also  borne  by  the  asphaltic  cliffs  east  of  the  Dead  Sea.

J  Burckhardt,  34.     Seetzen,  15.

Chap.  IV.]  VOLCANIC  INDICATIONS  AND  EARTHQUAKES.  lxxxiii

tance  of  about  two  miles  the  hills  presented  perpendicular  cliffs,  formed  in  half  circles,  none
of  them  being  more  than  sixty  to  eighty  feet  in  height ;  in  other  places  there  was  an  appear-
ance, of  volcanic  craters.  The  rock  is  black,  with  sometimes  a  slight  red  appearance,  full  of
cavities,  and  of  a  rough  surface ;  on  the  road  lay  a  few  stones,  which  had  separated  themselves
from  above.  The  cliffs  were  covered  by  deep  layers  of  sand,  and  the  valleys  at  their  feet  were
also  overspread  with  it.  It  is  possible  that  other  rocks  of  the  same  kind  may  be  found  towards
Ras  Abou  Mohammed,  and  hence  may  have  arisen  the  term  of  black  (fxikava  oprf),  applied  to
these  mountains  by  the  Greeks.  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  low  sand-hills  intervene
between  the  volcanic  rocks  and  the  sea,  and  that  above  them,  towards  the  higher  mountains,
no  traces  of  lava  are  found,  which  seems  to  show  that  volcanic  matter  is  confined  to  this
spot."a

That  this  spot  exhibits  the  only  traces  of  volcanic  action  in  the  lower  region  of  the  peninsula
cannot  yet  perhaps  be  affirmed.  But  we  are  not  aware  that  any  other  indications  have  been
found ;  for,  although,  with  reference  to  Wady  Bodera — another  and  distant  point  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  peninsula — Lord  Lyndsay  says  that  "  all  its  mountains  are  more  or  less
volcanic-looking,  some  of  them  resembling  the  heaps  of  cinders  thrown  out  from  an  iron-
foundry," — Burckhardt  himself  is  more  to  be  trusted  in  virtue  of  the  more  precise  language
in  which  he  describes  the  very  same  valley  as  consisting  of  sand-rock,  and  its  ground  deeply
covered  with  sand.

When  Burckhardt  says  that  the  Lower  Sinai  alone  exhibits  traces  of  volcanic  action,  he
must  of  course  be  understood  to  speak,  in  the  popular  sense,  of  the  more  easily  recognizable
and  (if  we  are  right  in  so  using  the  word)  secondary  volcanic  action.  But  it  appears  more
clearly  from  his  own  descriptions  than  could  otherwise  be  the  case,  that  the  peninsula  in
general,  and  the  Upper  Sinai,  in  particular,  exhibits  more  marked  traces  of  primary  volcanic
commotion  than  can  be  found  in  any  part  of  the  extensive  tract  which  we  have  passed  under
review.  The  super-position  of  unstratified  crystalline  rocks  in  the  Upper  Sinai,  and  the  abun-
dant manifestation  of  various  trap-rocks  along  the  eastern  shore,  equally  suggest  to  the
geologist  the  action  of  internal  heat  in  ages  very  remote.  The  very  prominent  appearance  in
this  peninsula  of  rocks  usually  considered  ignigenous,  will  have  struck  the  reader  in  the
geological  statement  which  the  preceding  chapter  contains.

We  have  now  surveyed,  with  a  view  to  the  volcanic  indications  it  might  offer,  the  whole
long  line  of  country,  extending  from  the  mountains  of  Lebanon  to  the  uttermost  cape  of  the
Sinai  peninsula.  Desiring  to  keep  as  nearly  as  possible  to  the  immediate  borders  of  the  pro-
longed basins  formed  by  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  we  refused  to  turn
aside  to  collect  the  volcanic  indications  which  are  offered  by  the  country  to  the  south  of
Damascus,  and  to  the  east  of  the  lands  occupied  by  the  tribes  beyond  Jordan.

To  the  east  of  the  regions  of  Bashan  and  of  Gilead  extends  a  broad  and  very  even  plain,
which,  although  below  the  level  of  the  high  plains  nearer  to  the  Jordan,  is  much  above  the
level  of  the  valley  through  which  that  river  flows,  and  of  the  lakes  which  belong  to  it.  This
plain,  which  has  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  miles  of  average  breadth,  and  about  fifty  of  extreme
length,  appears  to  be  the  district  to  which  the  name  of  Haouran  properly  belongs,1"  although
that  name  appears  to  be  also  used  more  comprehensively,  so  as  to  embrace  the  districts  more
eastward  which  have  also  separate  names.  The  northern  portion  of  this  plain  is  bounded  on  the
east  by  a  remarkable  rocky  district,  called  Ledja,  about  twenty-five  miles  broad  in  the  widest
(or  southern)  part,  and,  perhaps,  thirty  miles  in  length  from  north  to  south.  Beyond  this
district  southward,  and  bounding  on  the  east  the  southern  part  of  the  plain  of  Haouran,  is  a
mountainous  district  which  bears  the  same  name  (Jebel  Haouran)  as  that  plain.  Beyond  these
mountains  eastward,  is  the  unexplored  region  called  Szaffa,  which  we  only  know  from  the
reports  collected  by  Burckhardt,  as  resembling  the  Ledja  in  its  characteristics,  and  being  three
days'  journey  in  circuit.  (4)

The  extensive  tract  of  country  comprehending  these  several  districts,  still  more  even  than

a  '  Travels,'  p.  529.

b  It  is  mentioned  once  by  this  name  in  the  Old  Testament,  Ezek.  xlvii.  17;  and  appears  to  have  comprehended  the  Aurauitis
and  the  greater  part  of  the  Iturea,  which  the  New  Testament  specifies.

Ill   2

lxxxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  IV.

that  which  lies  nearer  the  Jordan,  was  utterly  unknown  till  the  present  century.  Seetzen  was
the  first  to  explore  it  in  some  parts,  and  he  furnished  to  the  European  public  the  first  notions
of  its  physical  as  well  as  moral  condition.  It  was  afterwards  more  extensively  traversed  and
more  minutely  described  by  Burckhardt ;  and  although  later  travellers  have,  since  the  change
of  government,  ranged  the  country  with  a  degree  of  facility  and  safety  unknown  in  his  time,
none  of  them  have  added  any  information  of  importance  to  that  which  he  supplied.

The  immense  plain  of  the  Haouran  is  sometimes  perfectly  level  for  miles  together,  sometimes
it  is  slightly  undulating,  and  here  and  there  are  seen  low  round  hills,  on  the  declivities  or  at
the  foot  of  which  most  of  the  villages  of  the  country  are  situated.  The  soil  is  naturally  rich,
and  needs  but  the  application  of  water  to  render  it  abundantly  fertile :  hence  for  some  time
after  the  season  of  rain,  and  wherever  moisture  is  present,  the  plain  is  covered  with  the  most
luxuriant  wild  herbage.  Artificial  meadows  can  hardly  be  finer  than  these  desert  fields  ;  and
it  is  this  which  renders  the  Haouran  a  favourite  resort  of  the  Bedouins.  This  it  may  be  im-
portant to  note  historically,  concerning  a  country  so  close  on  the  Hebrew  border.  The  district
is,  however,  bare  of  trees,  which  is  true  of  the  whole  country,  except  among  the  Haouran
mountains,  where  groves  of  oak  and  other  trees  are  found.

The  mountains  comprehended  under  the  name  of  Jebel  Haouran  have  been  less  adequately
explored  and  described  than  the  plain.  Viewed  from  the  distance  westward,  they  exhibit  a
broken  outline,  and  are  not  of  very  considerable  elevation  from  the  plain ;  but  their  summits
have  been  seen  covered  with  snow  in  the  middle  of  March.  The  highest  mountain  is  the  Kelb,
or  Kelab  Haouran,  which  is  a  cone  arising  from  the  lower  ridge  of  the  mountains.  This  is
barren  on  the  south  and  east  sides,  but  fertile  on  the  north  and  west.  Its  base  is  surrounded
by  a  forest,  and  Burckhardt  was  told  that  the  ascent  from  that  forest  to  the  summit  would
occupy  an  hour  ;  and  that  from  thence  a  prospect  of  "the  sea"  [qy.  the  Dead  Sea?]  might
be  obtained  in  clear  weather.  This  traveller  states  the  characteristics  of  several  of  the  inferior
mountains  of  this  region ;  but,  unfortunately,  he  neglects  to  notice  the  geological  construction,
except  in  one  instance,  when  his  attention  being  particularly  engaged  by  the  old  castle  of
Szalkhat,  which  stands  upon  one  of  the  exterior  hills  of  this  group,  towards  the  south,  he
observes  that  the  hill  itself  "  consists  of  alternate  layers  of  the  common  black  tufwacke  of  the
country,  and  of  a  very  porous,  deep  red,  and  often  rose-coloured  pumice-stone."  As  he  else-
where observes  that  this  same  black  stone  is  found  all  over  the  country,  and  is  the  only  species
which  it  offers,  we  may  presume  that  it  is  also  the  principal  constituent  of  the  other  mountains.

The  aspect  of  the  rocky  district  of  Ledja  is  singular,  and  far  from  pleasing.  It  presents  a
level  tract,  covered  with  heaps  of  black  stones,  and  small  irregular-shaped  rocks,  without  a
single  agreeable  object  for  the  eye  to  repose  on,  except  in  the  patches  of  meadow  which  are
sparingly  interspersed  among  the  stones.  In  the  central  part  of  this  district,  called  by  Burck-
hardt the  Inner  Ledja,  the  ground  is  more  uneven,  the  rocks  higher,  and  the  roads  more
difficulty

It  should  be  observed  that  this  same  black  stone  is  also  found  all  over  the  Haouran,  in  a
more  dispersed  form  :  that  masses  of  it  are  also  found  beyond  this  plain,  even  to  the  borders
of  the  Jordan  and  the  Dead  Sea.  Its  presence  at  various  points  on  the  eastern  side  of  the
Jordan's  valley  has  indeed  been  noticed  already  by  us,  and  its  character  described :  for  this  is
doubtless  that  black  stone  which  has  been  so  often  mentioned,  and  to  which,  under  the  various
names  of  black  basalt,  black  porous  tufa,  black  tufwacke,  black  stone  (or  tufwacke)  of  the
Haouran,  or  of  the  Ledja,  various  travellers — Seetzen,  Burckhardt,  Buckingham,  and  others —
have  concurred  in  referring  to  a  volcanic  origin.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  have  taken
occasion  to  describe  the  whole  district  in  this  place  and  under  the  present  head.

From  a  comparison  of  all  the  various  notices  of  this  black  stone,  we  collect  that  the  masses
in  and  about  the  Ledja  are  larger,  more  dense,  and  more  thickly  set  than  elsewhere ;  and  that
progressively,  as  we  remove  from  the  Ledja,  the  masses  become  smaller,  more  dispersed,  and
of  more  porous  texture.  If,  therefore,  these  stones  be  the  result  of  volcanic  action,  we  are
entitled  to  consider  that  the  Ledja  was  the  centre  of  that  action,  from  which  the  black  stone

a  Burckhardt,  51,56,  59,  65,  79,  93,  110,  192,  246,  295;  Buckingham's  ■  Travels  among  the  Arab  Tribes,'  159,  227,  284 ;  Lord
Lynrlsav,  ii.  131.

Chap.  IV.]  VOLCANIC  INDICATIONS  AND  EARTHQUAKES.  lxxxv

was  dispersed  widely  over  the  neighbouring  region.  That  the  masses  of  this  stone  which  are
found  near  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes  might  proceed  from  volcanic  explosion  in  the
Ledja,  is,  physically,  quite  possible ;  but,  all  things  considered,  and  particularly  as  it  seems
that  the  black  stone  along  the  Jordan  is  somewhat  less  dense  than  that  of  the  Haouran,  as  well
as  from  the  appearance  of  the  mountains  at  whose  base  the  hot-springs  of  Tiberias  rise,  we
incline  to  connect  the  black  stone  of  the  country  of  the  Jordan  with  the  other  volcanic  phe-
nomena which  that  region  exhibits.

The  evidence  of  volcanic  action  in  the  Ledja  does  not  rest  merely  upon  the  general  appear-
ance of  that  district  or  of  its  stone.

On  the  southern  border  of  this  district,  towards  the  Haouran  mountains,  is  a  town  or  village
named  Nedjeroun.  This  town  is  surrounded  by  a  perfect  labyrinth  of  rocks — broad  sheets  and
rugged  masses ;  which,  says  Lord  Lyndsay,  offers  an  appearance  more  like  that  of  the  bottom
of  the  crater  of  Vesuvius,  as  he  saw  it  in  1830,  than  anything  else  to  which  he  could  compare
it.  Buckingham  still  more  distinctly  describes  the  entrance  into  Nedjeroun  as  being  over  beds
of  rock  of  a  singular  kind,  having  the  appearance  of  volcanic  lava  suddenly  cooled  while  in
the  act  of  boiling  in  a  liquid  heat ;  there  being  globular  masses  in  some  parts,  like  the  bubbles
on  boiling  pitch,  and  in  others  a  kind  of  spiral  furrows,  like  the  impressions  often  seen  in  a
semi-liquid  when  put  into  violent  motion  ;  and  on  striking  it  with  any  hard  substance  it  gave
forth  a  ringing  sound,  like  metal.  Several  tanks  or  reservoirs  have,  however,  been  excavated
in  this  hard  material,  in  which  the  rain-water  continues  to  be  preserved.

This  spot,  it  will  be  observed,  is  about  the  middle  of  the  southern  border-line  of  this  district.
More  to  the  east,  that  is,  in  the  south-eastern  angle  of  the  Ledja,  several  Tels,  or  detached  hills,
are  found  near  one  another,  among  or  near  the  low  exterior  ridges  of  the  Jebel  Haouran  in  that
direction.  Passing  between  some  of  them,  Burckhardt  observed  the  ground  to  be  covered  with
pieces  of  porous  tufa  and  pumice-stone ;  and  he  adds,  that  the  western  side  of  one  of  these  hills
(the  Tel  Shoba)  appears  to  have  been  the  crater  of  a  volcano,  as  well  from  the  character  of  the
minerals  which  lie  assembled  on  that  side  of  the  hill,  as  from  the  form  of  the  hill  itself,  which
resembles  that  of  a  crater,  while  the  neighbouring  hills  have  rounded  tops,  without  any  sharp
angles.

In  concluding  this  rapid  survey  of  the  various  volcanic  indications  which  the  y  and  Mangles,  194—202  ;  Joliffe, '  Letters  from  Palestine,'  5—15;
Jowett, '  Syria  and  the  Holy  Land,'  124 — 131.

e  The  road  distance  is,  however,  much  greater  in  this  instance.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  ciii

aqueduct,which  still  exists  as  a  venerable  ruin.  The  eastern  mountains  are  here  about  a  league
distant  from  the  shore.  This  plain  continues  somewhat  narrowing  its  breadth  as  we  approach
the  White  Cape,a  a  sublime  and  picturesque  mountain,  composed  of  a  calcareous  stone  as  white
as  chalk.  The  road  over  it  is  occasionally  cut  through  the  rock  along  its  side,  and  is  about  two
yards  broad.  On  the  right  of  this  road  the  rock  is  covered  with  bushes,  while  the  left  offers  a
perpendicular  precipice  to  the  sea,  the  scene  from  which,  when  the  sea  rages,  is  tremendous.
This  pass  is  about  a  mile  and  a  half  in  length,  and  has  been  compared  to  some  of  the  roads  in
North  Wales.  It  is  perfectly  safe,  being  walled  in  where  necessary.  The  traditions  of  the
country  ascribe  this  road  to  Alexander  the  Great.  Having  crossed  this  promontory,  we  pass
for  about  two  hours  over  a  rocky  district,  and  then  arrive  at  the  steep  and  rugged  promontory
which  forms  the  Cape  of  Nakhoora,  over  which  the  road  passes.  The  ascent  of  this  road,  wind-
ing over  the  rugged  front  of  this  promontory,  reminded  Mr.  Buckingham  very  forcibly  of
similar  scenes  in  Spanish  mountains,  as  well  as  on  the  western  shores  of  Portugal :  and,  here
and  there,  striking  resemblances  were  found  to  the  rocky  and  sea-beaten  shores  of  Cornwall
and  Devonshire.  On  reaching  the  summit  of  this  promontory,  an  extensive  and  beautiful
view  across  the  whole  plain  of  Acre  opens  on  us.  The  elegant  and  lofty  minaret  of  the  city
appears  at  the  distance  of  seven  or  eight  miles  directly  before  us ;  in  the  back-ground,  far
off,  twice  as  distant  as  the  city,  is  a  noble  scene ; — Mount  Carmel  dipping  its  feet  in  the
Western  Sea,  and,  to  the  east,  running  considerably  inland,  entirely  locking  up  from  our  view
the  plain  of  Sharon,  which,  we  know,  lies  beyond  it  on  the  south.  In  the  horizon,  on  the  left,
the  eye  rests  on  the  milder  mountain  scenery  which  lies  on  the  road  to  Nazareth.  This  plain,
from  the  boundaries  thus  given,  is  about  fifteen  miles  in  length  from  north  to  south,  and  about
five  in  general  breadth  from  the  sea-shore  to  the  hills  which  border  it  on  the  east.  The  soil  of
this  plain  resembles  the  dark  loam  of  Egypt.  It  is  naturally  rich,  and,  in  the  season,  offers  a
most  exuberant  natural  cultivation,  but  it  is  now  almost  entirely  uncultivated.  Over  an  extent
of  several  miles  we  may  perhaps  see  a  solitary  Arab  turning  up  what,  on  the  great  plain,  ap-
peared to  be  only  a  few  yards  of  ground.  This  is  natural,  for  since,  from  the  extortions  of  the
government,  the  cultivator  cannot  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  own  labour,  hundreds  choose  rather  to
drag  out  a  half-starved  existence  within  the  walls  of  Acre  than  to  cultivate  the  rich  plain  which
lies  open  to  any  one  who  might  desire  to  till  it.  We  stop  not  at  the  towns  of  Zib b  or  Acre,
which  are  situated  close  to  the  shore,  nor  do  we  pause  to  drink  from  the  "  Fountain  of  the
Blessed  Virgin,"  but,  crossing  the  rivers  Belus  c  and  Kishon,  arrive  at  the  termination  of  the
plain  under  Carmel  .d

Our  fifth  stage  shall  reach  from  Mount  Carmel  to  Joppa,  fifty-six  miles.

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Mount  Carmel  is  formed  by  a  range  of  hills  coming  from  the
plain  of  Esdraelon,  and  ending  in  the  promontory  or  cape  which  forms  the  Bay  of  Acre.  The
road,  at  least  that  usually  taken,  winds  round  the  foot  of  this  promontory,  and,  after  having  turned
its  point,  we  continue  our  way  southward  along  the  sea-coast.  The  plain  here,  between  the  foot
of  Carmel  and  the  sea,  is  covered  with  brushwood,  much  frequented  by  various  wild  animals,
particularly  boars.  In  less  than  a  league  we  reach  a  cultivated  plain,  and,  after  crossing  that,
pass  behind  a  long  range  of  low  sandhills,  which  show  rocky  fragments  in  several  parts.  These
shut  out  the  view  of  the  sea  from  the  road ;  but  it  is  practicable  to  travel  on  the  other  side  of
them,  along  the  shore.  But,  if  we  journey  behind  them,  we  ultimately  turn  out  to  the  shore
through  a  pass  cut  in  these  hills  through  the  bed  of  rock.  This  pass  is  called  Waad-el-Ajal,
the  Vale  of  Death."     It  is  short,  and  appears  to  have  been  once  closed  by  a  gate.     It  is  just

*  Called  Ras  el  Abaid  by  the  natives,  classically  Album  Promontorium,  and  by  Europeans  Capo  Bianco.

b  Achzib  of  the  Bible  ;  classically  Ecdippa.

c  Now  Kardanah.

d  The  authorities  consulted  for  this  account  of  the  country  between  Tyre  and  Mount  Carmel  are  : — Morison,  liv.  ii.  c.  35;  Nau,
liv.  iii.  c.  23;  Maundrell,  50—54;  Brown,  370,  371;  Buckingham,  'Palestine,'  c.  iii.;  Irby  and  Mangles,  194—198;  Jowett,
'  Syria  and  the  Holy  Land,'  142—144;  Stephens,  ii.  342,353.

e  This  may  bring  to  mind  the  "  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death"  of  David.  Such  names  are  not  uncommonly  given  to  gloomy  or
dangerous  vales.

civ  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

broad  enough,  for  the  passage  of  a  wheeled  carriage  or  a  laden  camel,  with  causeways  on  each
side,  hewn  down  on  the  rock,  for  foot-passengers.  The  length  of  this  pass  may  be  about  a
hundred  yards.  Beyond  it  a  narrow,  sandy  flat  extends  to  the  sea.  Now,  turning  southward
again,  along  the  western  side  of  the  bed  of  rock  through  which  this  pass  has  been  cut,  nume-
rous square  chambers  are  seen  hewn  in  the  stone.  These  chambers  are  small  and  low,  with
benches  of  stone  and  sometimes  concave  recesses  inside,  and  cisterns  for  water  near.  In  par-
ticular parts,  little  flights  of  steps  are  provided,  leading  from  one  of  these  caverns  to  another.
These  were  doubtless  intended  for  habitations  ;  and,  as  they  bear  marks  of  high  antiquity,  it  is
not  impossible  that,  as  Mr.  Buckingham  conjectures,  they  may  be  counted  among  those
"  strongholds  near  the  sea,"  from  which  the  Hebrews  were  unable  to  dislodge  the
Canaanites.

We  travel  for  two  hours  along  these  hills  and  then  leave  them  through  a  wide  pass,  and
enter  on  a  wide  plain,  which  we  traverse,  passing  by  the  small  village  of  Tortura,a  until  we
reach  the  ruins  of  Csesarea,  the  capital  of  the  Herods,  so  often  mentioned  in  the  history  of  the
New  Testament.  The  whole  plain  is,  in  this  part,  a  sandy  desert  now ;  and  no  human  being
lives  within  many  miles  of  the  once  rich  and  busy  city.  Leaving  this  spot  for  the  present,
we  continue  our  way  along  the  shore,  chiefly  on  a  sandy  beach,  with  here  and  there  beds  of
rock  towards  the  sea.  Mr.  Monro  travelled  along  this  beach  for  two  hours,  and  then,  turning
up  into  the  plain,  found  that  he  had  entered  the  celebrated  plain  which  he  describes  as  "  the
rich  pasture-land  of  the  Valley  of  Sharon,  clothed  with  fresh  verdure  as  far  as  the  eye
can  reach.  The  white  clover  springs  spontaneously,  and  among  a  variety  of  shrubs  and
flowers  were  a  few  dwarf  tulips.  I  observed  nothing  bearing  the  appearance  of  what  we  call
a  rose,  and  unless  '  the  rose  of  Sharon  '  is  the  Cistus  roseus  of  Linnaeus,  which  grows  abun-
dantly, I  know  not  what  it  may  be.  This  tract  of  land,  glorious  as  it  is  to  the  eye,  is  yet
deficient  of  water  in  its  central  part,  and  for  this  reason  appears  not  to  be  frequented  even  by
the  Arabs :  I  traversed  it  for  hours  without  noticing  a  single  tent.b  The  grass  and  the  flowers
spring  to  waste  their  sweetness  and  to  fall  unseen ;  and  the  storks,  striding  to  and  fro,  are  the
only  animals  by  which  they  are  visited.  The  soil  is  light  and  the  surface  elastic ;  and  the
uneven  foreground  swells  into  hills  to  the  east,  which  are  backed  by  the  mountains  of  Samaria
beyond."  This  was  in  spring.  To  Buckingham,  who  passed  this  tract  in  the  depth  of  winter,
it  appeared  a  desert.

In  proceeding  southward  over  the  plains,  which  formed,  with  this,  the  land  of  Sharon,
various  interesting  changes  are  exhibited  to  our  view.  As  we  advance,  the  pasture-land
becomes  bordered  by  a  sandy  tract,  which  extends  a  considerable  distance  into  the  grass-
land, above  which  it  is  elevated  about  thirteen  feet  in  some  places.  It  has  the  appearance
of  an  almost  perpendicular  embankment,  to  the  very  foot  of  which  the  grass  grows  lux-
uriantly. A  considerable  number  of  low  shrubs  grow  upon  the  sand.  To  this  succeeds  a
cultivated  plain,  passing  from  which,  by  crossing  a  valley  which  runs  eastward,  we  reach
another  more  extensive  and  beautiful  plain,  covered  with  trees  and  with  a  carpet  of
richer  verdure  than  is  often  seen  in  Palestine.  In  this  wooded  country  was  situated  the
town  of  Sharon,  which  appears  to  have  given  its  name  to  the  fine  plains  which  we  are
describing,  and  which  extend  from  Caesarea  to  Joppa,  and  from  the  shore  to  the  hills  of
Samaria.  From  this  central  place,  far  around,  the  plains  are  more  extensive,  more  beautiful,
and,  to  all  appearance,  more  fertile  than  those  of  Acre,  of  Zebulon,  and  of  Carmel.  But  it
should  be  noted  that,  as  for  some  time  after  leaving  Caesarea,  so  for  some  time  before
approaching  Jaffa,c  the  plains  are  more  bare  and  desert  than  in  the  intervening  districts.  The
wooded  country  which  we  have  mentioned  is  succeeded  by  pasture-grounds,  such  as  have
been  already  noticed :  but  about  eleven  miles  before  we  reach  Jaffa  the  hills  stretch  out
towards  the  coast ;  and  a  narrow  pass  through  them  conducts  to  an  elevated  plain,  a  consider-

a  Probably  the  scriptural  Dor,  the  Dora  of  Josephus.

b  A  mere  accident ;  the  tract  is  frequented  by  Bedouins,  though  none  happened  to  be  there  at  the  time.

»  Or,  more  properly,  Yaffa  ;  which  is  just  the  old  Hebrew  name.     This  is  the  Joppa  of  the  New  Testament.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cv

able  part  of  which  is  under  cultivation.  From  this  the  road  descends  to  the  beach,  and  pro-
ceeds under  brown  cliffs  and  hills  till,  finally,  we  pass  over  a  desert  soil  to  reach  the  gates
of  Jaffa.*

The  whole  distance  between  Jaffa  and  El  Arish,  on  "  the  river  of  Egypt,"  may  be
despatched  in  one  long  stage,  of  nearly  a  hundred  miles,  through  the  land  of  the  Philistines.
In  the  part  which  lies  between  Jaffa  and  Gaza,  the  eastern  hills  approach  nearer  than  in  the
plains  of  Sharon.  But  these  hills,  although  connected  by  ramifications  with  the  central
mountains,  have  wide  plains  and  valleys  behind  them,  and  the  hilly  country  of  Judea.

It  may  also  be  observed  that  throughout  and  beyond  this  extent,  though  not  all  the  way  to
El  Arish,  the  plains  between  the  mountains  and  the  sea  are  less  level  than  they  have  been,  the
surface  being,  for  the  most  part,  composed  of  low  undulating  hills.

Thus,  after  we  passed  through  the  fine  gardens  of  Jaffa,  which  extend  for  a  considerable
distance  in  the  direction  of  our  road,  and  which  are  fenced  with  hedges  of  the  prickly  pear,
and  abundantly  furnished  with  pomegranate,  orange,  fig-trees,  and  water-melons,  we  find  the
surface  of  the  ground  beautifully  undulating.  The  hills  are  rather  high  and  partially  culti-
vated; but,  upon  the  whole,  the  plantations  of  thistles,  which  abound  throughout  this  country,
are  quite  as  numerous  as  the  fields  of  grain.  About  Ashdod,  eighteen  miles  from  Joppa,  the  still
undulating  ground  is  covered  with  rich  pastures.  The  description  given  by  Sandys,  which  is
still  applicable,  applies  to  the  tract  between  Ashdod  and  Gaza : — "  The  champion  betweene
about  twenty  miles,  full  of  fiowerie  hills  ascending  leasurely,  and  not  much  surmounting  their
rancker  vallies,  with  groves  of  olives  and  other  fruites  dispersedly  adorned.  Yet  is  this
wealthy  bottom  (as  are  all  the  rest),  for  the  most  part,  uninhabited,  but  onely  for  a  few  small
and  contemptible  villages,  possessed  by  barbarous  Moores  (Arabs),  who  till  no  more  than  will
serve  to  feed  them;  the  grass  waist  high,  unmowed,  uneaten,  and  uselessly  withering."  As
he  observes,  the  country  is  bare  of  trees;  but  when  the  growth  of  spring  comes,  the  undulating
hills,  everything  looks  fresh  and  beautiful.  "  It  is  not,"  says  Richardson,  "  like  the  land  of
Egypt,  but  a  thousand  times  more  interesting."  Askelon  is  nearly  midway  in  our  route
between  these  two  places,  and  the  vale  in  which  it  lies  is  peculiarly  rich  and  beautiful.  In
the  spring  it  is  enamelled  with  flowers,  among  which  our  garden-pink  assumes  the  place  of
daisies.  On  approaching  Gaza,  the  eye,  which  has  not  lately  seen  much  of  trees,  is  charmed
by  the  abundant  sycamores  and  the  plantations  of  old  and  large  olive-trees  which  surround
that  interesting  spot.

Beyond  Gaza  the  mountains  are  far  inland,  though  visible  in  the  distance ;  but  the  undu-
lation of  the  ground  over  which  we  pass  continues.  The  country  as  far  as  Khan  Younes,  or
even  Rafah,b  continues  to  present  the  same  kind  of  rural  scenery  as  before, — beautiful  undu-
lating fields  covered  with  flocks  and  herds,  and  crops  of  wheat,  barley,  lentils,  and  tobacco.
Speaking  generally  of  the  country  which  we  have  thus  far  traversed,  Ali  Bey  says,  "  All  the
country  of  Palestine0  which  I  saw  from  Khan  Younes  to  Jaffa  is  beautiful.  It  is  composed  of
undulating  hills  of  a  rich  soil,  similar  to  that  of  the  Nile,  and  is  covered  with  the  richest  and
finest  vegetation.  But  there  is  not  a  single  river  in  all  the  district ;  there  is  not  even  a  spring.
All  the  torrents  I  crossed  were  dry,d  and  the  inhabitants  have  no  other  water  to  drink  than  that
which  they  collect  in  the  rainy  season,  nor  any  other  means  of  irrigation  than  rain-water  and
that  of  the  wells,  which  indeed  is  very  good."

At  some  distance  beyond  Rafah  the  crops  get  thin  and  poor,  although  the  general  aspect  of
the  country  remains  the  same.  But  after  we  have  passed  the  village  of  Sheikh  Juide,  three
hours  beyond  Rafah,  a  perceptible  struggle  commences  between  the  sand  and  the  grass,  or  sand
and  cultivation.  The  sand  gradually  gains  the  superiority  during  the  twenty  or  twenty-one
miles  we  have  still  to  pass  before  we  reach  El  Arish,  which  is  seated  upon  a  hill  in  the  midst

a  The  particulars  embodied  in  this  account  of  the  coast  from  Carmel  to  Jaffa  are  derived  from  Iiuckingham,  c.  vi. ;  Monro,  i.
60—91;  Pococke.i.  15;  Nau.liv.  i.  c.  5 ;  Morison,  544;  but  chiefly  from  the  two  first.  Few  travellers  have  tracked  the  whole
way  from  Carmel  to  Jaffa  ;  but  many  have  crossed  and  described  the  plain  of  Sharon.

b  Classically  Ruphia.

c  The  reader  scarcely  need  be  reminded  that  the  district  we  are  now  travelling,  since  Jaffa,  is  the  original  Palestine,  the  land  of
the  Philistines,  which  gave  its  name  to  the  whole  country.

J  This  was  about  the  middle  of  July.

VOL.   I.  1)

CV1

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  V.

of  drifting  sands  ;  and  although  cultivation  struggles  to  that  point,  it  is  discontinued  beyond
it,  and  from  thence  to  the  borders  of  the  Nile  we  have  only  the  naked  desert  of  shifting  sand,
which  forms  a  marked  barrier  in  this  direction  between  Palestine  and  Egypt.  Here,  therefore,
we  shall  stop.a

Thus  by  taking  up  one  set  of  travellers  where  another  failed,  we  have  been  enabled  to  give
such  an  account  of  the  whole  seaward  plain  as  will  suffice  for  the  purposes  of  this  work.  In
now  proceeding  to  the  great  interior  valley,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  realize  the  same  advantage.
It  has  been  crossed  by  different  travellers  in  various  parts,  and  portions  of  its  length  have
been  traversed,  but  a  very  considerable  part  of  its  whole  extent  remains  unexplored  ;  it  may,
nevertheless,  be  possible,  by  comparing  and  combining  the  observations  made  at  different
points,  to  obtain  some  tolerably  clear  notions  of  the  whole.

Our  first  attention  is,  of  course,  required  by  the  great  valley  or  enclosed  plain,  which  sepa-
rates the  parallel  ranges  of  Libanus  and  Anti-Libanus.     This  vale,  extends  above  ninety  miles

[Baalbec.]

in  length,  from  north  to  south,  and  may  average  about  eleven  miles  in  breadth.  Its  breadth
is  unusually  equal.  The  widest  part  is  towards  the  northern  extremity,  and  the  narrowest
towards  the  southern.  This  was  the  Coele-Syria  or  Hollow  Syria  of  the  ancients,  and  now
bears  the  name  of  El  Bekaah,b  or  "  the  Valley,"  by  way  of  eminence.  This  valley,  by  collecting
the  waters  from  the  mountains  on  either  hand,  is  abundantly  watered  by  rivulets  ;  almost
every  village  has  its  spring,  all  of  which  descend  into  the  valley,  and  either  lose  themselves  or
join  the  Liettani  (the  ancient  Leontes),  the  source  of  which  is  between  the  towns  of  Zahle  and
Baalbec,  about  two  hours  from  the  latter  place,  near  a  hill  called  Tel  Hushben.     The  soil  is

a  Our  guides  through  the  land  of  the  Philistines  have  been,  Richardson,  Mangles  [these  alone  traversed  its  whole  extent],
Sandys, and  Ali  Bey:  Zuallert,  D'Arvieux,  and  Roger  [whose account  has  been  copied  by  Surius],  have  also  been  consulted;  but
the  route  along  the  coast  from  Jaffa,  southward,  was  not  much  frequented  by  the  older  travellers.  Dapper,  in  his  "  Syrie  en
Palestyn,"  has  a  very  full  account  of  the  land  of  the  Philistines  (pp.  211 — 229),  historical  and  geographical,  comprising,  perhaps,
all  the  information  which  existed  prior  to  the  eighteenth  century.

b  The  word  means  a  valley  or  low  plain  in  Hebrew,  Syriac,  and  Arabic,  and  is  expressly  applied  in  the  Scriptures  to  this  very
valley.  See  Josh.  xi.  17  ;  xii.  7;  and  Ezek.  xxxvii.  1,  2,  where  the  words  rendered,  very  properly,  "  the  valley  of  Lebanon,"
are  literally  "  the  Bekaah  of  Lebanon."  The  northern  part,  in  which  Baalbec  is  situated,  is  called,  distinctively,  Belad  (district,
province)  Baalbec;  but  El  Bekaah  applies  to  the  whole  valley,  although  it  is  more  frequently  heard  with  reference  to  the  southern
half,  which  has  no  distinctive  name.  This  led  Burckhardt  into  what  we  conceive  to  be  the  error  of  supposing  the  name  El  Bekaah
was  confined  to  that  portion,  and  to  divide  it  into  two  parts.  El  Bekaah  and  Belad  Baalbec.  La  Roque  and  Volney,  who  both
resided  long  in  Lebanon,  consider  the  first  of  these  names  to  comprehend  the  whole  extent  of  the  valley.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cvii

very  fertile ;  and  as  the  mountains  concentrate  the  rays  of  the  sun,  a  heat  in  summer  is  pro-
duced scarcely  inferior  to  that  of  Egypt.  Such  a  combination  of  water,  warmth,  and  a  good
soil,  produces  exuberant  fertility  everywhere  in  the  East.  It  does  so  in  the  Bekaah,  which  is
hence  naturally,  perhaps,  the  most  rich  and  beautiful  part  of  Syria.  In  La  Roque's  time  the
natural  beauty  and  agreeableness  of  this  vale,  together  with  the  extensive  cultivation  and  the
numerous  villages  and  plantations,  rendered  it  fully  comparable  to  the  far-renowned  plain  of
Damascus.  But  the  terrible  earthquake  of  1759,  joined  to  the  subsequent  wars  with  the
Turks,  brought  almost  everything  to  ruin  and  neglect.  But  still,  even  so  late  as  the  beginning
of  this  century,  the  plain  and  a  part  of  the  mountain  to  the  distance  of  a  league  and  a  half
around  the  town  of  Baalbec  were  covered  with  grape  plantations  :  but  the  oppressions  of  the
governors  and  their  satellites  have  now  entirely  destroyed  them  ;  and  the  inhabitants  of  that
place,  instead  of  eating  their  own  grapes,  which  were  renowned  for  their  superior  flavour,  are
obliged  to  import  such  as  they  need  from  the  mountains.  The  southern  part  of  the  vale  is
now  better  cultivated  than  the  northern  ;  but  even  there  five-sixths  of  the  soil  is  left  in  pasture
to  the  Arabs.  The  usual  produce  of  the  harvest  in  the  vale  is  ten-fold ;  but  in  very  good  years
it  is  often  twenty-fold.  Walnut-trees  abound,  particularly  in  the  more  northerly  part  of  the
vale,  as  do  also  mulberry-trees.  The  climate  is  particularly  suited  for  vines;  and  the  vale
formerly  and  does  still  to  some  extent  produce  those  fine  and  very  superior  raisins  which  were
exported  in  all  directions  under  the  name  of  "  raisins  of  Damascus."

Volney  says  that,  notwithstanding  the  heat  of  this  valley,  its  air  is  not  at  all  unhealthy?
giving  as  a  proof  that  the  inhabitants  sleep  without  injury  upon  their  house-tops.  This  salu-
brity he  attributes  to  the  fact  that  the  waters  never  stagnate,  and  that  the  air  is  perpetually
renewed  by  the  north  wind.  But  Burckhardt  says,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  air  of  the  valley
is  far  from  being  healthy.  "  The  chain  of  Libanus  interrupts  the  course  of  the  westerly  winds,
which  are  regular  in  Syria  during  the  summer  months ;  and  the  want  of  these  winds  renders
the  climate  extremely  hot  and  oppressive."  Considering  the  reputation  of  the  valley,  we  in-
cline to  think  that  Volney  is  most  probably  in  the  right.  Burckhardt  was  a  mountaineer —
a  Swiss, — and  men  are  apt  to  judge  from  their  own  impressions  without  reference  to  facts.
A  climate  may  be  oppressively  hot,  and  yet  not  unwholesome  to  the  natives.  The  plain  of
Irak  Arabi  is  far  warmer  than  any  part  of  Syria,  and  yet  a  healthier  country  would  be  very
difficult  to  find.a

The  valley  of  the  Jordan  is,  of  course,  the  space  between  the  hills  on  each  side  of  the  river
and  its  lakes,  without  regard  to  the  immediate  bed  of  these  waters,  which  will  more  properly
be  noticed  in  the  chapter  on  Lakes  and  Rivers.  Viewing  this  from  above  the  sources  of  the
Jordan  to  the  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  the  extent  is  not  under  175  miles.  The  breadth  varies
much ;  in  some  places  it  is  very  inconsiderable,  and  in  others  widens  into  extensive  plains.
"  This  valley,  through  its  whole  course,  is  bounded  by  a  chain  of  mountains  on  each  side.  On
the  east  they  rise  almost  precipitously  from  the  bed  of  the  river ;  but  on  the  west  there  is  a
fine  fertile  vale,  averaging  about  half  or  three-quarters  of  a  mile  broad,  between  the  river  and
the  mountain.  This  does  not  apply  to  the  lake  of  Gennesareth ;  for  there  the  mountains  are
close  to  the  lake  on  each  side,  with  here  and  there  a  small  beautiful  vale  opening  on  the  west-
The  mountains  on  the  east  are  bolder,  and  continue  with  little  interruption  all  the  way.  On
the  west  side  the  interruptions  are  frequent,  and  charming  defiles,  irrigated  by  small  streams
of  water,  pass  off."  This  statement  is  from  Dr.  Richardson,  who  tracked  more  of  the  course
of  this  valley  than  any  other  single  traveller;  and,  in  explanation  of  one  point,  it  is  only  neces-
sary to  remind  the  reader  of  our  previous  statement,  that  the  bolder  eminences  on  the  eastern
side  of  the  valley  are,  to  a  great  extent,  cliffs,  behind  which  there  are  not  proportional  descents,
but  higher  levels,  than  those  which  the  western  side  of  the  valley  offers.  We  have  also  had
occasion  to  state  that  the  valley  itself  offers  the  lowest  level  in  all  Syria,  that  level  being  the
lowest  of  all  in  the  southern  parts.  Some  idea  of  this  most  extraordinary  depression  of  the
valley  may  be  formed  from  the  facts  that  while  Jerusalem,  on  the  western  mountains,  is  2600

a  This  account  of  the  great  valley  of  Lebanon  has  been  drawn  up  chieflyfrom  the  brief  particulars  afforded  by  La  Roque,  Volney,
Burckhardt,  and  Elliot.     Daudini  has  nothing  of  any  value  on  the  subject.

p2

cviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

feet,  and  Jerash,  on  the  eastern  plain,  is  2000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean,*  the
plain  of  Jericho,  at  Rihhah,  is  100  feet,  and  the  Jordan  itself,  hefore  it  reaches  the  Dead  Sea,
is  1269  feet  below  the  same  level.1'  The  consequence  of  this  is  a  degree  of  heat  in  the  valley
comparable  to  that  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile ;  which,  with  the  presence  of  water,  exhibits  the
usual  effect  in  the  most  exuberant  fertility,  under  proper  treatment,  with  a  profuse  manifesta-
tion of  vegetable  products  which,  out  of  the  valley,  can  only  be  found  in  a  more  southern
latitude.  Here,  also,  the  seasons  are  more  advanced  than  in  the  more  elevated  tracts  of  country
on  either  hand  ;  so  that,  upon  the  whole,  the  vale  -of  the  Jordan  may  be  regarded  as  a  zone  of
almost  tropical  country  extending  through  what  may  be  called  a  temperate  clime.

As  we  consider  that  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  may  take  its  commencement  from  the  angle
formed  by  the  divergence  of  Jebel  Essheikh  from  the  main  chain  of  Anti-Libanus,  we  shall  there
commence  the  rapid  survey  of  it  we  now  purpose  to  take.

The  commencing  valley  thus  formed  seems  to  be  called  Wady  Ityne,c  though  it  also  bears
the  name  of  its  principal  town,  Hasbeya.  This  vale  has  a  general  direction  N.N.E.  and  S.S.W.,
and  varies  in  breadth  from  two  to  three  miles.  Its  level  is  often  interrupted  by  small  hillocks,
but  it  is  well  cultivated  throughout  with  corn,  vines,  and  olives,  and  is  full  of  villages,  peopled
wholly  by  Druses  and  Christians  in  nearly  equal  numbers.  They  rear  silkworms  on  a  very
extensive  scale,  and  for  their  sake  the  mulberry-tree  is  largely  cultivated.

At  the  end  of  this  valley  the  mountains  approach  each  other,  having  only  a  narrow  passage
for  the  stream  from  Hasbeya.  They  then  diverge  again,  and  stretch  wide  apart,  to  form  what
is  usually  considered  the  commencement  of  the  Jordan  valley ;  but  which,  geographically,  had
better  be  regarded  as  the  basin  and  plain  of  the  lake  Houle.  The  plain,  without  the  lake  of
that  name,  is  from  nine  to  twelve  miles  in  breadth,  by  about  twenty  in  length.  This  beautiful
plain,  enclosed  by  high  mountains,  and  backed  in  one  direction  by  the  snowy  heights  of
Hermon  (Jebel  Essheikh)  is  watered  by  the  river  of  Hasbeya  and  the  Jordan,  as  also  by  several
rivulets  which  descend  from  the  mountains.  The  soil  is  most  fertile.  It  is  covered  every-
where with  the  richest  pastures,  to  which  some  Arab  tribes  and  the  Toorkmans  bring  their
cattle.  Only  a  very  small  part  is  under  cultivation ;  and  the  crops  of  wheat  and  barley  here,
as  in  other  parts  of  the  Jordan  valley,  are  the  finest  which  can  anywhere  be  seen.  Thistles
abound  here,  as  on  the  coast ;  and  so  tall  and  gigantic  are  they  as  to  annoy  those  who  ride
through  the  plain,  as  they  reach  to  the  saddles  of  the  horses.  The  hills  around  are  to  a  very
considerable  extent  covered  with  oaks.d

Beyond  this  plain,  southward,  the  hills  approach,  or  rather  the  western  hills  incline  towards,
the  eastern  cliffs,  having  a  comparatively  narrow  valley  or  plain  to  connect  the  basin  of  Lake
Houle  with  that  of  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth.  This  is  a  fine  undulating  plain,  amply  covered
with  weeds  and  thistles ;  but  with  a  soil  capable  of  any  species  of  cultivation.

The  mountains  open  again  as  we  draw  near  the  great  lake  of  Gennesareth ;  but  the  basin
thus  formed  is  little  more  than  sufficient  for  its  waters,  so  that  a  narrow  vale  between  their
brink  and  the  foot  of  the  enclosing  mountains  is  all  the  space  afforded.  The  eastern  side  had
never  been,  till  of  late  years,  visited  by  travellers  ;  and  we  were  told  that  the  vale  only  existed
on  the  western  side,  and  that  the  feet  of  the  eastern  mountains  were  bathed  by  the  waters.
But  this  is  now  known  not  to  be  the  fact.

The  north-western  as  well  as  the  southern  shore  of  the  lake  is  generally  sandy ;  but,  passing
down  on  the  western  side,  we  soon  come  to  the  plain,  which  reaches  to  the  town  of  Tiberias,
and  which  may  average  nearly  a  mile  in  breadth.  The  streams  which  come  down  from  the
mountains,  and  cross  this  plain  to  enter  the  lake,  occasion  a  luxuriant  herbage  along  its  borders.
The  pastures  of  the  sloping  meadows  which  form  this  plain  are  proverbial  for  their  richness
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring  districts.  It  is,  indeed,  exceedingly  fertile,  but  for
the  most  part  uncultivated.  The  waste  parts  are  covered  with  the  rankest  vegetation, — reeds,
nebbek-trees,  oleanders,  honey-suckles,  wildflowers,  and  splendid  thistles  in  immense  crops.

R  '  Geographical  Journal,'  1837,  T>-  456.  b  See  p.  lvii.

c  So  Buckingham  calls  it,  '  Arab  Tribes,'  338.

*1  Burckhardt,  32—42;  Richardson,  ii.  445—454  ;  Buckingham, '  Arab  Tribes,'  399—406.

Chap  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cix

There  are  fig-trees,  and  a  few  palm-trees  occur  here  and  there.  Approaching  Tiberias,3  we
pass  the  warm  mineral  springs,  which  have  already  been  noticed  in  this  work  ;  and,  in  the
vicinity  of  the  town,  we  find  the  plain  and  the  lower  slopes  of  the  hills  under  cultivation.  The
heat  of  the  climate  would  allow  the  inhabitants  to  grow  almost  any  tropical  plant ;  but  the  only
products  of  their  fields  are  wheat,  barley,  dhourra,  tobacco,  melons,  grapes,  and  a  few
vegetables.  The  melons  are  of  the  finest  quality,  and  are  in  great  demand  at  Acre  and
Damascus,  where  the  fruit  is  nearly  a  month  later  in  ripening.  The  climate  here,  and  gene-
rally on  the  borders  of  the  lake,  is  extremely  hot,  and  is  alleged  by  Burckhardt  to  be  unhealthy,
as  the  mountains  impede  the  free  course  of  the  westerly  winds,  which  prevail  throughout  Syria
in  the  summer.  Hence  intermittent  fevers,  especially  those  of  the  quartan  form,  are  very
common  at  that  season.  Little  rain  falls  in  winter ;  snow  is  almost  unknown  on  the  borders  of
the  lake,  and  the  temperature  appears  to  be  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  Dead  Sea.

Under  the  altered  circumstances  of  Syria,  Lord  Lyndsay  was  enabled  to  accomplish  that
examination  of  the  eastern  margin  of  the  lake  which  Seetzen  attempted  in  vain.b  And,  as  the
result  of  his  survey,  he  tells  us  that,  "  So  far  from  finding  the  road  rugged  or  difficult,  it  was
far  easier  than  on  the  western  bank ;  in  fact,  by  far  the  best  we  have  ever  travelled  in  Syria —
lying  entirely  through  meadows,  covered  with  corn,  that  descended  to  the  water's  edge ; — and
this  description  applies  to  the  whole  eastern  side  of  the  lake;  the  western  is  much  more
rugged  and  precipitous.  Nothing  can  exceed  the  beauty  of  the  lake  and  opposite  mountains,
at  simset;  the  view  from  Tiberias  is  quite  tame  in  comparison."  c

What  is  more  usually  called  the  Ghor,  or  Valley,  of  the  Jordan,  is  that  part  which  lies  be-
tween the  two  lakes  of  Gennesareth  and  Asphallites,  the  direct  distance  between  which  is  about
sixty-five  miles.  This  beautiful  plain  is  five  or  six  miles  across'1  in  the  northern  half,  but  widens
greatly  in  its  progress  to  the  Dead  Sea.  It  occurred  to  Seetzen  that  this  plain  of  El  Ghor
greatly  resembled  that  of  El  Bekaah  (already  described),  save  that  the  mountains  which  inclose
the  Bekaah  are  far  more  grand  than  those  which  bound  the  Jordan  valley.  The  great  number
of  rivulets  which  descend  from  the  mountains  on  both  sides  of  the  Ghor,  and  form  numerous
pools  of  stagnant  water,  produce  in  many  places  a  pleasing  verdure,  and  a  luxuriant  growth  of
wild  herbage  and  grass  ;  but  the  greater  part  of  the  ground  is  a  parched  desert,  of  which  a
few  spots  only  are  cultivated  by  the  Bedouins.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Bysan  (Belhshan)
the  soil  is  entirely  of  marie ;  there  are  very  few  trees,  but  wherever  there  is  water  high  reeds
are  found.  The  river  itself  flows  in  a  valley  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  in  breadth,  which
is  considerably  lower  than  the  rest  of  the  plain  of  the  Ghor ;  and  this  lower  valley  is  covered
with  high  trees  and  a  luxuriant  verdure,  which  afford  a  striking  contrast  with  the  sandy
slopes  which  border  it  on  both  sides.  Except  for  the  town  of  Bysan,  and  the  village  of  Rihhah
(Jericho  ?),  the  plain  is  wholly  unoccupied,  unless  by  the  Bedouins. e

On  approaching  the  Asphaltic  Lake,  the  distance  between  the  opposite  mountains,  as  already
intimated,  is  greatly  increased — leaving  between  them  and  the  river,  on  the  east,  the  plains  of
Moab,  and  on  the  west  the  large  plain  of  Jericho.  As  almost  all  the  pilgrims  and  travellers
in  the  Holy  Land  have  made  it  a  point  to  visit  the  Jordan, — to  reach  which,  from  Jerusalem,
they  must  cross  this  plain, — there  are  few  parts  of  Palestine  which  have  been  more  frequently
described.  This  plain  is  very  extensive,  probably  eighteen  miles  in  extreme  length,  by  a
breadth  of  seven  or  eight  miles.  It  is  bounded,  internally,  by  tall  mountains,  which  form  a
kind  of  bow  by  bending  westward  in  their  course  from  north  to  south.  Of  this  bow  the  Jordan
is  as  the  chord.  Beyond  the  river,  eastward,  are  other  mountains,  as  high  or  higher  than
these,  and  still  more  distant  from  the  river ;  the  whole  making  the  plain  appear  as  the  arena  of
an  amphitheatre.  This  circle  of  enclosing  mountains  causes  an  extraordinary  degree  of  heat
in  the  plain,  by  the  concentration  and  reflection  of  the  sun's  rays.  The  almost  tropical  warmth
of  this  plain  may  also  be  partly  ascribed  to  the  sandy  nature  of  its  soil,  the  great  depression  of

a  Now  pronounced  Tabaria,  or  Tabareah.

b  Seetzen  seems  to  say  he  had  succeeded.  He  certainly  did  visit  the  eastern  shore,  but  did  not  traverse  its  extent.  From  the
north  he  went  a  little  way  down  the  eastern  side  to  an  Arab  camp,  but  was  obliged  to  return ;  and  from  the  south  he  went  up  the
eastern  shore  as  far  as  Feik,  but  the  extensive  tract  between  these  two  points  he  did  not  see.

c  Burckhardt.  318—33]  ;  Buckingham,  c.  xxvi. ;  Lyndsay,  87—92.  d  "  Two  hours."—  Burckhardt.

e  Seetzen,  22;  Burckhardt,  344.

ex  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

its  surface,  the  obstruction  which  the  enclosing  mountains  offer  to  the  passage  of  the  external
breezes,  and,  in  some  degree,  to  the  aridity  of  the  sides  and  summits  of  these  mountains ;  for,
as  well  observed  by  Mariti,  that  heat  is  reflected  with  much  greater  force  from  such  than  from
fertile  or  cultivated  hills.  The  heat  is  so  very  strong,  that  as  early  as  the  latter  end  of  April
it  deprived  Morison  of  his  appetite  and  sleep ;  and  Nau,  as  late  as  October,  found  even  the
nights  oppressively  warm.

The  soil  of  the  plain  is  almost  entirely  composed  of  sand;  but  beyond  Rihhah,  to  the  north  and
to  the  east,  it  seems  to  be  better,  and  not  infertile.  But  the  soil  of  the  whole  plain,  the  fertility
of  which  has  been  so  much  extolled  by  various  Latin  writers,  is  not  naturally  fertile.  All  the
richness  it  ever  had,  or  yet,  in  some  quarters,  retains,  has  been  owing  to  the  spring  of  Elisha,
which,  in  such  a  climate,  rendered  even  this  poor  soil  most  productive  wherever  its  waters
came ;  and  certainly  the  appearance  which  it  formerly  offered,  when  these  waters  were  dis-
persed far  around  in  numerous  irrigating  rills,  must  have  been  very  different  from  that  which
it  exhibits  now,  when,  with  the  exception  of  some  fruitful  spots,  the  whole  presents  an  arid  and
desolate  appearance,  and  only  one  poor  stunted  palm-tree  can  be  found  within  view  of  the
ancient  "  city  of  palms."  a

Going  down  towards  the  head  of  the  Dead  Sea,  the  soil  is  still  barren,  but  ceases  to  be  sandy,
having  a  surface  of  dark-coloured  earth,  which  might  be  taken  for  alluvium,  but  that  it  pro-
duces nothing  but  a  few  solitary  desert  plants,  and  seems  as  if  included  in  the  curse  which
overthrew  the  cities  of  the  plain.  It  is  much  intersected  by  deep  torrents,  and  crusted  at  the
top,  as  if  flooded  occasionally  by  the  swellings  of  the  Jordan,  or  washed  by  copious  rains.b

The  Dead  Sea  is  hemmed  in  on  the  west  by  the  mountains  of  Judea,  and  on  the  east  by  those
of  Moab.  Of  these  mountains,  and  of  the  mineral  products  of  this  region,  we  have  already
written ;  and  our  attention  must  now  be  confined  to  the  vale  which  is  left,  on  the  east  and  on
the  west,  between  the  margin  of  the  lake  and  the  feet  of  the  mountains.  The  plain  on  the  east
side,  which  continues  to  bear  the  name  of  El  Ghor,  varies  in  breadth  from  one  to  four  miles.
It  is  not  so  entirely  a  desolation  as  the  common  descriptions  of  the  lake  would  lead  us  to  sup-
pose. It  has  many  fertile  spots,  particularly  towards  the  south,  and  is  to  a  great  extent
covered  with  forests,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  miserable  peasants  who  inhabit  there  build  their
huts  of  rushes,  and  cultivate  their  fields  of  dhourra  and  tobacco.  The  spots  not  cultivated  are,
for  the  most  part,  sandy  ;  so  that  there  is  but  little  pasturage,  and  the  camels  feed  principally
upon  the  leaves  of  trees.  The  resident  peasants  may  amount  to  about  300  families.  They
live  very  poorly,  owing  to  the  continual  exactions  of  the  neighbouring  Bedouins,  who  descend
in  winter  from  the  mountains  of  Belka  and  Kerek,  and  pasture  their  cattle  amidst  their  fields.
The  heat  of  the  climate  in  this  low  valley,  during  the  summer,  renders  it  almost  uninhabitable.
The  people  then  go  nearly  naked;  but  their  low  huts  rather  increase  the  mid-day  heat,  than
afford  shelter  from  it.c

The  character  of  the  plain  on  the  western  border  of  the  lake  was  perfectly  unknown  until
lately  visited  by  Professor  Robinson  and  Rev.  Eli  Smith.  All  that  former  travellers  could
state  amounted  to  some  general  impression  formed  from  the  partial  and  obscure  view  taken
from  the  head  of  the  lake.  The  American  travellers  advanced  from  the  west  to  a  point  near
the  southern  extremity  of  the  lake,  where  the  name  of  Ain  Jiddi  points  out  to  us  the  Engeddi
of  the  Bible.  They  first  obtained  a  view  of  the  lake  from  the  summit  of  a  precipitous  cliff,
overhanging  Engeddi  and  the  lake  at  the  height  of  at  least  1,500  feet.  From  this  point  we
will  copy  their  statement,  with  the  omission  of  some  parts  which  we  shall  require  for  another
purpose  : —

"  The  Dead  Sea  lay  before  us  in  its  vast  deep  chasm,  shut  in  on  both  sides  by  precipitous
mountains,  and,  with  its  low  projecting  points  and  flat  border  towards  the  south,  resembling
much  a  long  winding  bay,  or  the  estuary  of  a  large  river  d  when  the  tide  is  out  and  the  shoals
left  dry.     We  descended  to  the  shore  by  a  pass  more  steep,  rugged,  and  difficult  than  is  to

a  Nau,  349;  Morison,  507 ;  Surius,  491  ;  Mariti,  ii.  305 ;  Monro,  ii.  134-8;  Taylor,  '  La  Syrie,'  175.
t>  Monro,  ii.  145-6.  c  Burckhardt  390,  391.

d  An  American  bay,  an  American  river,  of  course.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxi

be  found  among  the  Alps,  and  pitched  our  tent  near  a  fine  large  fountain  which  bursts  out
upon  a  narrow  terrace  still  400  feet  above  the  sea.  The  water  of  the  fountain  is  beautifully
transparent,  but  its  temperature  is  81°  of  Fahrenheit.

"  The  whole  descent  below  the  fountain  was  apparently  once  terraced  for  gardens ;  and  the
ruins  of  a  town  are  to  be  seen  on  the  right.  The  whole  slope  is  still  covered  with  shrubs  and
trees  of  a  more  southern  clime.  Nothing  is  needed  but  tillage  to  render  this  a  most  prolific
spot.  The  soil  is  rich,  the  heat  great,  and  water  abundant.  The  approach  to  the  sea  is  here
over  a  bank  of  pebbles,  several  feet  higher  than  the  level  of  the  water  as  we  saw  it.  The
phenomena  around  the  sea  are  such  as  might  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  its  waters  and
the  character  of  the  region  round  about, — for  the  most  part  a  naked,  dreary  waste.

"  Next  morning  we  were  compelled  to  re-ascend  the  pass  in  order  to  proceed  northward  along
the  shelving  table-land  above;  the  projecting  cliffs  cutting  off  all  passage  below  along  the
water.  At  night  we  encamped  again  on  a  cliff  1,000  feet  above  the  sea,  overhanging  the
fountain  Turabeh  which  is  below  on  the  shore.

"  We  continued  our  course  next  day,  descending  again  by  a  difficult  pass;  and  after  travelling
several  hours  along  the  shore  and  over  the  plain,  the  soil  of  which  is  here  in  many  parts  like
ashes,  we  arrived  at  the  lower  fords  of  the  Jordan."  a

We  have  now  to  examine  the  great  valley  of  Araba,  which  extends  between  the  Asphaltic
Lake  and  the  Red  Sea.  The  account  which  we  have  already  given b  of  the  mountains  which
enclose  this  valley  was  intentionally  made  to  include  such  information  as  we  possessed  con-
cerning the  valley  itself,  that  it  might  not  be  necessary  again  to  return  to  it.  But  since  then
the  Count  de  Bertou  has  communicated  to  the  public  a  very  interesting  account  of  a  journey
made  by  him  in  April,  183S,  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  valley  from  north  to  south.
As  he  is  the  only  European  who  has  seen  the  whole  of  this  important  valley,  and  as  his  con-
clusions are  adverse  to  those  of  the  travellers  who,  from  Burckhardt  downward,  have  only  seen
it  in  parts,  it  is  desirable  that  we  should  report  the  more  important  of  his  observations.0

It  is  only  necessary  to  premise  that,  as  we  have  more  than  on  one  occasion  stated,  Burck-
hardt saw  good  reason  to  conclude  that  the  Jordan  once  flowed  through  this  valley  to  the  Red
Sea,  and  that  all  subsequent  travellers,  till  M.  de  Bertou,  have  acquiesced  in  this  conclusion.

The  name  El  Ghor  for  a  time  is  continued  to  the  plain  or  valley  south  of  the  Dead  Sea.
M.  de  Bertou,  on  reaching  the  southern  end  of  that  lake,  found  the  Ghor  to  be  from  two  to
three  miles  wide,  and  travelled  over  a  plain  covered  with  salt  at  the  foot  of  salt-hills.d  These
hills  diminish  in  height  to  the  southward,  and  form  the  foreground  to  higher  ranges  behind
them  ;  they  are  in  every  part  furrowed  by  salt  torrents,  which  flow  in  winter  and  inundate  the
plain.  Seven  miles  e  from  the  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  the  Count  reached  the  chain  of  low  hills,
which  since  the  morning  had  appeared  to  him  the  limit  of  El  Ghor,  and  to  close  it  up,  by
uniting  the  mountains  of  salt  to  those  of  Arabia.  These  hills  are  from  sixty  to  seventy  feet
in  height,  and  composed  of  a  whitish  and  very  friable  sandstone  :  they  form  the  buttresses  or
out-works  (contreforts)  of  the  desert,  which  stretches  to  the  south,  and  is  known  by  the  name
of  Wady  Araba  :  they  are  channeled  by  numerous  small  streams  which  fall  into  El  Ghor  and
eventually  into  the  Dead  Sea.  Just  before  reaching  these  hills  the  guides  turned  suddenly  to
the  right,  and  cried  out,  "  Wady  Araba,  Wady  Araba!"  and  then  the  party  entered  this  cele-
brated valley.  M.  de  Bertou  confesses  that  this  valley  had  at  first  the  appearance  of  the  bed
of  a  great  river ;  and  if  its  slope  toere  not  visible  toxcards  the  Dead  Sea,  one  would  exclaim
on  seeing  it,  "  This  is  really  the  bed  of  the  Jordan  :"  it  is,  however,  he  tells  us,  the  bed  of  a
torrent  which  flows  in  an  opposite  direction,  namely,  from  south  to  north,  and  falls  into  El
Ghor.     There  was  no  water  in  it.     Its  breadth,  which  is  from  250  to  300  yards,  is  filled  with

a  '  American  Biblical  Repository,'  1839,  vol.  i.  part  ii.  p.  418,  419.  b  Page  xlii.— xlv.

c  The  account  of  this  journey  which  we  employ  is  that  given  in  vol.  ix.  pp.  277—286,  of  the  '  Journal  of  the  Royal  Geogra-
phical Society.'  The  article  is  entitled,  '  Notes  of  a  Journey  from  Jerusalem  to  Hebron,  the  Dead  Sea,  El  Ghor,  and  Wadi'
Arabah  to  'Akabah,  and  back  by  Petra,  in  April,  1838.     By  the  Count  de  Bertou.'

d  We  may  here  mention  that  the  saline  plain  around  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea  appears  to  be  the  scriptural
"  Valley  of  Salt."  2  Kings  xiv.  7.

e  So  the  account  which  we  cite;  but  the  map  in  the  same  Number  of  the  '  Geographical  Journal'  makes  the  distance  not  less
than  twelve  miles.

cxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

tamarisks :  it  extends  in  a  S.S.W.  direction,  and  is  bounded  by  almost  vertical  banks  of
gray  freestone  about  150  feet  in  height.  In  the  continuation  of  this  valley  the  hills  on  the
right  appear  to  be  more  furrowed  than  those  on  the  left.

After  proceeding  eleven  miles,  the  travellers  came  in  sight  of  Mount  Hor  in  the  distance.
Still  advancing,  the  Wady  became  broader,  and  assumed  the  aspect  of  a  desert ;  the.  hills  on
each  side  decreased  in  height,  and  the  plain  seemed  to  ascend.  At  twelve  miles  the  banks  of
the  valley  to  the  left  disappear,  and  on  the  right  distant  mountains  are  perceived  to  the  S.  W.
At  eighteen  miles  a  pause  was  made  at  a  spring  of  tolerable  water  for  the  Desert,  at  the  point
where  the  valley  is  crossed  by  the  road  from  Petra  to  Hebron.  As  the  Count  does  not  diverge
to  Petra,  but  continues  straight  on  towards  Akaba,  his  route  even  from  this  point  continues  to
be  one  not  in  modern  times  trodden  by  a  European.

After  travelling  some  miles  from  the  well,  the  valley  becomes  about  1,500  yards  wide  ;  and
at  ten  miles  from  that  well,  another  was  reached  of  the  temperature  of  59D  Fahrenheit,  the
water  being  detestable  both  in  taste  and  smell.  Near  this  spring  is  a  rock  of  soft  reddish
freestone,  10  feet  high,  covered  with  the  names,  or  rather  marks,  of  the  Arabs  who  pass  by  this
road.  Beyond  this  the  ground  is  covered  with  flint  pebbles  ;  all  vegetation  has  disappeared;
and  the  Wady  is  gradually  lost  in  the  slightly  undulating  plain  which  extends  towards  the
mountains  in  the  east.  And  here,  to  prevent  confusion,  it  may  be  proper  to  apprise  the  reader
that  our  previous  statements  embraced  the  whole  breadth  of  plain  to  the  eastern  hills  of  Seir,
whereas  the  Count,  to  this  point,  limits  his  statement  to  the  comparatively  narrow  valley  of  the
torrent  on  its  western  border.

The  next  morning  the  travellers  passed  on  the  right  the  Wady  Talh  (Acacia  Vale),  which
extends  to  the  westward,  and  which  the  Arab  guides  pointed  out  as  the  road  to  Egypt,  being
in  fact  the  route  which  Burokhardt  followed  in  1812,  when  he  went  from  Wady  Mousa  to
Cairo.  "  From  the  junction  of  the  Wady  Talh,"  says  M.  de  Bertou,  "  the  Arabs  give  the
name  of  Akaba  (the  Ascent)  to  the  southern  prolongation  of  the  Wady  Araba,  so  that  this  spot
would  seem  to  be  the  line  which  separates  the  waters  flowing  to  the  Dead  Sea  from  those  dis-
charged into  the  Red  Sea.  Indeed  it  is  impossible  to  mistake  the  two  slopes,  one  to  the  north
and  the  other  to  the  south."

From  this  point  the  road  continued  to  be  covered  with  small  black  flints,  and  with  large  but
withered  roses  of  Jericho.  After  having  passed  the  Wady  Gharendel  the  travellers  continued
their  journey  against  the  simoom  wind,  which  brought  with  it  a  quantity  of  fine  sand  with
which  the  plain  is  covered.  The  day  following  brought  them  to  the  spring  of  Ghadiyan,  which
is  strongly  impregnated  with  sulphur.

To  this  point,  it  will  be  observed,  the  route  of  Count  de  Bertou.  has  been  over  ground  un-
trodden by  any  modern  European,  except  where  Burckhardt  crossed  it  in  his  way  from  Petra
to  Egypt,  and  where  Stephens  and  Lord  Lyndsay  crossed  it  in  their  way  from  Petra  to  Hebron.
For  the  motive  which  has  led  travellers  to  enter  the  Wady  Araba,  has  been  the  visit  to  Petra,
which  visit  has  always  been  made  from  Akaba.  And  the  road  from  Akaba  to  Petra  lies  along
the  western  side  of  the  great  valley  only  as  far  as  this  spring ;  then  it  inclines  over  to  the
eastern  hills  to  reach  Wady  Mousa,  in  which  Petra  lies.  Returning  thence,  the  route  again
inclines  over  to  the  western  hills,  to  reach  the  roads  to  Cairo,  Gaza,  or  Hebron, — that  is,
merely  to  get  out  of  the  valley  westward,  not  to  travel  along  its  western  border.  Hence  the
peculiar  claim  of  M.  de  Bertou  is,  that  he  has  traversed  the  western  edge  of  the  valley  through
its  whole  extent.

Below  the  spring  of  Ghadiyan,  the  valley  is  spread  out  into  a  great  plain,  covered  with
small  gravel  of  porphyry  and  granite ;  twenty-four  miles  through  which  brings  the  traveller
to  Akaba.  As  this  great  valley  was  traversed  by  the  Hebrews  in  their  pilgrimage,  it  is  in-
teresting to  read  the  first  feeling  of  the  traveller  who  arrives  at  Akaba  after  having  passed
through  it :  — "  The  luxury  of  having  fresh  water  in  abundance,  after  having  been  obliged  for
eight  days  to  drink  water  impregnated  with  brimstone,  and  exhaling  an  odour  of  rotten  eggs,
and  for  the  last  two  days  even  to  have  occasionally  wanted  that,  is  not  easily  imagined  by
those  who  have  not  experienced  it ;  and  when  we  saw  the  sakka  (water-carrier)  come  to  water

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxiii

the  ground  both  within  and  without  our  tents,  we  could  not  help  exclaiming  against  the  appa-
rent waste  of  so  precious  a  fluid."

The  return  route  of  M.  de  Bertou  by  Petra,  to  Hebron,  is  the  same  which  other  travellers
have  taken,  and  does  not  here  require  to  be  noticed.  It  offers  no  new  facts — nor,  perhaps,
were  any  thought  needful — in  support  of  his  grand  conclusion,  that,  "  in  the  present  state  of
things,  the  Jordan  never  could  have  flowed  into  the  JElanitic  Gulf"

We  must  honestly  confess  that  we  have  received  this  announcement  with  more  pain  and
reluctance  than  we  ever  thought  that  a  mere  geographical  fact  could  possibly  occasion.  In
the  next  chapter  Ave  shall  have  a  more  suitable  occasion  than  now  offers  of  subjecting  it  to  the
examination  which  it  requires,  and  to  receive  it  without  murmuring,  if  we  find  that  it  must
be  received ;  even  though,  in  its  obvious  consequences,  it  overturns  a  most  satisfactory  and
beautiful  explanation,  on  which  the  mind  could  repose,  of  very  serious  difficulties,  and  revives
them  into  greater  force  than  they  even  formerly  possessed.

We  shall  now  proceed  to  notice  the  valleys  and  plains  of  Palestine,  which  extend  laterally
between  the  two  great  longitudinal  lines  which  we  have  now  traced.  In  executing  this  part
of  our  work  we  purpose  to  include  in  our  survey  all  the  plains  and  valleys  which  are  of
Scriptural  or  historical  consequence,  even  though  they  may  be  of  small  geographical  import-
ance.    We  shall,  as  before,  proceed  from  north  to  south.

Of  the  plains  and  valleys  in  the  northern  part  of  Palestine — that  is,  in  Galilee,  besides
those  which  have  already  been  noticed  in  our  survey  of  the  two  principal  lines — our  informa-
tion is  very  scanty.  In  this,  as  in  other  cases,  our  information  decreases  with  our  distance
from  Jerusalem — that  great  centre  of  all  interest  and  inquiry  connected  with  the  Holy  Land,

Many  of  the  valleys  of  Galilee  are  small,  but  beautifully  wooded,  and  the  villagers  who
occupy  them  seem  to  be  among  the  most  happily  situated  of  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine.

Speaking  generally  of  this  part  of  Galilee,  which  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Zebulon,  Clarke
says,  "  The  scenery  is  to  the  full  as  delightful  as  in  the  rich  vales  upon  the  south  of  the
Crimea  :  it  reminded  us  of  the  finest  parts  of  Kent  and  Surrey.  The  soil  although  stony  is
exceedingly  rich,  but  it  is  now  entirely  neglected."

The  Valley  of  Abilene  is  the  first  of  the  vales  which  lie  beyond  the  hills  which  skirt  the
coast  between  Cape  Nakhoora  and  Acre.  It  is  long  and  narrow,  and  bounded  by  low  hills
covered  chiefly  with  oak.a

The  vale,  which  is  particularly  distinguished  as  the  Valley  of  Zebulon,  lies  to  the  south-
east of  this,  and  is  the  first  vale  immediately  from  the  plain  of  Acre.  It  is  of  somewhat  an
oval  figure,  and  between  three  and  four  miles  in  length  by  one  in  breadth.  This  valley  must
have  been  a  treasure  to  the  tribe  of  Zebulon,  to  which  it  belonged,  and  by  which  it  was  doubt-
less well  cultivated.  Although  now  under  very  partial  cultivation,  the  natural  fertility  of  the
soil  may  be  easily  estimated  by  the  dense  abundance  of  the  plants,  field-flowers,  and  herbs,
which  it  spontaneously  produces.  The  enclosing  hills  are  beautifully  wooded,  chiefly  with  the
carob-tree  and  a  sort  of  oak  with  whitish  leaves.  The  pasturage  of  the  vale  is  accounted  among
the  finest  in  the  Holy  Land.b

The  Vale  of  Sepphoris  takes  its  name  from  the  city  of  Sepphor is,  also  called  Dio  Caesarea,
which  Josephus  describes  as  the  chief  city  of  Galilee.  It  still  survives  as  a  village,  and  con-
tinues to  bear  its  old  name  in  the  slightly  different  form  of  Sephoury.  This  vale  is  separated
by  hills  from  that  of  Zebulon,  which  is  to  the  west  of  it ;  and  it  is  on  these  hills  that  the  town
of  Sephoury  stands.  This  valley  is  about  the  same  length  as  that  of  Zebulon,  and  forms  a
very  fine  plain,  the  verdure  of  which  in  the  spring  is  most  striking,  abundantly  enamelled  with
an  endless  variety  of  flowers,  among  which  tulips  of  every  colour  are  most  conspicuous.  The
town  and  valley  are  celebrated  for  several  circumstances  in  the  later  history  of  the  Jews,  and
in  the  wars  between  the  Moslems  and  the  Christian  kings  of  Jerusalem,  which  it  will  be  our
future  duty  to  record.6

a  Robinson,  ii.  243.

b  Morison,  178;  Pococke,  vol.  ii.  part  1  ;  Clarke,  iv.  J31;  Skinner,  i.  141;  Robinson,  i.  243.

c  Zuallart,  iv.  77;  Morison,  1/9;  Pococke,  vol.  ii.  part  1 ;  Clarke,  iv.  131-136.
vol.  i.  q

cxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

The  small  Vale  of  Nazareth,  in  which  Jesus  Christ  was  born  and  passed  his  early  years,
claims  to  he  noticed  on  that  account.  It  is  a  kind  of  hollow  or  basin,  formed  by  inclosing
mountains  of  no  great  height.  "  It  seems,"  says  Dr.  Richardson,  "  as  if  fifteen  mountains
met  to  form  one  enclosure  for  this  delightful  spot ;  they  rise  around  it  like  the  edge  of  a  shell
to  guard  it  from  intrusion.  It  is  a  rich  and  beautiful  field  in  the  midst  of  barren  mountains.
It  abounds  in  fig-trees,  small  gardens,  and  hedges  of  the  prickly  pear,  and  the  dense  grass
affords  an  abundant  pasture.  The  village  stands  on  an  elevated  situation  on  the  western  side
of  the  valley,  and  contains  between  600  and  700  inhabitants."  This  picture  is  in  agreement
with  that  which  other  travellers  have  drawn.  Lord  Lindsay  thinks  them  all  too  highly
coloured. a

The  declivity  from  the  central  hills  of  Galilee  towards  the  great  valley  of  the  Jordan  is
formed  by  a  succession  of  narrow  plains  rising  one  above  another  from  the  valley  of  that  river.
Here  the  soil  is  everywhere  a  fine  black  mould,  deep  and  perfectly  free  from  stones,  and
appearing  in  such  a  climate  capable  of  almost  any  production,  were  but  the  hand  of  man
applied  to  it.b

Behind  the  hills  which  bound  the  lake  of  Gennesareth  on  the  west  there  are  some  valleys
which  tradition  indicates  as  the  scenes  of  some  of  the  transactions  in  the  history  of  Jesus
Christ,  which  certainly  must  have  occurred  somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood.  One  of  these  is
that  in  which  Christ  is  supposed  to  have  multiplied  the  seven  loaves  and  fishes.0  This  valley
is  long  and  of  moderate  width.  The  extremity,  which  advances  towards  the  lake  of  Gennesareth,
is  between  Tiberias  and  Bethsaida.  It  is  a  fine  valley,  with  green  and  abundant  grass,  and
well  capable  of  containing,  seated  thereon,  a  great  number  of  people.  The  hill,  on  which  our
Lord  is  alleged  to  have  stood  when  he  blessed  the  loaves  and  fishes,  is  of  less  height  than  some
of  those  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  valley.  It  hears  the  somewhat  odd  name  of  "La  Table  de
la  Multiplication,"  according  to  Nau,  who  with  his  party  sat  down  and  ate  a  commemorate
morsel  of  bread  on  the  spot.d

Froni  the  top  of  this  hill  is  visible  the  alleged  Mount  of  Beatitudes,  of  which  we  have
already  spoken  (p.  lvi.),  and  which  it  is  only  necessary  to  mention  further  for  the  sake  of
stating,  that  it  stands  detached  in  the  midst  of  an  extensive  plain,  greatly  elevated  above  the
level  of  the  Jordan,  from  which  cause  even  the  low  summits  found  here  command  extensive
prospects  in  different  directions.6

From  hence  the  road  westward  to  Cana  lies  over  a  succession  of  broad  valleys  for  nearly
three  hours.  In  one  of  these,  about  two  miles  from  Cana,  an  old  terebinth-tree  is  pointed  out
as  marking  the  field  in  which  the  disciples  of  Christ  occasioned  a  dispute  with  the  Pharisees
by  plucking  ears  of  corn  on  the  sabbath-day .f  This  is  a  fertile  champaign,  and  is,  or  was,
under  partial  cultivation.?

Before  leaving  this  part  of  the  country,  it  may  be  well  to  notice  the  extensive  valley  or  plain
which  lies  behind  the  hills  which  bound  the  northern  extremity  of  the  lake  of  Gennesareth,  on  the
western  side.  Richardson,  the  only  traveller  who  has  passed  this  plain  since  Pococke,  describes
it  as  "  an  extensive  open  field,  which  bore  an  abundant  crop  of  thistles,  and  in  which  herds  of
black  cattle  were  feeding."  This  is  in  conformity  with  the  accounts  of  the  old  travellers.    It  is,  in

a  Richardson,  ii.  434;  Lindsay,  ii.  82.  t  Robinson,  i.  234.  c  Matt.  xv.  32.

»  The  accounts  of  some  of  our  own  travellers  differ  from  this  and  from  one  another  about  the  alleged  scene  of  this  miracle.  The
old  Catholic  travellers,  especially  when  priests  or  monks,  were  certain  that  they  were  at  the  spots  which  their  traditions  (whether
right  or  wrong)  indicated,  and  could  not  be  deceived.  But  our  own  Protestant  or  sceptical  travellers — and,  as  such,  indifferent  or
doubtful — might,  at  the  convenience  of  their  guides,  have  almost  any  site  or  object  pointed  out  to  them  as  that  for  which  they
inquired.  So  between  wrong  indications  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  misunderstanding  the  tradition  when  the  right  indication
has  been  given,  on  the  other,  they  often  manage  to  arrive  at  a  very  strong  conclusion  concerning  the  doltish  knavery  of  those  who
settled  the  sites  of  such  transactions.  Now,  men  are  seldom  such  dolts  as  travellers  think  them.  In  the  present  case  a  wrong  site
seems  to  have  been  shown  to  some,  while  others  have  understood  that  it  was  exhibited  as  the  scene  of  the  multiplication  of  the
Jive  loaves  and  the  fishes,  which  they  triumphantly  tell  us  must  have  taken  place  on  the  opposite  or  eastern  side  of  the  lake.  But
all  the  old  Catholic  travellers  say  that  it  was  the  miracle  of  the  seven  loaves,  not  of  the  Jive  loaves,  which  took  place  here.  Most
of  them  were  quite  aware  of  the  difference  between  the  sites  of  the  two  miracles,  and  Father  Nau  has  as  clear  and  able  an  expla-
nation on  the  subject  as  can  possibly  be  given.  We  are  far  from  undertaking  to  say  that  this  was  really  the  site  of  the  miracle  in
question.  That  is  a  matter  with  which  we  have  nothing  to  do  in  the  present  work ;  but  it  appears  to  us  as  probable  a  site  as
could  possibly  be  indicated  in  the  neighbourhood.

e  Nau,  595  ;  Elliot,  ii.  358.  f  Luke  vi.  g  Morison,  194 ;  Nau,  597.

Chap.  V]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxv

fact,  an  extensive  plain,  forming  a  rich  pasture-ground,  on  which  account  it  seems,  in  all  times,
to  be  much  frequented  by  the  Bedouins  with  their  flocks.  It  bears  the  name  of  Dothan,  from
a  village  so  called,  and  is  regarded  by  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  as  well  as  by  the  Jews,  as
the  ground  on  which  the  sons  of  Jacob  were  pasturing  their  flocks  when  they  sold  Joseph  to
the  Ishmaelites.  We  are  told,  in  the  sacred  narrative,  that  Joseph  had  expected  to  find  them
near  Shechem,  but,  on  arriving  there,  heard  that  they  had  removed  their  flocks  to  Dothan,  and
went  there  to  seek  them.  That  this  plain  is  the  Dothan  in  question  has  been  disputed,  on  the
ground  of  the  distance  from  Hebron  and  from  Shechem.  The  town  of  Shechem  is  two  days
and  a  half,  or  three  days'  journey  from  Hebron,  and  this  present  plain  is  about  an  equal  distance
from  Shechem.  To  counterbalance  this,  there  are  the  facts — that  this  plain  is  a  famous  pasture-
ground,  and  that  it  lies  on  the  road  to  a  well-known  place  of  passage  over  the  Jordan  (where
there  is  now  a  bridge,  called  Jacob's  Bridge)  ;  so  that  it  is  a  very  likely  place  for  the  Ishmaelite
traders  to  have  passed  in  their  way  to  Egypt.  Whatever  be  the  probabilities  of  the  question,
the  objections,  founded  solely  on  the  distances  stated,  do  not  deserve  attention,  when  the
habits  of  the  migratory  shepherds  are  taken  into  account.  Such  writers,  therefore,  as  Nau  and
Morison,  long  resident  in  the  country,  and  well  acquainted  with  Bedouin  habits,  are  more  in
the  right,  when  they  refer  to  such  habits  as  explaining  the  distance,  than  Richardson,  who,
with  a  palpable  reference  to  the  habits  of  another  condition  of  life,  remarks  : — "  This  is  a  long-
way  from  Hebron  for  the  sons  of  Jacob  to  go  to  feed  their  herds,  and  a  still  further  way  for  a
solitary  youth  like  Joseph  to  be  sent  by  his  father  in  quest  of  them."  But  Joseph  was  not  sent
by  his  father  to  Dothan,  but  only  to  Shechem,  and  Joseph,  of  his  own  accord,  went  to  Dothan
when  he  could  not  find  them  there. — But  we  will  not  be  tempted  into  these  questions ;  and  we
beg  it  to  be  understood  that,  in  mentioning  a  particular  spot  as  the  alleged  scene  of  this  or  that
transaction,  we  feel  it  no  part  of  our  present  duty  to  examine  the  truth  or  probability  of  the  alle-
gation, unless  when  some  point  of  public  history  is  involved, of  sufficient  importance  to  render  such
an  examination  expedient.  But  we  may  say,  generally,  that  in  all  such  cases,  we  should,  in  the  first
instance,  be  disposed  to  consider  the  current  determinations  of  sites  to  be  right,  unless  we  could  find
some  good  reasons  to  conclude  them  wrong — rather  than,  with  some  travellers  and  writers,  deem
them  all,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  wrong,  until  we  find  good  reasons  for  believing  them  correct.

We  shall  now  leave  this  northern  division  of  Palestine,  and  proceed  to  the  great  central  plain
which  divides  Galilee  and  Samaria.

The  Plain  of  Esdraelon,  known  in  Scripture  as  the  "  Plain  of  Megiddo,"  measures  about
thirty  miles  in  length,  from  east  to  west,  and  eighteen  in  breadth,  from  north  to  south.  On
the  north  it  is  bounded  by  the  mountains  of  Galilee,  and  on  the  south  by  those  of  Samaria ;  on
the  eastern  part,  by  Mount  Tabor,  the  Little  Hermon,  and  Gilboa ;  and  on  the  west  by  Carmel,
between  which  range  and  the  mountains  of  Galilee  is  an  outlet,  whereby  the  river  Kishon
winds  its  way  to  the  bay  of  Acre.  Professor  Robinson,  in  his  instructive  memoir,  informs  us
that  the  eastern  part  of  the  plain  has  never  yet  been  correctly  laid  down  in  the  maps.  "  Two
mountain-ridges  run  out  into  it  from  the  east,  commencing  near  the  brow  of  the  Jordan
valley,  and  extending  westward  to  near  the  middle  of  the  plain.  The  southern  ridge  is  Gilboa,
and  the  north  is  the  Little  Hermon  of  Jerome.  They  divide  the  eastern  half  of  the  plain  into
three  parts ;  of  which  the  northern  and.  southern  decline  towards  the  west,  and  their  waters
flow  off  to  the  Kishon,  while  the  middle  portion,  between  Gilboa  and  Hermon,  slopes  to  the
east,  and  its  waters  descend  to  the  Jordan  through  a  broad  valley,  or  plain,  at  Bysan,  the
ancient  Bethshan."  This  central  valley,  or  plain,  may,  we  suppose,  be  the  Valley  of
Jezreel,  so  often  mentioned  in  Scripture,  although  that  name  appears  to  have  been  sometimes
applied  in  a  large  sense  to  the  whole  plain  of  Esdraelon.

This  great  plain  possesses  the  elements  of  great  fertility,  having  a  rich  alluvial  soil,  about
three  feet  deep,  resting  on  a  substratum  of  gravel  and  whitish  limestone.  As  seen  from  above,
it  is  not  a  perfect  level,  but  a  tract  of  gentle  undulations,  in  the  midst  of  the  hills  which  inclose
it  on  every  side.  It  is  destitute  of  trees  ;  but  so  rich  and  spontaneously  fertile  is  the  soil,  that
Morison  thinks  that,  if  it  were  cultivated  as  it  ought  to  be,  it  would  alone  suffice  to  supply  the

q2

cxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

whole  of  Galilee  with  corn,  even  were  that  province  as  populous  now  as  it  was  in  ancient
times.  But,  he  says,  it  was  in  his  time  almost  entirely  uncultivated,  although  so  covered  with
green  herbage,  as  to  evince  what  Nature  could  do  if  seconded  by  man.  It  is  difficult  to  account
for  this  last  intimation,  as  other  writers,  before  and  after  Morison,  describe  the  plain  as  being
to  a  considerable  extent  under  cultivation.  Zuallart  implies  that  much  was  cultivated,  and  the
remainder  left  to  pasturage  ;  for  he  describes  it  as  affording  abundance  of  corn,  wine,  oil,
herbage,  and  all  things  necessary  to  the  life  of  man  or  beast.  D'Arvieux,  who  was  there  in
May,  when  the  corn  had  nearly  reached  maturity,  says  that  when  one  looks  over  the  plain  from
an  eminence,  and  sees  the  immense  surface  of  corn  in  motion  from  the  breeze,  a  lively  image
of  the  agitations  of  the  sea  is  presented  to  him.  It  is  still  probably  cultivated  to  the  same
extent.  In  early  spring,  Major  Skinner  saw  the  plains  green  in  all  directions  with  the  rising
grain.  Another  recent  traveller,  whose  name  we  forget,  describes  much  of  it,  particularly  in
the  eastern  part,  as  furrowed  by  the  plough.  Yet  Clarke  speaks  of  it  as  "  one  vast  meadow,
covered  with  the  richest  pastures."  From  all  this  we  collect  that  there  is  much  pasture-ground,
and  much  cultivation  in  the  plain :  and  those  who  describe  it  as  uncultivated,  but  rich  in
natural  herbage,  passed  through  those  parts  only  which  were  in  this  state,  and  inferred  all
the  rest  to  be  like  it,  as  they  could  not  well,  in  the  wide  general  survey  from  an  eminence,
distinguish,  in  so  fertile  a  plain,  the  cultivated  from  the  uncultivated  parts,  especially  after  the
crops  have  been  gathered  in.

In  the  distribution  of  Canaan  to  the  people  of  Israel,  by  Joshua,  this  celebrated  portion  fell
to  the  lot  of  Issachar,  who  in  its  fertile  and  well-watered  soil  had  abundant  cause  to  "rejoice
in  their  tents. "a  And  at  this  day  some  of  the  more  peaceably  inclined  Bedouin  tribes  are  seen
living  under  tents,  surrounded  by  their  flocks,  for  the  sake  of  the  rich  pastures  it  affords.  Thus
the  latter  end  of  the  country  is  like  its  beginning.  Then  the  old  patriarchs  wandered  with
their  flocks  among  the  towns  and  villages  of  Canaan,  and  fed  them,  even  in  the  peopled  dis-
tricts, without  molestation.  This  was  before  the  country  had  become  populous  ;  and  now  the
same  thing  is  witnessed  when,  after  having  been  most  populous,  it  has  again  become  thinly
peopled.

The  historical  celebrity  of  this  plain  is  very  great.  It  is  that  "  mighty  plain  " — juiya  tteSiov,
as  it  is  called  by  many  ancient  writers, — which  has  in  all  ages  been  the  famous  battle-ground
of  nations.  In  the  first  ages  of  the  Jewish  history,  as  well  as  during  the  Roman  empire,  the
Crusades,  and  even  in  later  times,  it  has  been  the  scene  of  many  a  memorable  contest.  In  this
great  plain,  Barak,  descending  with  ten  thousand  men  from  Mount  Tabor,  fought  with  the
kings  of  Canaan,  "  by  the  waters  of  Megiddo."  Here  king  Josiah  was  slain  in  battle  with
the  Egyptians.  And  "  it  has  been  the  chosen  place  for  encampment  in  every  contest  carried
on  in  this  country,"  to  use  the  words  of  Dr.  Clarke,  "  from  the  days  of  Nabuchodonosar,  king
of  the  Assyrians,  until  the  disastrous  march  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte  from  Egypt  into  Syria.
Jews,  Gentiles,  Saracens,  Crusaders,  Egyptians,  Persians,  Druses,  Turks,  Arabs,  and  French,
warriors  out  of  every  nation  which  is  under  heaven,  have  pitched  their  tents  upon  the  plain  of
Esdraelon,  and  have  beheld  their  banners  wet  with  the  dews  of  Tabor  and  of  Hermon."b

The  country  of  Samaria,  situated  between  Galilee  and  Judea,  has  been  much  less  explored
than  either.  Pilgrims  and  travellers  have  crossed  and  re-crossed  Judea  and  Galilee  in  every
direction,  in  order  to  visit  the  different  spots  of  sacred  or  historical  interest  which  are  dispersed
in  them.  But  the  only  points  in  Samar,ia  which  the  sacred  history  has  made  memorable  are
about  Shechem  and  Samaria,  which  are  not  more  than  four  miles  from  each  other ;  and  as  no
other  part  of  the  country  has  been  thought  worthy  of  attention,  no  route  but  that  which  includes
these  two  places  has  been  followed.  Content  to  look  at  Shechem  and  Samaria  in  their  way?
pilgrims  and  travellers  have  regarded  this  really  interesting  and  important  part  of  Palestine
merely  as  a  road  from  Galilee  to  Judea,  or  from  Judea  to  Galilee,  in  which  the  same  well-

a  Deut.  xxxiii.  18.

b  Elliot,  ii.  360;  '  Am.  Biblical  Repository,'  No.  xxxiv.  429  ;  Morison,  220;  Zuallart,  iv.  83;  Roger,  73;  Quaresmius,  lib.  vii.
cap.  4;  D'Arvieux,  ii.  292;  Clarke,  iv.  35G— 360 ;  Jolliffe,  42;  Jowett,  ii.  191;  Skinner,  i.  2/6;  Robinson,  i.  214;  Stephens,
ii.  347.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxvii

trodden  path  has  almost  invariably  been  followed.  Samaria,  being  thus  very  imperfectly
known,  the  notice  we  have  to  take  of  its  valleys  will  be  found  greatly  disproportionate  to  the
relative  extent  of  its  figure  in  the  maps  of  Palestine.

Samaria  seems,  upon  the  whole,  a  much  more  open  and  less  mountainous  country  than  either
Galilee  or  Judea.  It  has  mountains,  indeed,  but  they  are  in  general  less  high  and  abrupt,  and
of  more  rounded  forms,  than  those  of  the  north  or  south.  There  is  little  of  stern  or  steril
aspect  in  Samaria.  The  sides  of  the  shapely  hills  are  for  the  most  part  beautifully  wooded,
while  the  valleys  commonly  open  out  into  fertile  plains  or  basins,  surrounded  by  hills.  These
plains  and  valleys  are  watered  by  numerous  streams,  which  contribute  greatly  to  their  fertility.
Of  the  trees  with  which  this  fine  province  is  stocked,  the  olive-trees  greatly  exceed  all  others  in
number.  Wild  animals a  and  feathered  game  (especially  the  red  partridge)  are  more  abun-
dant than  in  Judea,  or  even  in  Galilee.  But  with  all  these  advantages,  towns  and  villages
occur  less  frequently  than  in  the  other  two  provinces,  nor  are  the  inhabitants  near  as  numerous.
It  being  a  more  open  country,  and  therefore  more  exposed  to  injuries  and  oppression,  may
possibly  account  for  this.

The  valley  of  Jennin — one  of  the  numerous  vales  which  lead  out  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon —
is  that  through  which  the  usual  route  from  Galilee  to  the  city  of  Samaria  lies.  This  valley  is
about  thirteen  miles  long,  and  its  width  is  about  two  miles  in  the  northern  part, — that  is,  as
far  as  the  interruption  offered  about  midway  by  the  hill  on  which  stands  the  ruined  castle  of
Sanhoor,  after  which  it  becomes  more  narrow.  This  valley,  which  some  take  to  be  the  Scrip-
tural valley  of  Jezreel,  is  watered  by  a  brook,  and  is  very  fertile,  well  planted  with  olive-trees,
considerably  cultivated,  and  offering  green  pastures  in  those  parts  to  which  cultivation  does
not  extend.  This  valley  was  doubtless  in  former  times,  as  now,  the  high  road  by  which  the
inhabitants  of  Galilee,  who  "  must  needs  go  through  Samaria,"  journeyed  when  they  went  to
celebrate  the  periodical  festivals  at  Jerusalem  .b

The  city  of  Samaria  c  stood  but  a  few  miles  from  the  termination  of  this  valley.  It  offers  a
curious  and  imposing  appearance,  standing,  as  it  does,  in  terraces  upon  a  high  semi-spherical
mount,  standing  alone  in  the  midst  of  one  of  those  inclosed  basins  or  hollows  for  which  Samaria
is  particularly  noted.  The  inclosed  valley  which  surrounds  the  central  hill  is  very  beautiful,
watered  by  running  streams,  and  covered  by  a  rich  carpet  of  grass,  sprinkled  with  wild
flowers  of  every  hue  ;  while  beyond,  stretched  like  an  open  book  before  one  who  stands  upon
the  hill,  lies  the  boundary  of  pleasant  mountains,  on  which  the  olive  and  the  vine  are  seen
rising  in  terraces  to  the  very  summits. d

From  this  place  Lord  Lindsay  took  a  route  across  the  country  to  Carmel,e  which  enabled
him  to  see  a  portion  of  Samaria  not  often  visited  by  travellers.  He  describes  the  country  as
full  of  villages,  well  cultivated,  and  quite  beautiful.  After  clearing  the  hills  he  proceeded
along  a  beautiful  and  very  extensive  plain — a  prolongation,  doubtless,  of  the  vale  of  Sharon —
where  the  scenery  suggested  a  comparison  with  Kent.  "  Nothing  could  exceed  the  richness
of  the  soil  or  the  beauty  of  its  produce,  even  of  the  thistles,  with  which  every  fallow  and  uncul-
tivated field  was  overgrown,  and  which  were  of  the  deepest  hue  and  most  luxuriant  growth.
Presently,  leaving  the  plain,  we  rode  for  two  hours  through  a  range  of  sloping  hills  covered
with  beautiful  valonidis,  or  evergreen  oaks, — regular  English  park  scenery ;  then  the  trees
ceasing,  through  a  continued  expanse  of  sloping  downs,  till  we  reached  the  southern  prolonga-
tion of  Carmel."  f

Sandys,  in  travelling  by  land  from  Ramla  to  Acre  (a  rare  journey),  passed  through  the  dis-
tricts thus  described ;  but  the  first  part  of  his  journey  lay  through  the  western  part  of  a  more
southern  portion  of  Samaria  than  Lord  Lindsay  saw.  He  speaks  mostly  of  woods.  He  passed
behind,  inland,  that  wood  of  Sharon,  the  outer  part  of  which,  facing  the  coast,  we  have

a  Perhaps  it  was  so  anciently  also.     See  2  Kings  xvii.  25,  26.

t>  Dr.  Robinson,  '  Am.  Bib.  Repos.,  139,  428  ;  Morison,  225,  228  ;  Clarke,  iv.  264;  Maddox,  Skinner,  Stephens,  Lindsay,  and
Elliot,  passim,  in  Samaria.

c  The  ruined  site  now  bears  the  name  of  Subusta,  a  modification  of  Sebaste  [the  Greek  for  Augustus],  the  name  imposed  on  the
city  by  Herod  after  it  had  been  greatly  improved  by  him.

<1  Elliot,  ii.  381 ;  Stephens,  ^315.

c  The  route  is  the  same  as  that  of  Shaw,  of  which  Lord  Lindsay  does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware.  f  Lindsay,  ii.  /C,  77.

CXV111

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  V.

already  noticed.  Of  this  he  says, — "  After  a  while  we  entred  a  goodly  forrest  full  of  tall  and
delightfull  trees,  intermixed  with  fruitfull  and  dowry  lawnes.  Perhaps  the  earth  affordeth
not  the  like,  it  cannot  a  more  pleasant."  a

.   <

.''."■   '  'r-'-:  ;-'■'    §'4      >      :  zz.-

lilBIllll/*1

HPlfflfi
if

[Valley  of  Shechem,  with  Mounts  Ebal  and  Gerizim.]

The  town  of  Nablous — the  Shechem  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Sychar  of  the  New  Testa-
ment— is  about  four  miles  b  south  from  the  ruined  city  of  Samaria.  The  long  narrow  valley
in  which  it  stands  has  already  been  described  as  extending  its  length  from  east  to  west  between
the  mountains  of  blessing  and  cursing — the  fertile  Gerizim  and  the  barren  Ebal.  So  abun-
dantly is  this  valley  watered  that,  popularly,  it  is  said  to  be  enriched  by  365  springs.  "  There
is  nothing  in  the  Holy  Land,"  says  Dr.  Clarke,  "  finer  than  the  view  of  Nablous  from  the
heights  around  it.  As  the  traveller  descends  towards  it  from  the  hills,  it  appears  luxuriantly
embosomed  in  the  most  delightful  and  fragrant  bowers,  half  concealed  by  rich  gardens  and  by
stately  trees  collected  into  groves  all  around  the  bold  and  beautiful  valley  in  which  it  stands."0

This  valley  leads  into  a  fine  plain,  waving  with  corn  in  the  time  of  summer,  and  which  is
concluded  to  have  formed  or  to  have  contained  "  the  parcel  of  ground  which  Jacob  gave  to  his
son  Joseph,"  being  the  same  which  he  purchased  from  the  Shechemites.d  The  road  south-
ward towards  Jerusalem  lies  across  this  plain,  from  which  we  pass  into  the  beautiful  valley  of
Leban,e  which,  although  narrow,  is  not  under  eight  miles  in  length.  On  crossing  a  brook,  and
ascending  the  hills  at  the  end  of  this  valley,  we  leave  Samaria  and  enter  the  kingdom  of  Judea.f

Travellers  are  apt  to  form  the  notion  that  a  part  of  Palestine,  so  supremely  honoured  as
Judea  was,  must  needs  surpass  in  fertility  and  beauty ;  and  that  the  ancient  descriptions  of
the  glory  and  richness  of  the  country  at  large  must  apply  with  concentrated  effect  to  Judea  in
particular.  This  arises  from  an  association  of  ideas  which  there  is  nothing  in  Scripture  to  call
for  or  to  warrant.  We  are  aware  of  no  passage  in  which  Judea  is  so  described  even  by  impli-
cation. Cultivation — such  cultivation  as  Judea  anciently  received,  when  the  terraced  sides  of
its  hills  were  clad  with  olives  and  with  vines,  and  when  its  valleys  were  waving  with  corn —
might,  and  did,  make  it  not  inferior  to  any  other  part  of  the  country,  and  perhaps  superior  in

a    Sandys,  202.  b  "  An  hour  and  a  half."— Elliot.  c  Clarke,  iv.  267;  Elliot,  ii.  390.

11  John  iv.  5;  Gen.  xxxiii.  19.  e  "  Labonah,"  Judges  xxi.  19.

f  M.umdrell,  63  ;  Clarke,  iv.  232;  Lindsay,  ii.  73;  Elliot,  ii.  407-

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxix

variety  of  produce  :  but  in  a  state  of  nature — into  which  state  it  has  nearly  fallen  back — it  is,
for  the  most  part,  the  least  pleasant  and  fertile  part  of  Palestine,  with  the  exception  of  some
peculiarly  favoured  districts.  All  travellers  confess  this,  some  of  them  reluctantly  and  with
heavy  hearts.  We  have  already  intimated  something  of  this  in  our  accounts  of  the  mountains
of  Palestine ;  but  as  we  intend  to  let  these  chapters  stand  for  a  description  of  the  country,
there  is  no  more  suitable  place  than  the  present  of  enlarging  somewhat  further  on  this
difference.

Of  the  three  elements  of  fertility  in  this  climate,  water,  warmth,  and  soil,  Judea  can  only  be
said  to  have  warmth.  The  climate  is  warmer  than  that  of  Samaria  or  Galilee,  while  the  surface
-  offers  but  little  vegetable  mould,  and  water  is  scarce ;  and  hence,  except  for  a  short  time  after
the  latter  rains,  the  land  presents  an  aspect  of  drought  and  desolation,  singularly  at  variance
with  the  accounts  which  several  ancient  writers  give  of  its  former  fertility  and  pleasantness,  and
most  disappointing  to  those  whose  expectations  have  been  based  on  those  accounts, — forgetting
that  the  country  now  wants  that  teeming  population  to  which  its  ancient  richness  was  owing, —
that  it  is  now  still  in  enjoyment  of  its  long  sabbath,  and  is  waiting  the  dawning  of  another  day
to  resume  the  robes  of  glory  and  beauty  it  once  wore.

In  such  a  matter  as  this,  the  direct  testimony  of  believing  travellers  is  of  much  importance ;
and  we  therefore  introduce  the  testimonies  which  follow.  Maundrell,  journeying  to  Jerusalem,
after  having  left  Samaria,  by  the  route  we  have  indicated,  observes  : — "  All  along  this  day's
travel,  from  Kane  [Khan]  Leban  to  Beer,  and  also  as  far  as  we  could  see  around,  the  country
discovered  a  quite  different  face  from  what  it  had  before — presenting  nothing  to  the  view,  in
most  places,  but  naked  rocks,  mountains,  and  precipices."

Dr.  Richardson  advanced  to  Jerusalem  by  a  very  common  route,  from  the  N.W.,  by  Jaffa
and  Ramla.  The  last-named  town  is  on  the  inner  border  of  the  plain  of  Sharon.  The  hill
country  of  Judea  is  distant  two  hours  and  a  half  from  Ramla ;  but  the  characteristic  desolation
of  Judea  begins  to  be  exhibited  long  before  reaching  these  hills — that  is,  as  soon  as  an  ascent
has  been  made  from  the  frontier  plain  to  another  more  elevated.  "  The  aspect  of  the  country,"
says  the  Doctor,  "  was  now  become  bleak,  the  trees  both  few  and  small,  the  grass  withered,
from  the  little  depth  of  soil,  hard,  and  of  bad  quality.  For  some  time  before  we  reached
the  mountains,  we  kept  looking  up  at  their  dusky  sides,  as  they  rose,  in  towering  grandeur,  to
the  height  of  1000  or  1500  feet  above  our  heads,  covered  with  sun-burnt  grass  ;a  here  and
there  disclosing  strips  of  the  bare  horizontal  rocks,  and  diversified  with  a  few  bushy  trees,  that
stood  at  very  unfriendly  and  forlorn  distances  from  each  other."  Again: — "  The  hills,  from  the
commencement  of  the  mountain  scenery  [in  this  quarter],  are  all  of  a  round,  handsome  shape,
meeting  in  the  base  and  separated  at  the  tops,  not  in  peaks,  or  pointed  accuminations,  but  like
the  gradual  retiring  of  two  round  balls  placed  in  juxtaposition.  Their  sides  are  partially  covered
with  earth,  which  nourishes  a  feeble  sprinkling  of  withered  grass,  with  here  and  there  a  dwarf
shrub  or  solitary  tree.  They  are  not  susceptible  of  cultivation,  except  on  the  very  summit,
where  we  saw  the  plough  going  in  several  places.  They  might  be  terraced ;  but  there  are  no  traces
of  their  ever  having  been  so.  The  rock  crops  out  in  many  places,  but  never  in  precipitous  cliffs ;
the  strata  in  many  places  have  exactly  the  appearance  of  stone  courses  in  a  building."  b

The  view  over  the  north-eastern  part  of  Judea,  as  commanded  from  the  high  ridge  on  which
stands  Anathoth,  c  the  birthplace  of  Jeremiah,  is  thus  described  by  Professor  Robinson : —
"  From  this  point  there  is  a  view  over  the  whole  eastern  slope  of  the  mountainous  region,
including  also  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and  the  northern  part  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  whole  tract
is  made  up  of  deep  rugged  valleys,  running  eastward,  with  broad  ridges  of  uneven  table-land
between,  often  rising  into  high  points.  The  sides  of  the  valleys  are  so  steep,  that  in  descending
into  them  we  were  often  obliged  to  dismount  from  our  horses.  The  whole  district  is  a  mass  of
limestone  rock,  which  everywhere  juts  out  above  the  surface,  and  imparts  to  the  whole  land
only  the  aspect  of  sterility  and  desolation.     Yet,  wherever  soil  is  found  among  the  rocks,  it  is

a  These  observations  were  made  in  the  middle  of  April.

*>  Richardson,  ii.  221—223.    This  last  passage  more  properly  belongs  to  the  chapter  on  Mountains;  but  we  overlooked  it  at  the
time,  and  it  is  not  unsuitably  introduced  in  this  place.
c  Now  Anata.

cxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

strong  and  fertile ;  fields  of  grain  appeared  occasionally ;  and  fig-trees  and  olive-trees  were
scattered  everywhere  among  the  hills.  Lower  down  the  slope,  towards  the  Jordan  valley,  all
is  desert."  a

Lord  Lindsay,  who  traversed  the  whole  extent  of  Judea  from  south  to  north,  makes  the
important  general  remark, — "  All  Judea,  except  the  hills  of  Hebron  and  the  vales  immediately
about  Jerusalem,  is  desolate  and  barren  ;  but  the  prospect  brightens  as  soon  as  you  quit  it,  and
Samaria  and  Galilee  still  smile  like  the  Land  of  Promise. "b  Mr.  Stephens,  who  travelled  the
same  route,  says,  in  effect,  nearly  the  same  thing.

But  there  is  a  season — after  the  spring  rains  and  before  the  hot  sun  has  absorbed  all  the
moisture  left  by  them — when  even  the  desert  is  clothed  with  verdure ;  and  at  that  season
even  the  valleys  of  Judea  present  a  refreshingly  green  appearance.  But  this  happy  season  is
not  naturally  of  long  continuance,  and  the  skilful  or  laborious  hand  of  man  is  not  now  present
to  perpetuate  the  blessedness  which  that  season  brings.

After  this  general  notice,  we  will  now  proceed  to  enumerate  such  of  the  particular  valleys  or
plains  as  seem  most  to  demand  our  attention

The  most  northernly  spot  we  shall  notice  is  Ainbroot,  which  some  suppose  to  be  the  scrip-
tural Bethoron.  This  spot  shines  like  a  gem  amid  the  desolation  of  Judea.  All  travellers
mention  it  with  admiration.  The  village  is  prettily  situated  upon  an  eminence,  and  commands
on  all  sides  a  view  of  fertile  and  well-cultivated  valleys.  Lord  Lindsay  declares  that  this  spot
exhibited  some  of  the  loveliest  scenery  he  had  ever  beheld — "  Olive  and  fig-gardens,  vineyards
and  corn-fields,  overspreading  the  valleys,  and  terraced  on  the  hills,  alternating  with  waste
ground,  overgrown  with  the  beautiful  prickly  oak  and  lovely  wild  flowers."0

The  Valley  of  Bethel  has  been  already  noticed  (p.  108).  Although  stony,  as  of  old,
and  surrounded  by  stony  mountains,  this  vale  is  prettily  situated  about  eight  miles  to  the  north
of  Jerusalem.

The  Gibeond  of  the  Scriptures  is  situated  upon  a  sharp  rocky  ridge,  rising  in  the  midst
of  broad  valleys  or  plains,  which  form  an  extensive  basin,  full  of  corn-fields,  vineyards,
and  orchards  of  olive  and  fig-trees.e  The  situation  of  this  valley  seems  to  correspond  to
that  which  some  of  the  old  travellers  point  out  as  the  valley  of  Aijalon,  over  which  Joshua
commanded  the  moon  to  rest.  But  this  valley  has  been  indicated  in  so  many  and  distant
places,  that  it  is  difficult  to  receive  this  identification,  especially  if  Jib  be  identified  with
Gibeon/  Morison  says  of  this  valley  that  it  was  the  broadest  of  all  he  had  seen  in  Judea,
where,  in  general,  the  valleys  are  narrow  and  pressed  close  by  their  enclosing  mountains.

The  Valley  of  Jeremiah  is  a  long  and  steril  vale,  which  takes  its  name  from  the  notion
that  Anathoth,  the  birth-place  and  residence  of  the.  prophet,  stood  upon  the  enclosing  hills.  A
narrow  gullet  or  pass  leads  from  this  southward  into  the  Valley  of  Elah,  called  also  the
Terebinth  Vale,  the  alleged  scene  of  David's  victory  over  Goliah,  and  where  they  still  show
the  brook  from  which  the  youthful  champion  picked  the  "  smooth  stones  "  with  which  he
smote  the  Philistine.  The  whole,  however — the  vale  with  the  enclosing  hills — bears  the  name
of  the  Wilderness  of  St.  John  [the  Baptist],  from  its  being  supposed — we  should  think  erro-
neously—to have  been  the  scene  of  the  birth  and  early  history  of  the  Great  Forerunner.  Not-
withstanding the  formidable  name  of  "  desert  "  or  "  wilderness,"  this  is  altogether  one  of  the
pleasantest  places  in  Judea.  It  is  an  agreeable  solitude,  enjoying  a  pure  air  and  productive
soil ;  and  where,  although  the  people  are  few,  there  is  much  cultivation,  from  which  excellent
corn  and  exquisite  wine  is  obtained.  As  recent  travellers  have  been  somewhat  confused  in
appropriating  the  respective  names  of  the  Valley  of  Elah  and  the  Desert  of  St.  John,  it  may
be  well  to  intimate  that  the  eastern  hills  are  those  of  Modin,  while  the  western  are  more  espe-
cially appropriated  to  the  memories  of  the  Baptist,  and  that  the  valley  by  which  they  are
separated  is  that  of  Elah.  The  valley,  with  all  the  hills  which  enclose  it,  is  the  Desert  of
St.  John.     The  vale  now  exhibits  few  of  the  terebinth-trees  which  gave  it  name  ;  olive-trees

■  '  Am.  Biblical  Repository,'  1839,  p.  415.  b  Lindsay,  ii.  70.  c  Stephens,  ii.  297  !  Lindsay,  ii.  72.

d  Gubao  of  Josephus,  now  Jib.  c   Dr.  Robinson,  41G.  f  Josh.  xx.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxxi

and  carob-trees  prevail.  The  famous  brook  is  dry  in  summer,  but  in  the  season  of  rain  it
becomes  a  mighty  torrent  whicli  inundates  the  vale.  After  ascending  the  hills  which  bound
this  valley,  the  southward  traveller  finds  himself  at  the  edge  of  one  of  the  most  dreary  plains
that  can  be  imagined,  covered  with  stone  ;  and  this  extends  to  the  borders  of  Jerusalem.1

The  valleys  which  surround  the  height  on  which  Jerusalem  stands  claim  our  especial
notice,  on  account  of  the  historical  and  sacred  interest  connected  with  them,  rather  than  from
their  geographical  importance  in  a  general  survey  of  the  valleys  of  the  land.

The  renowned  city  is  very  singularly  situated.  Samaria  offers  some  similarity  of  situation ;
and  this  similarity  probably  suggested  the  establishment  there  of  that  city,  which  was  at  one
time  the  rival  metropolis  of  the  land.  Samaria,  as  we  have  seen,  stood  on  an  eminence  in  the
midst  of  a  hollow  enclosed  by  hills,  and  is  therefore  surrounded  by  the  valleys  which  intervene
between  the  bases  of  the  enclosed  and  enclosing  hills.  Jerusalem,  in  like  manner,  is  seated  upon
an  eminence,  or  rather  a  collection  of  eminences,  within  a  basin  of  enclosing  hills  and  valleys.
But  this  enclosure  is  only  on  three  sides ;  for  on  the  north  the  site  opens  to  the  high  plains.
Comparison  between  the  sites  of  Jerusalem  and  Samaria  ends  with  this  principle,  for  there  is
no  other  resemblance.  The  shape  and  extent  of  the  enclosed  basin  is  different  altogether.
At  Samaria  the  surrounding  valleys  are  far  more  broad  and  cheerful,  and  the  enclosing  hills
are  more  regular  and  beautiful  than  those  at  Jerusalem.

The  figure  of  the  site  of  Jerusalem  being  irregularly  oblong,  the  valleys  on  the  east  and
west — and  especially  the  former — are  much  longer  than  the  one  on  the  south.  To  these  val-
leys our  present  attention  will  be  confined.

The  most  extensive  and  important  of  these  valleys  is  that  which  lies  east  of  the  city — be-
tween it  and  the  Mount  of  Olives.  This  is  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  It  is  rather
more  than  a  mile  in  length,  but  narrow,  as  there  are  few  places  in  which  its  breadth  exceeds
200  yards.  This  is  that  memorable  valley  so  often  mentioned  under  different  names  (')  by
the  sacred  historians  and  prophets ;  and  which  is  sanctified  in  the  memories  of  men  afar  off
by  the  knowledge  that  its  soil  is  replete  with  the  dust  of  thousands  of  holy  and  venerable
personages ;  and  has  been  moistened  by  the  tears  of  the  prophets  and  the  blood  of  the  saints.
Who  knows  not,  also, that  this  valley  was  often  traversed  by  David,  or  by  "the  Son  of  Man,"
whenever  the  record  of  their  griefs  bears  witness  that  they  crossed  the  brook  of  Kedron,  or
ascended  Mount  Olivet ;  or  that  it  is  the  peculiar  and  awful  distinction  of  this  valley,  that
Jews,  Mohammedans,  and  the  mass  of  Christians,  live  and  die  in  the  persuasion  that  this  is
"  the  Valley  of  Decision," — the  valley  to  which  all  the  nations  shall  be  gathered  in  the  great
and  terrible  day  of  final  judgment.

Properly  speaking,  this  hollow  is  rather  a  ravine  than  a  valley — "  a  deep  and  rugged  ra-
vine,"— as  it  is  called  by  Lamartine,  whose  highly-wrought  and  figurative  language  is  here
applied  with  so  much  more  than  the  usual  appropriateness  as  to  warrant  the  use  of  his
description.  "  It  was  a  deep  and  narrow  valley,  enclosed  on  the  north  by  dark  and  barren
heights  which  contained  the  sepulchres  of  kings,  shaded  on  the  west  by  the  heavy  and  gigantic
walls  of  a  city  of  iniquities;  covered  at  the  east  by  the  summit  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and
crossed  by  a  torrent,  which  rolled  its  bitter  and  yellow  waters  over  the  broken  rocks  of  the
valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  At  some  paces  distant15  a  black  and  bare  rock  detaches  itself  like  a
promontory  from  the  base  of  the  mountain,  and,  suspended  over  Kedron  and  the  valley,  bears
several  old  tombs  of  kings  and  patriarchs,  formed  in  gigantic  and  singular  architecture,  and
strides,  like  the  bridge  of  death,  over  the  valley  of  lamentations.  At  that  period  [the  time  of
Christ's  '  agony '],  no  doubt,  the  sloping  sides  of  Mount  Olivet,  now  nearly  bare,  were  wa-
tered by  brooks  from  the  pools,  and  by  the  still  running  stream  of  Kedron.  Gardens  of
pomegranate,  orange,  and  olive-trees,  covered  with  a  thicker  shade  the  narrow  valley  of
Gethsemane,  which  delves  like  a  sanctuary  of  grief  into  the  darkest  depths  of  the  valley  of
Jehoshaphat."

a  Roger,  152;  Rochetta,  274;  Morison,  497,  534;   Nan,  467;  Skinner,  i.  199;  Stephens,  ii.  208;  Taylor,  •  La  Syrie,'  146.
b  He  is  describing  from  the  site  of  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane,  near  the  north  end  of  the  valley,  at  the  foot  of  the  Mount  of
Olives.

VOL.  I.  r

cxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

The  olive  plantations  and  vineyards  are  thin  and  few,  and  confined  mostly  to  the  northern
part,  upon  and  under  the  Mount  of  Olives.  The  valley  deepens  and  widens  in  its  progress
southward — save  that  it  somewhat  narrows  at  about  the  middle  part,  where  occur  those  old
sepulchral  monuments  of  which  Lamartine  speaks.  Nor  are  these  the  sole  memorials  of  the
dead.  The  sides  of  the  valley,  particularly  towards  this  middle  portion,  are  almost  paved
with  black  and  white  sepulchral  stones — thousands  and  tens  of  thousands, — for  this  is  the
place  where,  three  thousand  years  ago,  the  Jew  buried  his  dead  under  the  shadow  of  his
Temple ;  and  ever  since — because  this  is  holy  ground,  and  because  it  is  held  that  men  shall,
in  this  vale,  rise  at  the  last  day  to  honour  or  shame — the  Jew  journeys  in  his  old  age  from
the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,  that  when  he  dies  his  bones  may  be  laid  in  this  valley  of  his
fathers'  sepulchres.

The  famous  brook  Kedron,  which  traverses  the  length  of  this  valley,  is  a  mere  winter-tor-
rent, quite  dry  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year.

The  valley  to  the  south,  under  Mount  Zion,  and  between  it  and  the,  so  called,  Hill  of
Evil  Council,'1  is  most  probably  that  to  which  the  Scripture  gives  the  name  of  Ben-Hinnom,
or,  in  the  Greek,  Ge-Hennom — "  The  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom."  Who  this  Hinnom
was  is  not  known.  This  valley  is  rather  more  than  half  a  mile  long.  "  Its  breadth  is  about
fifty  yards,  and  its  depth  perhaps  twenty,  measuring  from  the  bottom  to  the  highest  part  of
Mount  Zion."b  It  is  traversed  by  the  channel  of  a  winter-torrent,  which  begins  in  the  western
valley  and  ends  in  the  bed  of  the  Kedron.  The  valley  is  wider  at  the  eastern  end,  which  joins
the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  than  at  the  western,  which  joins  the  valley  of  Gihon.  This  ravine
formed  part  of  the  boundary  between  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin.  Both  its  sides  are
cut  down  perpendicularly,  as  if  it  had  served  for  a  quarry  to  the  ancient  city, — and  this  circum-
stance increases  its  resemblance  to  a  trench  or  ditch ;  and  practically  it  did  serve  as  a  fosse
on  that  side  to  "  the  city  of  David  "  on  Mount  Zion.  The  bottom  is  rock  covered  with  a
thin  sprinkling  of  earth  washed  down  from  the  higher  ground.  Being  comparatively  well
watered,  it  was  anciently  rich  in  gardens  and  groves,  amid  which  the  apostate  Israelites,  in  the
days  of  the  monarchy,  celebrated  the  horrid  rites  of  Moloch,  not  unfrequently  attended  with
the  offering  of  human  victims  in  sacrifice  to  his  grim  idol.  Hence  its  frequent  mention  by
the  prophets  in  their  denunciations  of  the  "  dark  idolatries  of  alienated  Judah;"  and  in  these
it  sometimes  bears  the  name  of  Tophet,  from  the  tabrets  (called  in  Hebrew  top/i)  with  which
the  cries  of  the  victims  were  drowned.  After  the  captivity  had  extinguished  the  propensity
of  the  Jews  to  idolatry,  the  memories  connected  with  this  spot  caused  it  to  be  regarded
with  abhorrence ;  and,  following  the  example  of  king  Josiah,c  it  was  appropriated  to  the
vilest  uses.  Every  kind  of  filth  was  thrown  into  it,  as  well  as  the  carcasses  of  animals
and  the  dead  bodies  of  malefactors.  But,  to  obviate  the  evil  consequences  which  might  be
expected  to  ensue  if  such  a  mass  of  corruptible  matter  were  left  to  putrefy,  fires  were  con-
stantly kept  up  in  the  valley  to  reduce  the  whole  to  ashes.  Hence  the  metaphor  which,  in  the
New  Testament  and  in  the  Jewish  writings,  transfers  the  name  of  Gehenna  to  that  other  place,
"  where  the  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  On  the  farther  side  of  this
valley,  towards  the  south-east,  is  the  spot  supposed,  with  very  good  reason,  to  be  "  Aceldama,"
the  field  of  blood,  which  was  bought  with  the  price  of  the  treason  of  Judas  for  "  a  field  to
bury  strangers  in."d  The  rocky  and  precipitous  hill-side  is  here  and  elsewhere  pierced  with
tombs  of  various  forms  and  dimensions.  The  soil  of  Aceldama  has  had  the  reputation  of
reducing  to  dust  within  twenty-four  hours  the  bodies  deposited  in  it ;  and  it  was,  if  it  be  not
still,  believed,  that  it  did  not  lose  its  decomposing  properties  even  when  carried  to  a  distance.6

a  Because  the  house  of  Caiaphas,  where  the  chief-priests  and  the  scribes  took  council  against  Christ,  is  supposed  to  have  stood
upon  the  top  of  the  hill.     Very  unlikely.

b  Robinson ;  who  is  probably  right,  although  his  estimate  of  the  breadth  is  much  under  that  of  Eugene  Roger,  who  says,—
"  Laquelle  peut  avoir  mil  cinq  cents  pas  de  longueur'  d'orient  a  l'occident,  et  trois  a  quatre  cents  de  largeur."

c  2  Kings,  xxiii.  10.  d  Matt,  xxvii.  3-8.

e  '*  By  order  of  the  Empress  Helena,  270  ship-loads  of  this  soil  were  transported  to  Rome,  and  deposited  in  the  Campo  Santo
near  the  Vatican,  where  it  was  wont  to  reject  the  bodies  of  the  Romans,  and  only  consume  those  of  strangers  !  The  interior  of  the
Campo  Santo  at  Pisa  is  also  tilled  with  this  soil,  where  I  saw  it,  two  years  ago,  producing  a  rank  crop  of  alnpccurus  and  other
grasses." — Monro,  ii.  204.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxxiii

These  deep  valleys  on  the  east  and  south  must  always  have  restricted  the  extent  of  Jeru-
salem, in  those  quarters,  within  its  present  limits.  But  this  is  not  the  case  on  the  west ;  for
the  western  valley,  which  is  called  the  valley  of  Gihon,  is  so  shallow,  that,  according  to  Mr.
Elliot,  there  is  no  palpable  absurdity  in  supposing  that  it  may  have  been  included,  with  a
portion  of  the  opposite  hill,  in  the  ancient  Jerusalem.  On  arriving  on  the  verge  of  this  valley,
opposite  Jerusalem,  Lamartine  says,  "  A  vacant  space  of  some  hundred  paces  alone  lay
between  us  and  the  gate  of  Bethlehem.  This  area,  barren,  sloping,  and  waste,  resembling
the  glacis  which  at  a  certain  distance  surrounds  the  fortified  towns  of  Europe,  opened  to  the
right,  and  descended  with  a  gentle  declivity  into  a  narrow  valley."  The  valley  is,  however,
considerably  wider  in  its  southern  part  than  at  this  place.

Having  completed  this  brief  survey  of  the  valleys  which  surround  the  humbled  "  city  of  the
Great  King,"  we  may  now  proceed  to  explore  the  other  valleys  and  the  plains  of  Judea.

The  road  from  Jerusalem  to  Bethlehem  lies  through  a  continued  valley  upwards  of  six
miles  in  length,  and  of  very  considerable  breadth. a  The  entrance  to  it  is  south-west  of  Jeru-
salem from  the  valley  of  Gihon.  All  the  old  travellers  identify  it  with  the  Valley  of
Rephaim  so  often  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures,  and  which  is  there  celebrated  for  its  fertility
and  for  the  victory  of  David  over  the  Philistines.15  We  have  no  doubt  this  identification  is
correct,  seeing  that  the  Philistines  then  held  possession  of  Bethlehem.  Hence  we  are  sur-
prised to  see  that  recent  travellers  suppose  the  Valley  of  Rephaim  to  be  the  same  as  that  of
Gihon  on  the  west  of  Jerusalem.  This  mistake  may  have  originated  from  some  travellers
misunderstanding  the  indications  given  to  them ;  supposing,  probably,  that  their  guides  indi-
cated that  as  the  Valley  of  Rephaim,  when  they  really  intended  to  point  out  the  commencement
of  that  valley  which  now  engages  our  attention.

This  valley  is  not  deep.  It  might  perhaps  be  more  distinctive  to  describe  it  as  a  depressed
plain,  bounded  on  either  hand  by  low  hills.  Its  present  appearance  of  fertility  supports  its
ancient  fame ;  and  in  it  are  corn-fields,  vineyards,  olive-grounds,  and  orchards  of  various  kinds
of  fruits.  The  interest  of  this  valley  arises  from  the  certainty  that  it  was  often  traversed  and
its  natural  features  noted  by  some  of  the  most  venerable  personages  of  the  sacred  history  in
their  journeys  from  Jerusalem  to  Bethlehem  or  to  Hebron.  The  road  is  replete  with  pilgrim
curiosities  of  the  usual  description,  in  few  of  which  the  instructed  mind  will  be  much
interested.  First,  about  two  miles  from  Jerusalem,  we  observe  to  the  right  a  small  eminence
in  which  are  the  ruins  of  some  large  building  which  we  are  told  was  the  house  of  the
aged  Simeon,  who,  in  the  Temple,  took  the  infant  Jesus  in  his  arms.  About  midway  between
Jerusalem  and  Bethlehem  was  the  largest  and  most  lofty  terebinth-tree  which  Rauwolff  had
ever  seen.  It  was  too  conspicuous  and  noble  an  object  not  to  be  sanctified  by  some  tradition;
and,  accordingly,  we  are  told  that  beneath  the  shade  which  this  tree  offered,  the  Virgin  Mary
was  wont  to  rest  on  her  journeys  between  Bethlehem  and  Jerusalem  ;  and  some  marvellous
instances  are  given  of  the  respect  and  attention  which  the  docile  tree  evinced.  It  was  burnt
down  by  the  Arabs  a  few  years  after  Rauwolff  saw  it,  and  an  olive-tree  afterwards  supplied
its  place. c  Six  or  seven  hundred  paces  from  this  is  a  fine  cistern,  made  apparently  for  watering
the  flocks  pastured  in  the  neighbouring  campaigns.  It  is  called  the  cistern  of  the  kings,
because,  as  the  story  runs,  the  Magi,  while  watering  their  camels  here,  saw  anew  the  star
which  guided  them  to  the  obscure  birth-place  of  Christ  in  Bethlehem.  Near  this  is  the
monastery  of  St.  Elias,  where  there  is  a  rock  on  which  we  are  told  the  prophet  lay  down  to
sleep  when  he  fled  from  Jezebel,  and  on  which  he  left  the  impress  of  his  figure  !  Another
building  in  ruins,  about  500  paces  beyond,  is  announced  as  the  house  of  the  prophet  Habakkuk,

a  The  only  estimate  of  its  breadth  we  have  met  with  is  that  of  Morison,  who  calls  it  a  league  wide.  But  we  see  cause  to  think
this  much  too  high  an  estimate.     Accuracy  of  measurements  is  not  among  the  many  great  merits  of  Morison  as  a  traveller.

b  2  Sam.  xxiii.  13;  1  Chron.  xi.  15;  xiv.  8-17;  Isa.  xvii.  5.     Joseph.  '  Antiq.'  vii.  4.

c  Morison  says  that,  when  the  old  terebinth-tree  was  destroyed,  many  attempts  were  made  to  plant  another  of  the  same  species,
but  without  success,  as  none  of  the  young  terebinths  could,  with  any  care,  be  made  to  take  root.  But  the  olive-tree  grew  spon-
taneously on  the  spot.

r  2

cxxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

or,  more  likely,  as  Morison  suggests,  of  a  church  built  upon  its  alleged  site.  Not  far  from
this  is  a  cultivable  ground,  commonly  called  the  Pea-field :  it  was  formerly  usual  to  find  there
a  quantity  of  small  rounded  stones,  in  the  form  of  chick-peas,  concerning  which  we  are  told
by  a  tradition,  which  Morison  allows  we  are  at  liberty  to  admit  or  to  reject,  that  a  whole  crop
of  this  legume  was  turned  to  stone,  because  the  churlish  proprietor  refused  a  handful  to  the
Virgin  Mary,  and  jeeringly  told  her  they  were  not  peas  but  stones. (2)  In  the  same  neigh-
bourhood, a  ruined  tower,  with  some  other  buildings,  upon  a  height,  is  pointed  out  as  the
tower  of  Edar  or  of  Jacob  ;  and  here  also  occurs  Rachel's  Sepulchre,  which  has  been  noticed
in  the  historical  portion  of  this  work.a  About  1200  paces  from  this  is  seen  on  the  right
hand  a  large  and  deep  fosse  of  a  round  shape,  which,  as  traditions  tell,  was  dug  to  receive  the
bodies  of  Sennacherib's  host,  which  was  encamped  in  this  valley  when  slain — all  in  one  night
— by  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  RauwolfF  mentions  another  ditch,  higher  up  the  valley,
employed  for  the  same  purpose,  but  the  situation  of  which  he  does  not  clearly  indicate.  That
great  pits  were  dug  on  the  occasion  indicated  is  more  than  likely ;  but  they  were  dug  to  be
filled  again,  and  would  not  now  be  recognizable  as  ditches.  Even  sensible  travellers  have
forgotten  this.b

We  have  enumerated  the  objects  in  the  short  route  of  two  hours  from  Jerusalem  to  Beth-
lehem, partly  that  the  reader  may  have  before  him  some  specimens  of  the  ample  fare  which
was  provided  for  the  curiosity  and  enthusiasm  of  pilgrims  to  the  Holy  Land.

At  a  short  distance  to  the  south  of  Bethlehem  is  a  fine  and  rather  extensive  plain  covered
with  rich  pasture,  where  David,  no  doubt,  often  fed  the  flocks  of  his  father.  One  part  of  this
plain,  enclosed  by  low  hills  planted  with  olive-trees  and  partly  cultivated,  is  called  the  Shep-
herds' Field,  from  a  tradition  that  it  was  in  this  place  the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem  were
watching  their  flocks  by  night,  when  the  angel  proclaimed  to  them  the  "  glad  tidings  "  that  in
"  the  city  of  David"  "  a  Saviour"  had  then  been  born;  and  where  a  multitude  of  "  the
heavenly  host"  exulted  in  the  manifestation  of  glory  to  God,  -peace  to  the  earth,  and  good-will
to  man.

About  one  hour's  journey  to  the  south  of  Bethlehem  is  a  small  valley  which  offers  the  tra-
ditional and  very  probable  site  of  one  of  Solomon's  pleasure-grounds,  where  he  made  him
"  gardens,  and  orchards,  and  pools  of  water."  The  reservoirs  at  the  south  end  of  this  valley,
called  the  Pools  of  Solomon,  still  engage  the  attention  of  travellers,  and  will  be  duly  noticed
in  a  more  suitable  place.  Below  these  runs  another  valley,  narrow  and  rocky,  about  two
miles  in  length,  terminating  in  a  close  ravine.  The  mountains  which  enclose  it  are  high,  and
run  straight  as  palisades.  The  cultivable  soil  in  the  bottom  of  the  valley  varies  in  width,  but
rarely  exceeds  a  hundred  yards,  and  the  rocks  rise  abruptly  on  either  side.  At  something  more
than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  occurs  the  lower  portion  of  a  quadrangular  building  of  coarse  stone  work,
thirty  feet  by  twenty-one,  the  walls  of  which  are  six  feet  thick,  and  a  small  pipe,  three  inches
in  diameter,  passes  out  on  the  side  next  the  pools ;  but  no  other  passage  out  can  be  discovered.
A  short  distance  beyond  it  the  valley  is  set  with  fig-trees,  vines,  and  olives,  the  proprietors  of
which  inhabit  a  few  huts  on  the  left,  where  are  also  some  ruined  arches  of  stone.  From  the
foot  of  the  rock  beneath  these  ruins  issues  a  transparent  spring,  which,  passing  onward  in  a
copious  stream,  winds  through  the  valley,  irrigating  and  fertilizing  in  its  course,  while  the
rock  over  its  source  is  cut  into  various  forms.

This  valley  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  site  of  the  gardens,  and  the  enclosed  fountain  and
spring  to  be  those  alluded  to  by  Solomon  in  the  text,  "  A  garden  enclosed  is  my  sister,  my
spouse:  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed."0  Hence  the  valley  bears  the  name  of  Hart us
Conclusus.  Maundrell  thinks  the  pools  before  referred  to  were  very  likely  made  by  Solomon ;
"  but  for  the  gardens,"  he  says,  "  one  may  safely  affirm  that,  if  Solomon  made  them  in  the
rocky  ground  which  is  now  assigned  for  them,  he  demonstrated  greater  power  and  wealth  in

a  Page  103.

b  Quaresm.  Elucid.  T.  S.  ii.  589-614;   Rauwolff,  373;    Furer,  U;  De  Breves,  170;  Zuallart,  iii.  15;  Cotovic,  cap.  10;  Nau,
iv.  10;  Morison,  ii.  26;  Maundrell,  86.
c  Solomon's  Song,  iv,  12.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxxv

finishing  his  design  than  he  did  wisdom  in  choosing  the  place  for  it."  But  Hasselquist,  a
hetter  judge,  says,  "  The  place  will  well  admit  that  Solomon  might  have  formed  a  garden
here,  though  it  is  not  hy  nature  an  agreeable  situation,  being  in  a  bottom ;  but  perhaps  this
great  prince  might  choose  to  improve  nature  by  art,  as  many  other  potentates  have  done."
The  fact  is,  that  a  valley  kept  always  verdant  by  the  singular  abundance  of  water,  afforded
peculiar  advantages  in  this  country  for  a  pleasure-ground.  Mariti  says,  "Nature  has  still
preserved  its  original  fertility  to  the  valley  of  Hortus  Conclusus.  Although  but  little  culti-
vated, the  soil  still  produces  a  tolerable  quantity  of  cotton  and  various  kinds  of  grain.  There
are  also  seen  fine  plantations  of  fruit-trees,  affording  the  most  juicy  fruits  of  the  country.
Various  flowers  and  many  fragrant  plants  grow  there  naturally  at  all  seasons — among  which
are  thyme,  rosemary,  marjorum,  sage,  absinthium,  persil,  rue,  ranunculuses,  and  anemones."
De  Breves,  long  before,  bore  similar  testimony,  though  he  was  there  in  the  very  unfavourable
month  of  July  :  he  describes  the  valley  as  "always  green ;"  and,  besides  the  plants  just  named,
cultivated  by  Nature's  own  kindly  hand,  he  adds  oranges,  citrons,  and  pomegranates  to  the
fruits  which  grow  there.  Zuallart  says  that  several  species  of  rare  plants  were  found  in  the
valley,  and  seems  to  insinuate  the  probability  that  they  had  been  propagated  from  exotic
plants  which  Solomon  introduced  into  his  gardens. a

Having  come  so  far  in  this  line  of  road,  we  will  follow  it  as  far  as  Hebron,  in  order  to
reach  the  Valley  of  Mamre,  near  that  town.  From  the  Pools  of  Solomon  to  Hebron,  the
road  lies  over  a  succession  of  barren  hills,  between  which  we  do  not  find  any  noticeable  val-
leys. The  vicinity  of  Hebron  renders  the  identification  of  the  Vale  of  Mamre  unquestionable.
It  has  been  slightly  noticed  in  our  history  of  the  patriarchs,  to  whom  it  formed  a  favourite
place  of  encampment,  and  which  contained  the  sepulchre  in  which  their  bones  lay.  This
broad  and  winding  valley  extends  for  some  miles,  and  is  bounded  on  all  sides,  and  apparently
shut  in  by  stony  mountains.  The  soil  is  good ;  and  offers  much  cultivation  of  the  olive  and
the  vine,  while  the  uncultivated  parts  exhibit  rich  pastures.  It  contains  a  terebinth-tree,
which  is  held  in  high  honour  by  all  the  inhabitants  of  Hebron,  especially  by  the  Jews,  in  the
belief  that  the  tent  of  Abraham  was  shaded  by  its  boughs.b

The  notice  which  has  been  taken  of  the  valleys  on  the  line  of  road  between  Jerusalem  and
Hebron  will  incidentally  have  the  use  of  supplying  points  which  will  serve  to  indicate  the
bearings  of  such  other  valleys,  to  the  east  or  west  of  this  line,  as  may  now  require  our  at-
tention.

We  may  now  return  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  and  again  walk  southward  from
thence  to  explore  the  valleys  which  lie  to  the  east  or  Avest  of  the  central  line  to  Hebron,  which
has  now  been  described.  The  very  important  portion  of  Judah  which  lies  between  this  cen-
tral line  and  the  coast  has  been  very  partially  explored  hitherto.  Some  travellers  of  the  six-
teenth and  seventeenth  centuries  did  indeed  traverse  it  by  tracks  which  have  not  been  followed
by  later  travellers,  except  in  the  instance  of  Professor  Robinson  and  the  Rev.  Eli  Smith,  the
results  of  whose  researches  have  only  as  yet  been  communicated  to  the  public  in  a  very  slight
sketch.

The  only  valley  in  this  quarter  to  which  the  older  travellers  call  attention,  happens  also  to
be  the  only  one  of  which  the  Scripture  takes  notice.  This  is  the  Vale  of  Sorek,  so  cele-
brated for  its  large  clusters  of  fine  grapes,  and  for  the  excellent  wine  which  those  grapes
afforded.  It  is  the  channel  of  a  winter-torrent,  which  commences  behind  the  southern  hills  of
that  Wilderness  of  St.  John  which  we  lately  noticed.  From  this,  which  is  about  five  miles
west  of  Jerusalem,  the  valley  stretches  about  four  miles  in  a  direction  south  by  west,  after
which  it  extends  away  westward  to  the  coast,  where  the  torrent  which  passes  through  it  dis-
charges its  waters  (when  it  has  any)  into  the  sea,  below  Ashdod.  The  whole  of  this  course  is
about  forty  miles.  This  may  explain  the  discrepancy  between  different  travellers  ;  for,  while
some  apply  the  name  of  the  Vale  of  Sorek  to  this  whole  extent,  others  confine  it  to  the  shorter

a  Monro,  ii  256;  De  Breves,  180  ;  Zuallart,  iv.  3;  Nau,  444;  Maundrell,  89;  Mariti,  ii.  388;  Hasselquist,  145.
b  Elliot,  ii.  499;  Stephens,  ii.  140;  Lindsay,  ii.  50.     About  the  terebinth-tree  of  Mamre,  see  pp.  36,  51.

cxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

commencing  portion,  before  the  westward  turn  is  taken.     It  is  only  of  this  part  that  we  have
any  satisfactory  description.

One  principal  reason  of  the  interest  which  the  old  travellers  took  in  this  valley  was  from
the  belief  that  it  was  not  only  the  valley  of  Sorek  so  celebrated  for  its  wine  grapes,  but  also
that  of  Eshcol,  from  which  the  spies  took  the  enormous  vine  cluster  which  they  bore  to  Moses. a
Or  rather,  they  think  the  valley  was  named  Sorek,  and  the  brook  which  flowed  through  it
Eshcol.  As  the  valley  from  which  the  spies  took  the  cluster  of  grapes  derived  its  name  from
that  circumstance,  it  might  certainly  have  two  names  — its  old  one,  and  that  which  it  thus  ac-
quired. Others  have  rather  chosen  to  find  the  valley  of  Eshcol  in  that  which  contains  the
spring  called  the  Fountain  of  St.  Philip — at  which  the  deacon  of  that  name  is  supposed,  but
we  imagine  very  erroneously,  to  have  baptised  the  Ethiopian  eunuch.  This  valley  opens  into
that  of  Sorek,  just  at  the  point  where  the  latter  begins  to  bend  decidedly  westward.  We  have
ourselves  no  very  clear  opinion  about  the  situation  of  the  Scriptural  brook  of  Eshcol.  Since
one  of  Abraham's  Amoritish  friends,  dwelling  in  the  valley  of  Mamre,  near  Hebron,  bore  this
name  of  Eshcol,  it  has  generally  of  late  years  been  concluded  that  the  valley  so  called  took
its  name  from  him,  and  is  in  fact  only  another  name  for  the  valley  of  Mamre.  The  testimony
of  Jerome,  which  is  of  great  weight  in  such  a  question,  is  favourable  to  this  opinion,  as  is
also  the  southward  situation  of  that  valley .b  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sacred  text  expressly
says,  not  that  the  brook  Eshcol  was  so  called  from  any  connection  with  the  Amoritish  chief,
but  that  "  the  place  was  called  the  brook  Eshcol  because  of  the  cluster  of  grapes  which  the
children  of  Israel  cut  down  from  thence."  But  we  may  leave  this  question,  and  return  to  the
valley  of  Sorek,c  which  might  certainly  claim  to  be  regarded  as  that  through  which  the  brook
of  Eshcol  flowed,  if  the  great  superiority  of  its  wines  might  be  taken  as  evidence  in  its
favour.

Understood  in  the  more  limited  sense  which  we  have  defined,  the  valley  of  Sorek  is  rather
deep,  and  moderately  broad.  The  mountains  which  enclose  it  on  the  west  present  only  the
appearance  of  scarped  rocks.  Those  on  the  opposite  side  are  lower,  but  covered  with  verdure.
The  valley  is,  or  was  down  to  recent  times,  cultivated  unusually  well — partly  as  arable  land,
and  partly  in  vineyards,  besides  plantations  of  the  fig-tree  and  the  olive.  The  vines  of  this
valley  are  still  the  finest,  and  the  wine  made  from  them  the  best  in  the  Holy  Land.  The  sup-
position that  this  was  the  vale  in  which  the  spies  "  cut  down  a  branch  with  one  cluster  of
grapes,  and  bare  it  between  them  upon  a  staff,"  gives  interest  to  the  statement  of  Eugene
Roger,  that  in  the  year  1633  he  found  here  a  cluster  of  white  grapes  weighing  twenty-four
French  pounds  ;d  and  he  adds  that  it  was  quite  ordinary  to  find  them  from  six  or  eight  to
ten  or  twelve  (French)  pounds  weight.  Tiie  wine  made  from  these  grapes  was  that  which
was  supplied  to  visitors  at  the  convent  of  St.  John,  and  is  declared  by  Morison  and  others  to
be  one  of  the  best  in  the  Holy  Land.  It  is  a  white  wine ;  and,  says  the  traveller  just  named,
"  it  was  so  delicate  and  so  delicious,  that,  in  tasting  it,  my  conscience  secretly  reproached  me
for  so  badly  imitating  the  great  Baptist,  who  in  this  very  place  [the  wilderness  of  St.  John]
abstained  from  all  wine  and  strong  drink. "e

Seeing  that  the  valley,  which  is  thus  noticed  in  its  commencement,  passes  seaward  at  no
great  distance  from  Ask  el  on,  it  seems  very  possible  that  the  wine  which  the  Scriptures  cele-
brate as  the  "  wine  of  Sorek  "  may  be  the  same  of  which  the  classical  ancients  make  honour-
able mention  as  the  wine  of  Askelon.  The  bed  of  the  winter  torrent,  the  commencing  por-
tion of  which  we  have  described,  crosses  at  its  other  extremity  the  plain  of  the  coast  at  be-
tween four  and  five  miles  to  the  north  of  Askelon,  and  travellers  pass  it  with  little  further  re-
mark than  "  We  crossed  a  broad  stone  bridge,  which  was  over  the  bed  of  a  river,  with  stag-
nant water  in  several  places."     This  was  in  April.f

B  Num.  xiii.  23,  24.  b  Epitaph.  Paulae,  fol.  59,  G.  H.

c  All  the  Scriptural  encomiums  on  the  vine  and  the  wine  of  Sorek  are  lost  to  the  English  reader,  through  our  translators  having
understood  the  word  as  an  appellative  rather  than  a  proper  name,  and  accordingly  translated  *'  choice  vine,"  "  noble  vine,"  as  in
Gen.  xlix.  2;  Isa.  v.  2;  Jer.  ii.  21,  &c.

d  Twenty-six  lbs.  7  ozs.  avoirdupois.  e  Luke  i.  15.

t  Roger,  182;  Morison,  492;  Thevenot,  203;  Quaresm.  Elucid.  T.  S.  ii.  696;  Richardson,  ii.  205.

Chap.  V  ]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxxvii

We  shall  now  look  to  the  valleys  which  lie  between  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  centre  of
Judea.

The  Desert  of  St.  Saba  might  be  mentioned  either  among  mountains  or  valleys.  We  place
it  here,  among  the  latter,  because  the  mountains  which  give  it  character  form  the  sides  of  the
valley  or  ravine,  at  the  bottom  of  which  the  torrent  of  Kedron  makes  its  way  towards  the
Dead  Sea.  As  Dr.  Pococke's  account  of  it  involves  an  account  of  the  valley  of  Kedron  from
Jerusalem  to  this  place,  we  give  it  the  preference.  The  older  and  later  travellers  usually
visit  it  from  Bethlehem.  The  route  by  the  valley  of  Kedron  offers,  as  might  be  expected,  a
more  direct  route  to  the  Dead  Sea  than  that  by  the  plain  of  Jericho.

"  We  went  to  the.  south-east,  along  the  deep  and  narrow  valley  in  which  the  brook  Kedron
runs :  it  has  high  rocky  hills  on  each  side,  which  are  shaped  into  terraces,  and  doubtless  pro-
duced formerly  both  corn  and  wine :  some  of  them  are  cultivated  even  at  this  time ....  About
six  miles  from  Jerusalem  we  ascended  a  hill  to  the  south,  from  which  we  had  a  prospect  of
Zion,  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  Bethlehem.  We  then  went  about  an  hour  on  the  hills,  and
descending  a  little  to  the  south,  came  to  a  lower  ground,  where  we  had  the  first  view  of  St.
Saba.  Then  turning  east,  in  less  than  a  mile  we  arrived  at  the  convent,  which  is  situated,  in
a  very  extraordinary  manner,  on  the  high  rocks  over  the  brook  Kedron.  There  was  a  great
number  of  grottoes  about  it,  supposed  to  have  been  the  retreats  of  hermits.  The  monastic
and  hermit's  life  was  instituted  here  in  the  fourth  century  by  St.  Saba.  They  say  that  there
have  been  10,000  recluses  here  at  one  time,  and  some  writers  affirm  that,  in  St.  Saba's  time,
there  were  14,000.  The  monks  of  the  convent  never  eat  flesh ;  and  they  have  such  privileges
that  no  Mohammedan  can  enter  the  convent,  under  penalty  of  paying  500  dollars  to  the
mosque  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon.  St.  John  Damascenus,  Euphemius,  and  the  monk  Cyril  of
Jerusalem,  lived  in  this  retirement,  which  is  computed  to  be  ecpially  distant  from  Jerusalem,
Bethlehem,  and  the  Dead  Sea;  that  is,  about  three  hours  from  each  of  them."

This  learned  traveller  seems  not  to  have  been  at  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  and  consequently
was  not  aware  of  the  large  and  deep  cavern  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  in  which  rises  a  spring
of  water,  said  to  have  been  miraculously  produced  by  St.  Saba  for  the  benefit  of  the  monastery
which  he  founded.  This  place  has  not  been  much  visited  by  the  old  Catholic  pilgrims,  be-
cause the  monastery  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Greek  "  schismatics,"  nor  by  those  of  recent  date,
because  it  does  not  lie  on  any  of  the  more  frequented  roads.

The  old  travellers  who  visited  St.  Saba  generally  included  what  they  called  the  Desert  of
Engeddi  in  their  route.  In  a  former  inquiry  after  Engeddi  we  satisfied  ourselves,  by  reasoning,
that  it  must  have  lain  nearer  to  the  southern  than  to  the  northern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea.a
Yet  we  must  confess  that  the  accounts  which  we  have  since  met  with  of  the  received  Engeddi,
show  the  name  to  have  been  so  judiciously  appropriated  with  reference  to  many  circumstances
of  agreement  with  the  scriptural  notices  of  the  place,  that  we  are  not  sure  we  should  have
adhered  to  our  former  conclusion  against  it,  were  it  not  that  Professor  Robinson  has  since  dis-
covered the  very  name  of  Ain  Jiddi  as  nearly  as  may  be  in  the  situation  we  indicated.  But
although  travellers  are  thus  shown  to  be  wrong  in  the  appropriation  of  the  name  of  Engeddi  to
the  locality  which  they  describe,  the  place  itself  is  a  reality  which  requires  ovir  notice.

Several  of  the  travellers  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  have  very  satisfactory
accounts  of  this  place ;  but  that  which  Mr.  Monro  has  given  is  better  than  any  of  them,  and
will  be  more  acceptable  to  the  reader : —

"  At  one  hour  (east  from  Bethlehem)  we  reached  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  upon  the  eastern
side  of  which  the  "  Cave  of  Engeddi  "  is  situated.  The  ascent  is  not  difficult,  although
marked  by  no  paths  ;  and  the  mountains  are  of  the  loftiest  in  the  neighbourhood,  presenting
a  strong  and  well-chosen  "  hold."  Upon  the  summit  are  the  foundations  of  a  thick  wall  com-
posed of  large  stones,  enclosing  a  quadrangular  space  in  which  is  a  reservoir  for  water,  and
on  the  western  side  of  it  the  ground  is  raised  in  a  semicircular  form.  A  cistern,  no  doubt,  has
existed  here  from  the  earliest  times,  at  which  the  flocks  were  wont  to  be  watered,  and  which
gave  the  name  to  the  place,  since  Engeddi  in  Hebrew  signifies  the  kid's  fountain.     The  cave

a  '  Pictorial  Bible,'  note  on  1  Sam.  xxiv.  1.

cxxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

a  little  below  its  summit  had  its  entrance,  four  and  a  half  feet  high,  and  somewhat  wider,  care-
fully closed  with  stones  by  the  Arabs  previous  to  their  retiring  to  the  desert.

"  Having  pulled  down  the  wall,  I  found  the  length  of  the  interior  to  be  about  sixty  feet,  and
the  guide  said  that  its  depth  was  nearly  the  same  ;  but  the  back  part  was  so  entirely  filled  up
with  chaff,  that  not  more  than  twenty-five  feet  were  left  vacant.  In  the  highest  part  it  was
eight  feet,  but  in  most  places  less  than  five.  Although  a  natural  cavern,  it  seems  to  have  had
its  surface  smoothed  by  cutting.  This  mountain  stands  upon  the  border  of  the  desert,  com-
manding a  view  of  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  south-east.

"  That  the  spot  is  entitled  to  the  name  it  bears  appears  probable  from  the  coincidence  of  its
physical  circumstances  with  the  scriptural  narration  of  the  transaction  with  which  it  is  con-
nected^ '  Saul  came  to  the  sheep-cotes  by  the  way,  where  was  a  cave.'  This  could  not
have  been  actually  in  the  wilderness,  where  is  no  vegetation.13  Besides  which,  he  was  on  the
way  thither,  he  had  not  yet  reached  it.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  nature  of  the  ground  is  pre-
cisely the  same  at  the  present  day.  While  the  neighbouring  district  on  three  sides  is  arable,
this  mountain,  situated  within  a  mile  of  the  wilderness,0  is  covered  with  grass  ;  and  near  the
top  of  it  are  caves  with  small  stone  enclosures  in  front,  serving  as  pens  or  '  sheep-cotes'  for
the  flocks.     Near  the  cave  itself  a  flock  of  sheep  and  goats  were  feeding."*1

Separately  from  any  question  about  Engeddi,  this  is  one  interesting  specimen  of  the  numerous
grottoes  in  Palestine.  That  which  has  been  described  is  not  the  only  one  in  the  neighbour-
hood. It  is  the  principal  of  them ;  but  there  are  many  others  which,  like  this,  serve  as  retreats
to  the  Arabs  and  to  the  flocks  which  they  feed.

As  Mr.  Monro's  account  is  rather  limited,  it  is  proper  to  observe  that  what  the  old  travellers
understood  as  the  desert  of  Engeddi  is  a  district  of  some  extent,  rendered  agreeable  by  the
diversified  aspect  of  its  mountains,  and  by  the  richness  of  its  well-watered  valleys.  The  scrip-
tural Engeddi  was  celebrated  for  its  vineyards.*5  The  place  now  described  has  no  such  celebrity.
The  hills  and  valleys  are  entirely  uncultivated  ;  and  only  some  wild  olives  and  other  trees  are
now  seen.f

In  taking  a  view  of  the  country  to  the  south  of  Hebron  down  to  the  borders  of  the  desert,  we
must  avail  ourselves  exclusively  of  the  most  recent  authorities.  The  information  we  have
lately  acquired  concerning  this  very  interesting  portion  of  Palestine  is  one  of  the  benefits  which
we  have  incidentally  derived  from  the  discovery  of  Petra  by  Burckhardt.  Before  that  time,
those  travellers  whose  views  embraced  Egypt  and  Sinai  as  well  as  Palestine,  proceeded  first  to
Cairo,  then  went  to  Sinai,  and  returned  to  Cairo,  after  which  they  either  took  the  caravan
route  from  Cairo  to  Gaza,  or  else  proceeded  to  the  coast  and  embarked  for  Jaffa.  But  when
Petra  had  attracted  attention,  and  travellers  in  visiting  that  place  from  Akaba  were  already
more  than  half  way  to  Palestine,  it  began  to  be  felt  absurd  to  return  to  Egypt  in  order  to  pro-
ceed from  thence  to  the  Holy  Land.  Mr.  Stephens,  followed  by  Lord  Lindsay,  struck  boldly
across  from  Petra, through  the  desert  and  the  south  of  Judea  to  Hebron;  and  the  practicability
of  the  route  being  thus  established,  travellers  already  in  Palestine  have  not  hesitated  to  proceed
from  Hebron  to  Petra.  This  has  been  done  by  Count  de  Bertou  and  Professor  Robinson.  The
latter  gentleman,  with  his  companion  Mr.  Smith,  also  explored  another  tract  of  this  interesting
district  in  travelling  strait  from  Akaba  to  Hebron,  across  the  desert  which  intervenes  between
Sinai  and  Palestine,  and  through  the  southernmost  portion  of  the  latter  country.  He  was  not,
however,  as  he  supposes,  the  first  modern  traveller  to  cross  this  desert.  Mr.  Arundale  had
some  years  before  (in  1833)  crossed  its  entire  length  in  the  journey  which  he  made  direct
from  Sinai  to  Gaza,  without  turning  aside  to  Akaba  on  the  one  hand  or  to  Suez  on  the  other.
But,  unhappily,  this  gentleman  does  not  appear  from  his  book  to  have  been  aware  that  he  was
pursuing  a  route  which  is  not  known  to  have  been  for  ages  travelled  by  European  feet ;  and
hence,  his  particular  attention  not  being  excited,  his  information  conveys  little  instruction  to  us.

It  may  be  useful  to  state  the  routes  or  parts  of  routes  which  are  peculiar  or  common  to  the

a  1  Sam.  xxiv.
b  This  is  not  true,  whether  taken  as  a  general  or,  with  reference  to  the  present  case,  a  particular  observation.
c  What  wilderness?  a  Monro,  ii.  259-261.  *  Sol.  Song,  i.  14.  f  Morison,  489  ;  Nau,  446.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxxix

several  travellers  we  have  named,  as  enabling  the  reader  to  enter  the  better  into  those  passages
in  which  their  authority  is  adduced.

The  route  of  Mr.  Stephens  and  of  Lord  Lindsay  was  the  same  all  the  way  from  Sinai  to
Hebron.  The  return  journey  of  Count  de  Bertou,  from  Akaba  to  Hebron  by  Petra,  was  also
the  same  as  theirs  between  the  same  points.

The  route  of  Count  de  Bertou  from  Hebron  to  Akaba  is  two-thirds  of  it  new.  Its  com-
mencing portion,  from  Hebron  to  the  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  coincides  partly  with  the  pre-
ceding route,  and  wholly  with  that  of  Irby  and  Mangles,  and  Dr.  Robinson,  who  regrets  that
M.  de  Bertou  had  anticipated  him,  by  three  or  four  weeks,  on  this  route,  not  knowing  that
both  were  anticipated  twenty  years  ago  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  and  before  them  by  Seetzen ;
while  its  terminating  portion,  on  the  approach  to  Akaba,  is  twenty-five  miles,  included  in  the
usual  route  from  Akaba  to  Petra.

Although  Dr.  Robinson  was  not  the  first  to  cross  the  desert  of  El  Tyh,  his  route  across  it,
from  Akaba  to  Hebron,  is  new,  with  the  exception  of  about  eighteen  miles  between  the  points
where  Mr.  Arundale's  route  from  Sinai  joined  this,  and  afterwards  left  it  to  proceed  to  Gaza.
All  Mr.  Arundale's  route  from  Sinai  to  Gaza  is  new,  with  the  same  exception  which  has  just
been  stated,  and  in  which  his  route  coincided  with  that  of  Dr.  Robinson.

Departing  from  Hebron,  we  will  trace  such  particulars,  on  these  several  lines  of  route,  as
come  within  the  scope  of  our  present  chapter.  We  shall,  however,  stop  when  we  reach  the
skirts  of  the  desert;  which,  as  it  happens,  coincides,  as  nearly  as  possible,  with  the  line  which
we  gave  to  the  southern  border  of  Palestine.  The  desert  beyond,  we  reserve  for  the  general
notice  with  which  this  chapter  will  terminate.

Our  first  route  traverses  the  heart  of  the  southward  country,  from  Hebron  to  Wady  Ruhei-
beh,  through  which  Professor  Robinson  is  our  sole  guide.  But,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity,
we  reverse  the  direction  which  he  took,  which  was  to  Hebron  not  from  it.

The  valley  of  Mamre  has  already  been  noticed,  as  well  as  the  claim  which  it  offers  to  be
regarded  as  the  Scriptural  Eshcol.  This  claim  is  supported  by  the  generally  fertile  character
of  the  district  about  and  immediately  to  the  south  of  Hebron.  "  We  could  not  but  notice,"
says  our  guide,  "  the  fertility  of  the  surrounding  valleys,  full  of  fields  of  grain,  and  of  vine-
yards, yielding  the  finest  and  largest  clusters  of  all  Palestine.  Yet,  to  a  careless  observer,  the
country  in  general  can  only  appear  steril ;  for  the  limestone  rocks  everywhere  come  out  upon
the  surface,  and  are  strewn  over  it  in  large  masses,  to  such  a  degree  that  a  more  stony  or
rocky  region  is  rarely  to  be  seen."

This  sort  of  country,  but  with  diminishing  cultivation,  continues  about  twenty  miles,  when
the  hill  country  of  Judea  terminates,  and  we  have  before  us  a  wide  open  plain,  covered  with
grass,  and  where  fields  of  wheat  and  barley  are  seen  all  around.     It  was  probably  for  the  sake
of  the  pastures,  by  this  and  other  plains  and  valleys  in  this  quarter,  that  so  much  preference
was  given  to  it  by  the  Hebrew  patriarchs.     Indeed,  this  present  plain  extends  southward  to
the  borders  of  the  Wady  es-Seba,  on  which,  at  the  point  where  the  road  crosses,  Dr.  Robinson
had  the  happiness  to  discover  the  site  of  the  patriarchal  Beersheba,  as  mentioned  in  a  preced-
ing page  (90).  Beyond  this,  the  hills  are  higher  than  travellers  coming  from  the  south  have  seen
since  leaving  the  Sinai  peninsula.     Beyond  these  higher  hills  extends  for  many  miles  an
"  open  rolling  country  :"  all  around  are  swelling  hills  covered,  in  ordinary  seasons,  with  grass
and  rich  pasturage.     After  this  the  character  of  the  country  becomes  changed  to  that  of  an
elevated  plateau ;  and  beyond  it  another  plateau  [of  lower  level,  we  presume]  extends  all  the
way  to  our  limit,  Wady  Ruheibeh.     This  is  called,  by  Professor  Robinson,  "  a  fine  plain,
covered  with  grass,  and  herbs,  and  bushes  ;  in  crossing  which  our  ears  were  regaled  with  the
carols  of  the  lark  and  the  song  of  the  nightingale,  all  indicating  our  approach  [coming  from
the  south]  to  a  more  fertile  region."     The  learned  traveller  also  remarks  that  the  Arabic
name  Ruheibeh  may  suggest  the  Rehoboth  of  Scripture— the  name  of  one  of  Isaac's  wells;
but,  as  he  also  observes,  other  circumstances  do  not  correspond.

These  facts  are  important  and  interesting,  as  showing  the  existence  of  a  large  tract  of  natur-
ally fine  country,  partly  cultivable,  and  everywhere  abounding  in  rich  pastures.     This  must
vol.  i.  s

cxxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

have  been  a  valuable  part  of  the  Hebrew  territory ;  but  the  greater  part  of  it  was  either  not
assigned  to  the  Hebrews  at  all,  or  set  down  only  as  so  much  unprofitable  desert,  until  we  were
enabled  by  analogy  to  estimate  its  true  value,  and  to  assign  to  it  a  character  similar  to  that
which  actual  observation  has  since  shown  it  to  bear.

Now,  returning  to  Hebron,  we  will  travel  from  thence,  south  by  east,  to  the  borders  of
Wady  Araba.  Count  de  Bertou  must  be  our  chief  guide ;  for,  although  Mr.  Stephens  and
Lord  Lindsay  have  some  important  observations,  there  is,  as  usual,  a  want  of  that  precision
which  gives  value  to  the  remarks  of  a  man  of  science,  and  in  the  absence  of  which  it  is  often
difficult  to  allocate  observations  entitled,  in  themselves,  to  much  consideration.

As  the  travellers  whom  we  have  named  all  advanced  towards  Hebron  northward  from
Wady  Araba,  it  may  be  well  to  give  the  same  direction  to  the  statement  collected  from  their
observations.

As  the  point  at  which  they  left  the  Wady  Araba  is  too  far  southward,  we  will  take  a  point
on  this  route  nearly  on  the  same  line  with  the  Wady  Ruheibeh  of  the  more  western  route,  and
distant  forty-four  miles  therefrom.  Let  this  be  Wady  el  Kofeikifeh,  which  is  about  eighteen
miles  from  the  point  at  which  we  leave  the  Wady  Araba.

For  some  miles  above  and  below  this  point,  a  range  of  low  hills,  bearing  the  same  name,
intervene  between  Wady  Araba  and  the  road  which  we  traverse.

Before  reaching  the  point  where  the  roads  to  Hebron  and  Gaza  diverge,  we  pass,  about
three  miles  to  the  left,  an  isolated  small  hill,  named  by  the  guides  Kadeseh,  or  El  Madaruh,  a
remarkable  name,  which  suggests  to  Count  de  Bertou  whether  it  may  not  be  the  Kadesh  of
the  Scriptures.  This  must  be  the  same  site  which  Lord  Lindsay  writes  so  differently  as
Hussaya  Ulmedurra,  and  calls  it  a  chalk  hill ;  reporting  also  the  Bedouin  tradition  that
under  it  God  crushed  a  guilty  village.  A  little  way  beyond  this  brings  us  to  the  foot  of  Jebel
Yamen  (Right  Hand  Mountain),  a  range  of  hills  which  forms  the  termination  (or,  in  our
direction,  the  beginning)  of  the  mountains  of  Judea  in  this  quarter.  These  we  enter  by  a  deep
defile  called  Wady  Fukreh,a  the  mural  hills  on  either  side  rising  from  150  to  200  feet.  On
reaching  the  end  of  this  valley  or  gorge,  a  steep  ascent  is  commenced,  up  mountains  about
1000  feet  high,  winding  by  a  very  rough  track  through  a  wild  and  rocky  defile.  On  reaching
the  summit  a  slight  descent  brings  us  upon  an  elevated  plain,  called  Atreibi,b  the  surface  of
which  is  composed  of  heavy  sand,  with  the  usual  plants  of  the  desert, — "  but  still,"  says  Lord
Lindsay,  "  a  garden  compared  with  the  waste  we  had  recently  traversed."  In  fact,  traces  of
something  more  than  desert  vegetation  begin  to  appear  as  we  advance  into  the  plain ;  and
beyond  Wady  Kurnib  c  the  country  assumes  the  appearance  of  a  down  rather  than  a  desert,
being  thickly  covered  with  grass  and  shrubs.

Travellers  march  on  for  six  hours  from  Wady  Kurnib  without  finding  much  to  engage
their  attention.  Then  they  reach  a  place  called  El  Melek,d  which  is  described  as  being  situ-
ated in  a  very  extensive  plain,  called  El  Foura.  Here  Lord  Lindsay's  party  "  were  surprised
at  finding  two  large  and  deep  wells,  beautifully  built  of  hewn  stone :  the  uppermost  course,
and  about  a  dozen  troughs  for  watering  cattle  disposed  round  them,  of  a  coarse  white  marble :
they  were  evidently  coeval  with  the  Romans.  Quite  a  patriarchal  scene  presented  itself  as  we
drew  near  to  the  wells.  The  Bedouins  were  watering  their  flocks, — two  men  at  each  well
letting  down  the  skins,  and  pulling  them  up  again  with  almost  ferocious  haste,  and  with  quick
savage  shouts,  and  then  emptying  them  into  the  troughs :  the  sheperdesses  stood  aloof,  and
veiled  their  faces,  seeing  the  strange  howagis.  The  several  flocks,  coming  up  and  retiring  in
the  exactest  order,  were  a  beautiful  sight."

The  same  neighbourhood  gives  M.  de  Bertou  occasion  to  remark, — "  In  summer  each

a  Lord  Lindsay  must  have  misunderstood  his  guides.  He  supposed  they  were  telling  him  the  name  of  the  mountains,  when
they  actually  told  him  the  valley ;  for  this  word  is  doubtless  that  which  he  represents  by  Jebel  Asufar.  These  and  other  differences
of  orthography  which  we  have  occasionally  to  notice — and  which  are  sometimes  very  amusing — may  serve  to  indicate  to  the  reader
a  circumstance  by  which  geographical  inquiry  and  comparison  are  ofteu  grievously  perplexed.

b  By  Lord  Lindsay.     M.  de  Bertou,  whose  names  are  more  trustworthy,  does  not  name  it.

c  Lord  Lindsay  has  it  Kournou.

d  So  Lord  Lindsay.     The  place  El  Milh,  incidentally  named  by  M.  de  Bertou,  is,  doubtless,  the  same.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxxxi

camp  seeks  out  fresh  pasturage  for  its  flocks  and  herds,  which  forcibly  recalled  to  my  mind
that  Esau  and  Jacob  separated  from  each  other  for  the  same  purpose.  At  every  step  in  this
country  one  finds  a  striking  resemblance  between  the  account  given  in  the  Bible  of  the  pa-
triarchs of  old  and   the   manners  and  customs  of  its  present   inhabitants — nothing    ha.s

CHANGED."

A  range  of  stony  hills,  called  Jebel  el  Gheretain,a  bound  the  plain  of  El  Foura  on  the
north ;  and,  these  being  passed,  numerous  ruined  garden-walls  and  terraces  warn  us  of  our
entry  among  the  ancient  cultivation  of  Judea.  As  we  proceed,  we  observe  occasional  patches
of  ground  reclaimed  from  the  desert,  and  under  actual  cultivation ;  and,  ere  long,  the  whole
valley  below  us  becomes  green  with  corn,  field  descending  below  field,  divided  by  regular
terraces.  This  cultivation  belongs  to  the  village  of  Semuah.b  This  is  but  ten  miles  from
Hebron ;  and  all  the  way  we  ride  through  fields  of  corn,  between  rounded  hills,  which  are
covered  to  their  very  tops  with  bushes  of  the  prickly  oak.

One  general  observation  results  from  the  brief  survey  of  the  two  last  routes,  which  is,  that
cultivation  and  pasturage  cease  the  soonest  on  the  south-eastern  route,  being  that  to  the  extre-
mity of  the  Dead  Sea  and  to  the  Wady  Araba.c

In  stating  the  observations  made  by  M.  de  Bertou  in  his  southward  route  from  Hebron  to
Akaba,  we  took  up  that  route  as  it  entered  the  Ghor  at  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead
Sea,  omitting  the  details  which  he  gives  of  his  route  from  Hebron  to  that  point.  Part  of  that
route  coincides  with  that  which  has  just  engaged  our  attention.  But,  coming  from  Hebron,
the  route  in  question  leaves  this  at  about  El  Melek,  and  strikes  off  east-south-east  to  the  end
of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  distance  does  not  exceed  twenty  miles ;  but  is  of  very  striking  in-
terest.

The  journey  lies,  at  first,  over  an  undulating  plain,  with  the  grass  dried  up  (in  April)  for
want  of  water.  Proceeding,  a  glimpse  of  the  Dead  Sea  is  first  obtained  at  the  outlet  of  a  deep
valley  on  the  left.  The  ground  soon  begins  to  descend  rapidly,  and  is  covered  with  salt,  and
occasionally  flints,  presenting  an  aspect  of  the  most  complete  desolation.  When  we  have
made  half  our  way,  the  road  takes  a  more  easterly  direction,  following  the  dry  bed  of  a  tor-
rent, which  in  winter  discharges  its  stream  into  the  back-water  of  the  lake,  near  its  extre-
mity. This  torrent  bed  is  called  Wady  Zoarah.d  As  we  advance  in  this  valley,  tamarisks
and  acacias  become  abundant,  and  a  fine  view  of  the  Arabian  mountains  opens  in  the  distance ;
and,  ultimately,  at  the  foot  of  the  descent,  the  waters  of  the  Wady  Zoarah  spread  out  over  a
plain,  which  is  called  by  the  Arabs  El  Nqfileh,e  from  the  quantity  of  shrubs  of  that  name  with
which  it  is  covered.  In  this  plain  the  route  continues  for  a  short  distance  parallel  to  the  lake,
and  within  500  yards  of  its  shore,  till  we  reach  the  Ghor,  or  plain  to  the  south  of  the  Dead
Sea,  at  which  point  we  took  up  the  route  on  a  former  occasion,  and  therefore  leave  it  now.

Seeing  that  we  were  disposed  to  look  for  the  cave  of  Engeddi  in  this  quarter,  it  is  interest-
ing to  find  here  quite  as  remarkable  a  cave  as  that,  towards  the  other  extremity  of  the  lake,  to
which  the  name  has  long  been  assigned.  M.  de  Bertou,  passing  along  this  plain,  with  the
Dead  Sea  on  his  left,  and  the  hills  from  which  he  had  descended  on  his  right,  says, — "  In
the  limestone  hills  on  our  right  is  a  grotto  named  Magharat  Esdiim  (Sadum),  whence  gushes
a  salt  stream.     The  Arabs  say  that  the  cave  may  be  followed  for  some  miles."

The  tract  which  has  thus  briefly  been  characterised,  together  with  the  salt  plain  south  of  the
Asphaltic  Lake,  forms  the  scene  of  which  M.  de  Bertou  speaks  in  these  memorable  words,  which
we  can  neither  omit  nor  abridge  : —

"  In  attempting  to  describe  the  scenes  which  we  had  yesterday  beheld,  I  feel  the  utter  in-

a  Lindsay.     Not  named  by  De  Bertou.

b  De  Bertou.  Lord  Lindsay  says  "  Simoa  or  Simoo  ;"  .and  thinks  it  maybe  the  Shema  enumerated  among  the  towns  in  Judea  in
Josh.  xv.  26.

c  The  above  particulars  are  mostly  drawn  from  M.  de  Bcrtou's  paper  in  vol.  ix.  pt.  ii.  of  the  '  Geog.  Journal,'  and  from  Lord
Lindsay's  '  Letters.'  It  has  been  found  impossible  to  make  any  use  of  Mr.  Stephens'  facts,  on  account  of  the  entire  want  of  names,
and  his  neglect  of  stating  time  and  distance.

d  The  editor  of  the  '  Geog.  Journal'  thinks  this  should,  perhaps,  be  written  Zoweirah,  and  warns  us  that  the  name  has  uo  rela-
tion to  the  Scriptural  Zoar.

e  This  seems  to  be  either  Medicago  intertexta  or  Medicago  Arabica ;  we  are  not  sure  which.

s  2

cxxxii  PHYSICAL  HTSTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

adequacy  of  words  to  express  my  feelings.  I  had  wandered  through  the  Alps,  the  Pyrenees,
and  many  other  mountains, — I  had  seen  countries  blasted  by  the  curse  of  the  Almighty,  the
plains  of  Moab,  and  the  land  of  Amnion, — but  had  seen  nothing  to  compare  with  the  moun-
tains of  Zoarah  and  Esdum.  Here  is  desolation  on  the  grandest  scale,  and  beyond  what  the
imagination  of  man  could  conceive ;  it  must  be  seen — to  describe  it  is  impossible.  In  this
striking  and  solemn  waste,  where  Nature  is  alike  destitute  of  vegetation  and  of  inhabitants,
man  appears  but  an  atom  ; — all  around  is  enveloped  in  the  silence  of  death, — not  a  bird,  not
even  an  insect  is  seen !  The  regular  step  of  our  camels  returned  a  dull  sound,  as  if  the  earth
were  hollowed  beneath  our  feet :  the  monotonous  chant  of  the  camel-driver  accompanied  at
times  the  step  of  this  inhabitant  of  the  desert,  but  was  suddenly  stopped,  as  if  he  feared  to
awaken  nature.  The  sun  concealed  itself  by  thick  clouds,  and  seemed  unwilling  to  shine
upon  the  land  cursed  by  the  Almighty.  We  saw  the  traces  of  several  wolves.  Everything
seemed  to  combine  to  make  the  landscape  awfully  sublime."

We  now  proceed  to  notice  such  characteristics  of  the  country  east  of  the  river  Jordan  and
its  lakes  as  the  object  of  this  chapter  will  allow  it  to  embrace.  But,  seeing  that  particular
spots  in  this  important  part  of  the  country  are  less  aggrandised  by  historical  or  sacred  associa-
tions than  those  on  the  western  side  of  the  river,  a  much  less  detailed  survey  may  be  sufficient:
and,  perhaps,  the  view  which  we  can  afford  to  take  may  be  best  exhibited  in  the  form  of  a
statement  of  the  prominent  characteristics  of  the  several  districts  of  which  this  region  is  com-
posed.

These  are  the  districts  of  Argob  and  Bashan,  of  Giiead,  of  the  land  of  Moab,  of  the  land  of
the  Ammonites,  and  of  the  Haouran.

Argob  and  Bashan  are  allied  districts,  which  may  be  placed  together,  as  they  usually  are
in  Scripture,  in  which  they  are  celebrated  for  their  oaks  and  their  cattle.  The  "bulls  of
Bashan"  was  indeed  a  proverbial  expression  for  cattle  in  their  best  and  proudest  condition.
This,  of  course,  implies  the  excellence  of  its  pastures.

We  shall  understand  that  Argob  and  Bashan  embraced  the  northernmost  portion  of  the
trans-Jordanic  country,  from  the  spurs  of  Mount  Hermon  to  the  river  Jarmouk,  a  few  miles
south  of  the  lake  of  Gennesareth.  It  is,  indeed,  possible  that  the  district  may  have  extended
somewhat  to  the  south  of  this  border ;  but,  as  the  precise  limits  of  this  and  the  other  provinces
are  uncertain,  it  seems  best  to  assume  the  most  marked  geographical  boundary  which  can  be
found  at  some  point  which  cannot  be  far  from  the  truth.

By  Argob,  as  distinct  from  Bashan,  though  it  was  probably  only  a  district  of  Bashan,  we
shall  understand  the  strip  of  country  which  extends  along  the  eastern  border  of  the  Lake  of
Gennesareth,  and  perhaps  beyond  it  northward.

This  country  has  been  explored  by  Burckhardt,  Major  Skinner,  Elliot,  Baron  Taylor,  and
others.  Burckhardt  traversed  both  the  northern  and  southern  route  through  this  country,
on  the  roads  to  Damascus.  The  first  of  these  routes  crosses  the  Jordan  at  Jacob's  Bridge,
and  proceeds,  by  way  of  Kanneytra  and  Sasa,  to  the  plain  of  Damascus.  Major  Skinner
and  Baron  Taylor  went  from  the  Jordan  to  Damascus,  and  Burckhardt  and  Elliot  from
Damascus  to  the  Jordan,  by  this  route.  The  other  route  leads  from  Feik,  a  town  near  the
south-eastern  extremity  of  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth,  and  proceeds  to  the  plain  of  Damascus  by
way  of  Nowa  and  Tel  Shakab.     This  has  been  travelled  by  Burckhardt  only.

We  have  already  found  more  than  one  occasion  to  intimate  that  the  whole  country  east  of
the  Jordan  is  elevated  far  above  the  level  of  that  river,  insomuch  that  the  high  mountains
which  rise  before  one  who  approaches  from  the  west,  offer  but  slight  descents  into  the  eastern
plains  when  their  summits  are  reached.

The  chain  of  Jebel  Heish  a  comes  down  from  the  Great  Hermon,  through  about  twenty-five
miles  of  the  tract  which  is  now  under  our  notice.  The  higher  road  passes  over  this  chain,
near  the  middle  part ;  while  the  lower  road  passes  about  seven  miles   south  from  its  termi-

nating eminence  of  Tel  Faras.

See  before,  p.  xli.

Chap.  V.]

VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.

CXXX1U

fJJ'V **x-—

[Jacob's  Bridge.  (_3)]

These  hills  are  of  very  moderate  elevation  when  we  draw  near  them,  although  their  positive
height  ahove  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  on  the  one  hand,  and  ahove  the  plains  of  Jolan  and
Damascus  on  the  other,  makes  them  most  conspicuous  in  the  distance.  The  road  has  a
gradual  ascent  to  them  in  both  directions.  These  hills  are  bordered  by  a  stony  district,  which
is  about  three  miles  broad,  and  in  some  directions  more.  The  oaks,  for  which  the  country
was  so  highly  celebrated,  make  their  appearance  a  few  miles  after  we  leave  the  valley  of  the
Jordan.a  They  are  of  the  dwarf  kind,  and  in  this  quarter  their  branches  have,  to  a  very  great
extent,  been  lopped  off,  and  carried  away  for  fuel.  After  passing  the  hills,  the  country
becomes  flatter  and  more  plentifully  wooded.  The  soil  is  richer,  cultivable,  and,  to  a  consi-
derable extent,  cultivated.  As  we  advance  to  the  river  Meghannye  the  trees  increase,  and  the
country  becomes  a  forest ;  but  beyond  that  river,  we  soon  enter  a  stony  plain,  which  continues
to  the  fertile  plain  of  Damascus.  The  river,  or  the  border  of  this  stony  desert,  probably
formed  the  northern  limit  of  Bashan,  and,  consequently,  of  the  territory  of  Manasseh  beyond
Jordan.

The  general  pasturage  of  this  tract  is  very  good,  and  wherever  there  are  streams  the  soil
is  covered  with  the  most  luxuriant  herbage  and  grass  of  the  brightest  green.  The  sites  of  the
villages  are  marked  by  clumps  of  poplars  and  olive-trees.  But  in  this  region  villages  are
few  and  far  between;  and,  says  Major  Skinner,  "  it  is  desolate  to  pass  over  so  rich  a  country
for  many  hours  without  seeing  a  habitation."

In  the  southern  part  of  the  country,  which  the  mountains  of  Heish  do  not  intersect,  the
plain  is  more  even  and  open.  It  also  appears  to  be  less  wooded — at  least  the  presence  of
wood  is  less  noticed,  until  near  the  southernmost  border  at  the  river  Jarmouk.  For  eighteen
or  twenty  miles  east  of  the  hills  which  bound  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth,  the  plain  is  wholly
uncultivated,  but  is  overgrown  with  a  wild  herb  called  khob,  on  which  camels  and  oxen  feed
with  pleasure — even  in  this  circumstance  agreeing  with  the  ancient  character  of  the  country.
The  tract  thus  characterised  must  have  included  Argob.  The  soil  is  black  or  gray ;  but,  at
the  distance  eastward  which  we  have  indicated,  the  soil  changes  to  the  red  colour  of  the  earth

By  which  we  mean,  as  always  when  speaking  largely,  the  general  channel  of  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes,

cxxxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

of  the  Haouran  plains ;  and,  as  if  this  soil  were  more  cultivahle,  as  it  prohably  is,  cultivation
commences  with  this  change.  The  neighbourhood  of  Tzeil,  where,  on  the  route,  this  change
first  appears,  offers  also  the  first  traces  of  cultivation.  Beyond  this  the  greater  part  of  the
plain  is,  in  the  season,  covered  with  fine  crops  of  wheat  and  barley ;  but  in  about  fifteen  miles
more  the  plain  becomes  badly  cultivated,  and,  finally,  we  enter  upon  the  first  stony,  and  then
rocky  district,  which  bounds  this  district  upon  the  north  and  east.a

Gilead. — The  precise  limits  of  the  land  of  Gilead  cannot  be  clearly  defined  on  any  data
which  the  Scriptures  offer.  We  know  that  it  lay  south  of  Bashan,  and  north  of  Moab ;  but,
although  from  this  we  know  well  enough,  in  a  general  way,  the  situation  of  the  district,  we
are  not  thereby  assisted  to  the  knowledge  of  its  precise  limits,  as  the  boundaries  of  Bashan
and  of  Moab  are  as  uncertain  as  those  of  Gilead.  The  best  course,  therefore,  seems  to  be,  as
before,  to  assume  marked  geographical  limits,  which  shall  certainly  include  the  whole  or
greater  part  of  the  country,  without  undertaking  to  say  that  the  true  limits  may  not  have
extended  beyond,  or  fallen  within,  those  which  we  adopt.  In  the  present  instance  this  is  the
more  obvious  course,  as  the  name  Gilead  seems  to  have  been  always  rather  loosely  applied,
and  never  described  a  political  division  of  the  country.  We  shall,  for  these  reasons,  consider
the  name  of  Gilead  as  applicable  to  the  fine  hilly  country  embraced  between  the  river  Jarmouk
on  the  north,  and  the  river  Jabbok  on  the  south.  We  are  quite  aware  that  the  current
authorities — Adrichomius,  Quaresmius,  Calmet,  and  Wells — affirm  that  Bashan  extended,
southward,  to  the  river  Jabbok.  There  is  no  authority  in  Scripture  for  this  assertion ;  but  it
so  happens  that  this  statement  would  have  been  nearly  true  if  the  Jabbok  had  really  been
placed  as  they  lay  it  down  :  for,  without  confounding  the  Jabbok  with  the  Jarmouk,  but  by
misplacing  both,  they  make  the  Jabbok  either  flow  into  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth !  or  into  the
Jordan,  a  few  miles  below  its  southern  extremity — in  fact,  nearly  where  the  Jarmouk  ought  to
bave  been  placed.  Consequently,  their  southern  frontier  of  Bashan,  and  northern  of  Gilead,
coincides,  in  fact, — though  in  terms  far  from  doing  so, — with  that  which  we  have  chosen.  As
the  old  writers  knew  absolutely  nothing  of  the  country  beyond  Jordan,  their  mistakes  are
excusable,  and  we  should  not  have  deemed  it  worth  while  to  notice  the  matter,  were  it  not
that  some,  and  those  not  the  least  intelligent,  recent  travellers,11  adopt  the  modern  conclusion
that  the  Jabbok  (being  the  Zerka)  is  forty  or  fifty  miles  south  of  the  position  formerly  assigned
it,  and  yet  retain  the  old  conclusion  that  Bashan  extended  to  the  Jabbok,  whereby  they  make
that  district  disproportionately  large,  at  the  expense  of  leaving  no  suitable  room  for  Gilead,
and,  in  fact,  include  under  the  name  of  Bashan  the  district  to  which  the  name  of  Gilead
properly  belongs.

The  land  of  Gilead  is  more  mountainous,  and  more  diversified  by  hill  and  dale,  than
Bashan  to  the  north,  or  than  the  land  of  Moab  to  the  south.  In  the  more  southern  part  the
mounts  are  of  considerable  height.  In  the  northern  part  this  district  is  the  least  interesting;
in  the  central  and  eastern  parts  it  is  the  most  picturesque ;  and  the  southern  the  most  grand.
But,  although  the  northern  part  is  a  dull,  uninteresting  country,  with  little  wood  and  less
beauty,  the  soil  is  very  rich,  and  amply  repays  the  labour  of  the  husbandman.  On  the  southern
border  there  is  nearly  an  equal  want  of  wood,  and  the  soil  seems  less  productive ;  but  a
compensation  is  offered  to  the  traveller  in  the  striking  character  of  the  scenery  which  the
mountains  offer.

Advancing  from  the  north,  or  north-west,  to  the  south,  or  to  the  east,  trees  begin  to  appear,
and  soon  thicken  into  clumps,  and  woods,  and  forests,  The  roads  are  beautiful,  winding  over
hills,  and  through  vales,  or  narrow  rocky  ravines,  overhung  with  valonidi  oak,  which  is  the

a  The  above  account  of  Argob  and  Bashan  offers  a  digested  comparison  of  the  numerous  particular  observations  in  Burckhardt,
Skinner,  and  Elliot.— Burckhardt,  281-284;  312-315;  Skinner,  i.  301-319  ;  Elliot,  ii.  317-327.

b  Lord  Lindsay,  for  instance.  Of  the  writers  on  Biblical  geography,  the  acute  and  judicious  Reland  is  the  only  one  who  acted
well  in  this  matter.  Distrusting  the  northernly  position  previously  given  to  the  river  Jabbok,  and  yet  knowing  nothin"  clearly
about  it,  he  omits  it  in  all  his  maps,  while  the  principal  rivers,  which  he  does  insert,  the  Jarmouk  (Hieromax)  and  Arnon,  are
first  placed  by  him  correctly — indeed,  with  wonderful  correctness,  considering  the  imperfection  of  his  data.  See  particularly  his
map,  '  Facies  Palaestinae,'  and  his  short  chapter  (xliv.  of  lib.  i.)  '  De  Fluminibus  Terra  TransjordanicaV  in  his  admirable
work,  '  PaUestina  ex  Monumentis  Veteribus  Illustrata.' — Traj.  Bat.  1714.

Chap.  V.]

VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.

cxxxv

characteristic  tree  of  this  region,  and  which  is  the  last  to  disappear  in  the  least  wooded  parts.
But  there  are  many  other  fine  trees,  the  names  of  which  travellers  do  not  specify.  The  beds
of  the  streams  and  winter-torrents  are  everywhere  full  of  the  most  superb  oleanders.

The  grandest  part  of  the  country  is  the  most  mountainous — about  Jebel  Adjeloun.  Corn-
fields appear  in  favourable  situations.  The  valonidi,  the  prickly-oak,  and  the  olive-tree
invest  the  lower  summits,  or  appear  tufted  among  the  crags.  After  a  long  ascent  these
disappear,  saving  the  prickly-oak ;  but  the  arbutus,  the  fir,  and  the  ash  succeed  them  ;  and  a
larger-leaved  species  of  valonidi  supplies  the  place  of  that  which  we  have  lost.  Even  the
noble  crags  which  form  the  summits  of  these  mountains  are  almost  hidden  among  beautiful
trees.     The  fir-trees  of  the  utmost  heights  are  very  noble.

One  of  the  finest  and  broadest  valleys  of  Gilead  is  that  near  El  Hosn,  which  Lord  Lindsay
thus  describes : —

"  A  beautiful  narrow  glen  ushered  us  into  a  broad  valley,  richly  wooded  to  the  summits  of
the  hills  with  noble  prickly-oaks,  a  few  pine-trees  towering  over  them.  I  never  should  have
thought  that  the  shrub  which  I  had  seen  covering  the  hills  at  Hebron  could  have  attained
such  size  and  beauty  :  yet  the  leaf  of  the  largest  tree  is  not  larger  than  the  shrubs.  I  saw  an
occasional  dcgub  tree,  or  arbutus,  but  the  prevailing  trees  were  oaks,  prickly  and  broad-leafed  :
it  was  forest  scenery  of  the  noblest  character — next  to  that  of  Old  England,  with  which  none  I
ever  saw  can  stand  comparison. "a

[View  in  the  Laud  of  Moab.]

The  Land  of  Moab. — In  fixing  the  northern  border  of  this  land  at  the  river  Jabbok,  we
are  influenced  chiefly  by  the  desire  to  avoid  minute  subdivisions  in  a  cursory  survey  like  that
on  which  we  are  now  engaged.  In  this  we  imitate  the  Scripture,  which,  when  it  speaks
largely  and  generally,  appears  to  give  the  same  extent  to  the  land  of  Moab.  The  fact  is,  that
all  this  territory  was  once  occupied  by  the  Moabites;  but  the  northern  part — nearest  the
Jabbok — was  taken  from  them  by  the  Amorites,  and  erected  into  an  independent  kingdom.
In  the  possession  of  this  people  the  Israelites  found  it  when  they  marched  from  the  desert

"  The  above  general  account  of  Gilead  has  been  drawn  up  from  the  various  particulars  dispersed  in  Lord  Lindsay's  large
account  (ii.  99,  101,  109,  120,  124-126,  142),  with  the  help  of  ideas  previously  derived  from  Burckhardt,  Buckingham,  and  Irby
and  Mangles.

cxxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

towards  the  Jordan ;  and  when  it  fell  to  them,  by  their  victory  over  Sihon  the  Amoritish  king,
they  bestowed  it  upon  the  tribes  of  Reuben  and  Gad.  But  the  children  of  Lot  always  remem-
bered that  this  land  had  been  originally  theirs ;  and  in  the  time  of  Jephthah  made  a  formal
demand  for  its  restitution,  and  a  battle  was  the  consequence  of  a  refusal.  It  is,  therefore,
admissible  to  call  the  whole  of  the  country,  from  the  Jabbok  southward  to  the  borders  of
Edom,  the  land  of  Moab,  when  we  require  a  larger  and  more  comprehensive  name  than  the
minute  subdivisions  of  political  geography  will,  in  this  quarter,  supply.

Notwithstanding  that  we  have  formerly  fixed  the  southern  limit  at  the  Jabbok,  we  have,  on
more  than  one  occasion,51  expressed  our  willingness  to  include  under  that  denomination  the
mountains  which  lie  immediately  to  the  south  of  that  river.  We  have  no  difficulty  in  this ;
for,  regarding  Gilead  as  a  loose  general  name  for  the  more  hilly  part  of  the  country  beyond
Jordan,  and,  as  such,  unrestricted  by  political  divisions,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  denomi-
nation should  not  be  extended  into  the  land  of  Moab.

The  mountains  south  of  the  Jabbok  have  been  already  noticed  in  this  work  (p.  xli.)  ;  and,
in  fact,  the  account  there  given  of  the  country  is  a  summary  of  all  the  information  we  possess,
and  shall  be  able  to  add  but  little  to  it  in  this  place.

The  views  among  the  mountains  on  the  south  of  the  Zerka  are,  perhaps,  less  magnificent,
but  to  the  full  as  beautiful  as  in  those  to  the  north  of  that  river.  Lord  Lindsay  thinks  he
could  distinguish  three  stages  in  these  mountains, — the  upper,  chiefly  productive  of  the  prickly-
oak  and  arbutus, — the  central,  of  prickly-oak,  arbutus,  and  fir, — while  the  lower  slopes,
particularly  to  the  northward,  are  invested  with  the  prickly-oak  and  the  valonidis.  This
traveller  draws  a  glowing  picture  of  the  beauty  of  the  northward  slopes.  The  descending
paths  wind  through  thickets  of  the  most  luxurious  growth,  and  of  every  shade  of  verdure,
frequently  overshadowing  the  road,  and  diffusing  a  delicious  coolness,  though  a  delightful
breeze,  blowing  freshly  over  the  slopes,  so  allays  the  heat  that  it  is  never  oppressive.  In  this
most  pleasant  region  the  ear  is  also  regaled  with  notes  of  happiness  from  the  tenants  of  the
thickets  and  the  woods — "  the  cooing  of  the  wood-pigeons,  the  calling  of  partridges — magnifi-
cent birds,  as  large  as  pheasants, — the  incessant  hum  of  insects,  and  hiss  of  grasshoppers,
singing  in  the  trees  as  happy  as  kings."

We  will  not  allow  ourselves  to  speak  further  of  the  mountains  of  this  country.  But  of  the
plains  and  valleys,  generally,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  soil  is  exuberantly  fertile,  and,  in  the
small  portions  which  are  cultivated,  affords  rich  returns  to  the  cultivator.  It  seems,  in  fact,
that  the  wheat  grown  in  this  region,  the  size  of  the  grains,  and  the  number  of  grains  in  the
ear,  far  exceed  what  is  common.  The  country  also  abounds  in  rich  pastures  ;  which  is  true,
indeed,  of  almost  all  the  country  east  of  the  Jordan,  whence  it  is  now,  in  its  desolate  condition,
much  resorted  to  by  the  Bedouins  with  their  flocks.  And  in  the  time  of  Moses  it  was  so
eminently  "a  land  for  cattle,"  that  the  tribes  of  Reuben  and  Gad,  who  "had  much  cattle,"
sought  and  obtained  (with  the  addition  of  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh)  to  have  it  assigned  to
them  expressly  on  that  account.11

The  population  of  the  land  of  Moab,  in  particular,  was  fully  equal  to  its  fertility,  as  is  evinced
by  the  numerous  sites  of  ancient  towns  which  occur  on  every  eminence  or  spot  convenient  for
their  construction.  The  valleys  through  which  streams  flow  at  any  time  of  the  year,  are
generally  beautifully  wooded.  We  have  no  room  to  describe  particular  valleys  or  plains.  A
few  of  the  more  elevated  plains  are  very  stony,  many  are  covered  with  a  fine  grassy  turf,  and
some  are  so  thickly  wooded  as  to  take  the  character  of  forests.  The  appearances  of  spon-
taneous fertility  considerably  decline  as  we  advance  southward,  and  the  scenery  takes  a  less
pleasing  aspect.  We  pass  tracts  of  chalky  soil  covered  with  flints.  On  the  south-east  the
prolific  mould  gives  place  to  a  sort  of  clayey  and  stony  soil ;  while  the  desert  sands  encroach
on  the  south,  and  on  the  south-west  the  salt  of  Sodom  intrudes,  and  covers  the  neighbouring
tracts  with  unmitigated  desolation.0

a  'Pictorial  Bible,'  note  on  Gen.  xxxi.  25.,  and  p.  xli.  of  this  work.  b  Num.  xxxii.

e  Mure  particular  information  concerning  this  country  than  we  are  able  to  give  may  be  found  in  Burckhardt,  Sectzen.Irby
and  Mangles,  Buckingham  ('  Arab  Tribes  '),  and  Lord  Lindsay.

Chav.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxxxvii

We  have  now  to  turn  our  attention  to  the  Haouran.  The  boundaries  and  mineralogical
character  of  this  district  have  been  indicated  in  a  preceding  page  (lxxxiii).  This  ex-
tensive plain  has  the  countries  of  Bashan  and  Gilead  on  the  west,  and  on  the  east  the  moun-
tains and  rocky  tracts  which  form  the  boundary  of  the  Great  Syrian  Desert.  The  northern
part  of  it  was  probably  included  under  the  denomination  of  Bashan  ;  and  the  whole  may  be
concluded  to  have  been  at  one  time  in  the  occupation  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  if  Gad  had
not  also  a  share  of  it.

In  its  general  character,  the  plain  of  Haouran  resembles  that  of  the  Belka  in  the  land  of
Moab,  and  of  Esdraelon  in  Galilee,  in  having  gentle  undulations,  the  same  level  being  nowhere
of  long  continuation,  although  still  not  so  much  above  or  below  each  other  as  to  destroy  its
general  character,  as  an  irregular  undulating  plain,  the  whole  surface  of  which  offers  nothing
that  deserves  to  be  called  a  hill.a  The  eminences  that  here  and  there  break  its  continuity,
are  mostly  small  veins  of  rock  projecting  above  the  surface,  and  these  appear  to  have  been  in
all  cases  selected  for  the  sites  of  towns,  for  the  sake  of  securing  a  commanding  position,  a
freer  air,  a  dryer  soil,  and  convenient  access  to  the  materials  of  building,  which  are,  indeed,
thus  close  at  hand.

The  soil  is  excellent  for  corn,  whence  the  plain  seems  to  have  been  in  all  ages  regarded  as
the  granary  of  Syria.  It  still  supports  that  character ;  although  now  great  part  of  it  lies
fallow  for  want  of  the  cultivating  hand,  and  teems  only  with  wild  flowers,  "  It  must  have
been,"  as  Robinson  observes,  "  an  agreeable  and  imposing  prospect,  indeed,  to  those  who
looked  down  upon  its  rich  productions,  at  the  time  when  the  whole  was  brought  under  culture
by  the  numerous  and  industrious  Roman  colonies  that  once  inhabited  these  territories — its
golden  crops  bending  submissively  under  the  breezes  that  crossed  its  surface,  like  the  smooth
undulations  of  the  wide  ocean,  and,  like  it,  having  no  other  boundary  than  the  horizon
itself."

There  are  few  springs  in  this  district :  but  water  is  here  indispensable  to  cultivation  with
the  best  possible  soil ;  and  hence  the  population  of  the  Haouran  owes  its  means  of  existence,
and  the  success  of  its  agriculture,  to  the  numerous  winter-torrents  descending  from  the  eastern
mountains  of  Jebel  Haouran,  which  traverse  the  plain.  Few  of  these  inundate  the  land;
but  the  inhabitants  make  the  best  use  of  the  water  to  irrigate  the  fields  after  the  great  rains
have  ceased.  It  is  from  these  wadys  that  the  numerous  reservoirs  are  filled,  which  supply
both  men  and  cattle  with  water  till  the  return  of  the  rainy  season.  In  all  this  plain,  as  in
every  other  district,  on  both  sides  of  the  Jordan,  where  there  are  no  springs,  the  cultivation
follows  the  course  of  these  winter-torrents,  as  in  Egypt  it  follows  the  course  of  the  Nile.  The
only,  or  by  far  the  chief,  evil  to  which  the  cultivator  is  here  exposed,  is  a  season  of  deficient
rain ;  and,  under  severe  drought,  not  only  the  harvests,  but  the  rich  pastures  of  the  unculti-
vated parts,  utterly  dry  up  and  wither.  The  whole  of  this  country  seems  a  desert  in  the
maps ;  but  it  is,  in  fact,  full  of  villages — more  villages  than  there  are  people  to  occupy.
These  are  ancient  villages,  apparently  built  when  the  country  was  rich  and  populous  under
the  Romans, — not  in  ruins,  but  in  a  perfectly  habitable  condition,  and  to  some  extent  inhabited.
This  is  owing  to  the  extraordinary  durability  of  the  buildings,  which  are  entirely  of  stone —
even  to  the  doors b  and  door-posts,  without  the  least  portion  of  wood  or  other  perishable
material.  This  mode  of  construction,  while  it  arose,  in  the  first  instance,  from  the  want  of
wood — as  there  are  no  timber- trees,  or  hardly  any  trees  in  all  the  plain — has  ensured,  in  a
remarkable  degree,  the  preservation  of  the  houses  in  a  condition  of  extraordinary  freshness.
The  houses  in  these  villages  are  free  property  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Haouran,  who  live  in
them  rent-free,  and  when  they  are  tired  of  one  village  remove  to  another  as  seems  convenient
to  them.     Those  who  first  arrive  appropriate  the  best  houses,  but  they  have  no  right  in  them,

"  The  Haouran  is  an  immense  plain,  very  rich  and  fertile,  sometimes  slightly  undulating,  sometimes  flat  as  a  pancake, —
with  here  and  there  low  rounded  hills,  like  dumplings,  conspicuous  from  a  great  distance,  and  excellent  landmarks." — Lord
Lindsay,  ii.  129.

b  Few  of  the  stone  doors  remain  in  use ;  but  those  which  are  still  found  entire,  with  the  fragments  of  others,  with  the  indications
about  the  door-posts,  render  it  manifest  that  most  of  the  doors  were  anciently  of  stone.

VOL.   I.  t

cxxxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

nor  desire  to  have  any,  longer  than  they  continue  to  occupy  them.  Theie  heing  more  houses
and  villages  than  can  be  occupied,  while  no  ties  of  property  exist,  removals  are  frequent,  and
scarcely  a  man  can  be  found  who  is  a  native  of  the  place  in  which  he  lives.  Hence,  also,
some  travellers  find  villages  to  be  void  of  inhabitants  which  others  had  found  to  be  inhabited,
and  the  reverse.

The  public  buildings  in  the  towns  have  suffered  more,  as  might  be  expected,  and  are,  for
the  most  part,  in  fact,  in  ruins.  They  are  all  Roman ;  and,  with  the  villages,  satisfactorily
evince  how  prosperous  and  populous  this  country  a  was  under  their  rule:  while  the  vast  labour
and  expense  which  was  bestowed  by  them  on  public  works,  destined  to  promote  the  comfort,
and  even  the  luxury  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns  in  their  distant  colonies,  is  evinced  by  the
numerous  remains  of  amphitheatres,  paved  roads,  aqueducts,  and  reservoirs,  which  are  still  of
vast  service  to  the  inhabitants.  Works  of  this  sort  are,  indeed,  so  numerous  and  important,  in
this  and  other  districts  east  of  the  Jordan,  that  Mr.  Buckingham  could  say,  that  "  neither  in
the  East  nor  West  Indies,  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  New  South  Wales,  nor  any  other  of
the  many  colonial  possessions  of  Great  Britain,  are  there  any  works,  even  at  their  respective
capitals  (fortresses  alone  excepted)  which  can  be  compared  for  magnificence  or  utility  with
the  numerous  public  works  scattered  over  the  region  of  Decapolis,  and  attached  to  the  colonial
towns  of  the  Romans,  of  so  little  importance,  even  in  their  estimation,  that  not  even  their
names  have  descended  to  us  in  the  annals  of  their  empire."

This  same  traveller  was  struck  by  the  height  of  the  stone  door-ways,  about  seven  feet,  while
in  Palestine  and  other  parts  of  Syria  they  are  rather  below  than  above  the  human  stature,  so
that  in  most  cases  the  passenger  is  obliged  to  stoop  as  he  enters.  But  a  good  house  includes
a  large  room  or  stable  for  cattle ;  and  it  seems  the  doors  are  made  so  high  to  admit  camels
under  shelter  at  night,  and  thus  secure  them  from  the  incursions  of  the  Bedouins.  This  flat
country  must  always  have  been,  as  it  is  now,  a  camel  country,  and,  from  the  indestructible
nature  of  their  materials,  the  rooms  for  their  reception  may  have  been  of  the  highest  an-
tiquity.

"  During  our  journey  through  the  [western]  hills,"  says  Mr.  Buckingham,  "  we  had  seen
only  horses,  mules,  and  asses,  used  as  beasts  of  burden ;  but  since  we  have  entered  the  plain
of  Haouran,  we  have  met  only  camels,  and  these  to  the  number  of  several  hundreds  in  the
course  of  one  day.  If  this  were  really  the  land  of  Uz,b  and  the  town  [Gherbee]  in  which  we
now  halted  the  place  of  Job's  residence,  as  tradition  maintains,  there  would  be  no  portion  of
all  Syria  or  Palestine  that  I  have  yet  seen  more  suited  to  the  production  and  maintenance  of
the  7000  sheep,  3000  camels,  500  yoke  of  oxen,  and  500  she-asses,  which  are  enumerated  as
forming  the  substance  of  '  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  the  East '  (Job  i.  3).  At  the  present
day  there  is  no  man,  probably,  with  such  herds  and  flocks  for  his  portion ;  but  these  are.  still,
as  they  were  in  the  earliest  times,  the  great  wealth  of  the  men  of  substance  in  the  country  :
and  it  is  as  common  now  as  it  appears  to  have  been  when  the  history  of  Job  was  written,  to
describe  a  man  of  consideration  in  these  plains  by  the  number  of  his  flocks  and  herds,  rather
than  by  any  other  less  tangible  indication  of  wealth."0

It  is  difficult  to  say  what  were  the  limits  of  the  Land  of  the  Ammonites.  Indeed  it  is
not  easy  to  find  room,  adequate  to  their  relative  importance,  for  the  several  tribes  or  nations
which  the  Scriptures  place  in  the  country  east  of  the  Jordan.  There  are,  however,  large
tracts  of  country,  south  of  the  Haouran  and  east  of  Moab,  which  remain  to  be  explored ;  and
although  travellers  have  heard  that  all  this  country  is  desert,  we  should  not  be  surprised  if  it
proves  that  those  districts  form  as  fine  a  country  as  the  Haouran  or  the  plains  of  Moab,  with,
perhaps,  as  ample  indications  of  a  formerly  dense  and  active  population.  The  term  "  desert "
is  very  loosely  applied ;  and  travellers  are  too  apt  to  conclude  that  all  which  they  do  not  see  is

a  Called  by  them  Auranitis  ;  but,  in  the  extent  now  viewed,  the  present  Haouran  seemed  also  to  have  included  at  least  a  con-
siderable part  of  Iturzea.

t>  At  Gherbee,  near  the  western  borders  of  the  plain  towards  Bashan,  the  tradition  is,  that  Job  was  born  and  lived  there,  or  in
that  quarter,  and  that  there  is  the  scene  of  his  history  as  detailed  in  the  sacred  volume.

<=  Burckhardt,  51-121,211-250;  Buckingham,  167,'l7l,  180,  251,  &c. ;  Robinson,  ii   137,  161,  1C8  ;  Lindsay,  ii.  129,  130.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxxxix

not  worth  seeing.  Within  our  own  times,  much  of  the  country  which  we  have  now  been
describing  was  regarded  as  much  a  desert  as  that  unexplored  region  which  is  now  indicated
as  bearing  that  character.  There  was  plenty  of  room  for  the  Ammonites  to  spread  in  this
direction,  to  the  extent  of  that  idea  which  the  scriptural  accounts  seem  to  give  of  the  relative
importance  of  this  branch  of  the  family  of  Lot.  Their  territories  may  also  well  have  reached
beyond  the  Zerka  into  the  southern  parts  of  the  Haouran — a  name  which  described  the
country  without  any  reference  to  its  occupiers.  There  is  a  chain  of  hills  commencing  near
the  Zerka,  at  about  the  distance  of  forty  miles  east  of  the  Jordan,  by  the  name  of  Jebel  el
Zoble,  and  which  is  continued  southward  under  different  names,  and  at  a  diminishing  distance
from  the  Dead  Sea.  Extensive  plains  lie  between  these  hills  and  the  hill  country  of  Moab ;
and  beyond  them,  eastward,  all  is  said  to  be  desert.  Now  as  it  happens  that  the  remains  of  a
site  which  still  bears  the  name  of  Amman,  and  which  was  doubtless  originally  that  of  Rabbah,
the  capital  of  the  Ammonites,  has  been  found  upon  the  hills  at  the  north-western  border  of
this  plain,  it  might  be  safe  to  give  them  as  much  of  this  plain  itself  as  might  not  interfere
with  the  claims  of  their  brethren  the  Moabites,  besides  the  very  possible  extension  into  the
southern  parts  of  the  Haouran  and  into  the  "  desert  "  beyond  the  eastern  hills.  Confining
our  attention  to  the  known  part  which  we  have  not  yet  described — which  is  the  eastern  and
northern  part  of  these  enclosed  plains — we  may  observe  that  even  this  has  been  little  explored
by  travellers.  Seetzen,  Burckhardt,  and  Trby  and  Mangles,  only  traversed  the  south-western
portion,  belonging,  as  we  suppose,  to  Moab  ;  and  the  more  easterly  route  of  Buckingham,
from  Amman  to  Om  el  Russas,  ran  about  twelve  miles  from  the  eastern  hills ;  and  he,
therefore,  with  Mr.  Robinson,  who  saw  something  also  of  this  part,  are  the  only  travellers
who  supply  any  available  information.

Proceeding  from  Amman  southward,  through  the  plain,  we  find  everywhere  a  fertile  soil
capable  of  the  highest  cultivation,  but  entirely  uncultivated.  A  broad  Roman  road  extends
completely  through  it,  and  far  beyond  it.  The  plain  seems  to  have  a  slight  ascent  for  sixteen
miles,  where  the  highest  point  is  reached  in  an  elevation  which  commands  a  view  over  a  still
more  extensive  plain  than  that  which  has  been  passed,  lying  on  a  somewhat  lower  level.
"  Throughout  its  whole  extent  were  seen  ruined  towns  in  every  direction,  both  before,  behind,
and  on  each  side  of  us ;  generally  seated  on  small  eminences,  all  at  a  short  distance  from  each
other ;  and  all  as  far  as  we  had  yet  seen  bearing  evident  marks  of  former  opulence  and  con-
sideration. There  was  not  a  tree  in  sight  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  ;  but  my  guide,  who
had  been  over  every  part  of  it,  assured  me  that  the  whole  plain  was  covered  with  the  finest
soil  and  capable  of  being  the  most  productive  corn  land  in  the  world.  It  is  true  that  for  a
space  of  thirty  miles  there  did  not  appear  to  me  a  single  interruption  of  hill,  rock,  or  wood,  to
impede  immediate  tillage ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon,  so  justly  cele-
brated for  its  extent  and  fertility,  is  inferior  in  both  to  this  plain.  Like  Esdraelon,  it  appears
also  to  have  been  once  the  seat  of  an  active  and  numerous  population  ;  but  on  the  former  the
monuments  of  the  dead  only  remain,  while  here  the  habitations  of  the  living  are  equally
mingled  with  the  tombs  of  the  departed,  both  thickly  strewn  over  every  part  of  the  soil  from
which  they  drew  their  sustenance."

Om  el  Russas,  the  most  southern  point  which  has  been  reached  in  this  direction,  is  about
forty-two  miles  S.S.E.  from  Amman.  After  the  first  eighteen  or  twenty  miles,  the  quality  of
the  soil  differs  from  having  a  larger  proportion  of  clay,  but  it  still  continues  fertile  and  highly
cultivable.  But  after  leaving  a  place  called  Om  el  Keseer,  which  is  twenty-five  miles  from
Amman,  it  appears  to  grow  progressively  inferior,  though  for  the  most  part  still  capable  of
cultivation.  The  face  of  the  country  also  becomes  more  unequal  and  the  level  descends  ;  and
before  we  reach  our  limit  the  ground  becomes  stony,  chalky,  and  barren.  The  unexplored
country  southward  is  no  doubt  desert.

In  short,  this  country,  or  series  of  plains,  has  a  rich  soil,  but  is  without  trees  or  shrubs.
The  ground  is  highly  cultivable,  but  exhibits  not  the  least  trace  of  actual  cultivation ;  and
while  numerous  ruins  indicate  how  rich  and  populous  the  country  once  was,  it  is  now,  more

t  2

cxl  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

than  even  the  Haouran,  without  fixed  inhabitants.  The  wandering  tribes  resort  to  it  in  the
summer  months,  for  the  sake  of  the  pasturage  which  it  offers ;  but  when  they  have  left,  the
ashes  and  dung  of  their  encampments  are  the  only  signs  of  human  occupation  which  the
country  affords.  "  It  is  now  one  vast  desert,  which  has  long  ceased  to  be  occupied  by  man
in  a  civilized  state. "a  Thus  truly  has  Ammon  become  "  a  desolation,5'  as  the  prophets  fore-
told^

Although  there  are  not,  properly  speaking,  any  deserts  in  Palestine  itself,  the  deserts  by
which  it  is  bounded  on  the  east,  and  on  the  south,  figure  so  largely  in  the  history  of  the  country,
and  exercised  so  manifest  an  influence  on  the  condition  and  relations  of  its  inhabitants,  as  well
as  on  their  ideas  and  sentiments,  that  it  is  quite  necessary  to  bestow  upon  them  a  concluding
portion  of  our  attention.

The  best  and  most  satisfactory  general  description  of  these  deserts  is  that  which  has  been
supplied  by  Volney  ;c  and  having  tested  this  account  by  some  information  in  our  own  posses-
sion, and  by  the  statements  of  various  travellers  who  have  crossed  the  desert  he  describes,  we
have  judged  it  best  to  adopt  it  as  the  basis  of  the  following  account.

To  form  an  idea  of  these  deserts,  the  reader  must  imagine  a  glowing  and  unclouded  sky,
over  plains  so  vast  that  the  view  is  lost  in  them ;  and  entirely  destitute  of  buildings,  trees,
rivulets,  or  hills.  Often  in  these  plains  the  eye  meets  nothing  but  an  extensive  and  uniform
horizon  like  the  sea;  while  a  few  isolated  palm-trees,  here  and  there,  complete  the  illusion  by
appearing  in  the  distance  like  the  masts  of  ships.  In  other  parts  the  undulated  surface  sug-
gests the  idea  of  a  stormy  sea,d  while  in  others  it  is  roughened  by  rocks  and  stones.  Almost
always  arid,  the  land  offers  only  some  wild  plants,  thinly  scattered,  and  thickets,  whose  soli-
tude is  rarely  disturbed  but  by  gazelles,  hysenas,  hares,  jerboas,  and  locusts.  Such  is  the
character  of  nearly  the  whole  country,  which  extends  600  leagues  in  length  and  300  in
breadth,  stretching  from  Aleppo  to  the  Arabian  Sea,  and  from  Egypt  to  the  Persian  Gulf.

In  such  an  extent  of  country  there  is,  however,  considerable  variation  of  soil.  Upon  the
frontiers  of  Syria,  for  example,  which  is  that  portion  of  this  immense  desert  with  which  we
have  most  concern,  the  soil  is  in  general  rich,  cultivable,  and  fertile.  It  is  of  the  same  cha-
racter on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates.  But  in  the  internal  parts  of  the  country,  and  towards
the  south,  it  becomes  white  and  chalky,  as  in  the  parallel  of  Damascus,  then  stony  as  we
advance  into  the  deserts  of  El  Tyh  and  of  the  Hedjaz,  and  ultimately  pure  sand,  as  to  the
east  of  Yemen.  These  variations  produce  corresponding  differences  in  the  condition  of  the
inhabiting  tribes.  In  the  districts  where  the  herbage  is  scarce  or  meagre,  as  in  the  Nedjed  and
in  the  interior  of  the  great  desert,  the  tribes  are  feeble  and  very  distant.  They  become  less
rare  and  nearer  to  one  another  in  those  parts  where  the  soil  is  less  bare  and  the  oases  more
frequent,  as  between  Damascus  and  the  Euphrates,  and  in  the  cultivable  cantons  of  the  Aleppo
pashalic,  in  the  Haouran ;  and  in  the  country  of  Gaza  the  Arab  camps  are  numerous  and  con-
tiguous. In  the  first  case,  the  Bedouins  are  a  purely  pastoral  people,  living  on  the  produce
of  their  flocks  and  on  a  few  dates ;  in  the  second,  they  are  demi-cultivators,  and  sow  some
land,  which  enables  them  to  add  to  their  fare  a  little  rice  and  barley.

This  invincible  sterility  of  the  desert,  even  where  the  soil  is  naturally  fertile,  or  where  not

a  Buckingham's  '  Arab  Tribes,'  82-99 ;  Robinson,  ii.  171,  180.

t>  Dr.  Keith,  in  his  popular  work  on  '  Evidence  from  Prophecy,'  describes  the  Haouran  as  the  land  of  the  Ammonites.  But  it
is  not  likely  that  they  ever  had  more  than  perhaps  a  portion  of  the  south  of  that  vast  plain.  The  district  which  we  have  now
described  would  have  answered  his  laudable  purpose  as  well  or  better,  and  it  may  with  far  greater  probability  than  the  Haouran
be  assigned  to  the  Ammonites.  In  Dr.  Keith's  remarkable  book,  the  parts  which  refer  to  towns  are  by  much  the  most  valuable.
When  there  is  a  determined  site,  such  facts  and  observations  as  those  which  this  author  has  collected  apply  with  great  force  and
effect;  but  in  those  portions  which  refer  to  the  state  of  the  "  Lands  "  of  certain  ancient  nations,  there  is,  perhaps  necessarily,
much  vague  and  uncertain  matter,  and  the  result  is  comparatively  ineffective  to  the  instructed  reader.

c  Baron  Taylor  bears  witness  to  its  value  by  copying  it  entire,  with  some  slight  alterations  and  additions,  into  his  recent
publication,  "  La  Syrie."

d  The  comparisons,  here  employed,  of  the  desert  to  the  sea  in  various  conditions,  are  so  common  that  they  have  become  trite.
Yet,  we  can  answer  for  it,  they  are  the  ever  first  and  last  impressions  which  strike  a  traveller,  and  are,  therefore,  natural  and  proper.
The  reader  who  would  like  to  trace  the  varying  characteristics  of  the  desert  between  Syria  and  the  Euphrates,  cannot  do  better
than  consult  the  daily  entries  in  Colonel  Capper's  '  Observations  on  the  Passage  to  India,  through  Egypt  and  across  the  Great
Desert"  (1/83).

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxli

absolutely  sandy,  is  entirely  owing  to  the  absence  of  water  ;  and  this  want  of  water  is  occa-
sioned by  the  nature  of  tbe  country,  which  being  flat  and  destitute  of  mountains  which  might
arrest  the  clouds,  they  glide  over  its  heated  surface  during  nine  months  of  the  twelve  without
affording  a  single  drop  of  rain.  Thus,  during  the  day,  the  sky  sparkles  in  brilliance,  and  is
of  the  finest  azure  during  the  night.  In  winter  only,  when  the  cold  of  the  atmosphere  con-
denses the  clouds,  they  soon  resolve  themselves  in  showers  ;  but  in  the  interior  of  the  desert
the  water  thus  supplied  is  very  quickly  absorbed  by  the  arid  sands.  Upon  the  borders  only  it
affords  an  irrigation  by  which  the  natural  fecundity  of  the  soil  is  awakened.  The  summer
comes ;  and  all  this  water  disappears  without  any  durable  result  in  springs  or  perennial  brooks.
Hence  to  avoid  the  inconvenience  of  wanting  water  the  whole  summer,  it  has  been  necessary
to  form,  by  manual  labour,  wells,  cisterns,  and  reservoirs,  in  which  to  preserve  a  supply  of
rain-water  for  the  year.  Such  works,  though  rude  and  inadequate,  are  expensive  and
laborious,  and  are  therefore  of  rare  occurrence,  except  in  the  more  settled  districts.  Besides,
war  may  destroy  in  one  day  the  labour  of  many  months  and  the  resources  of  the  year.  A
drought,  which  is  but  too  common,  may  cause  the  failure  of  a  crop,  and  reduce  the  inhabitants
to  a  total  want  of  water.  It  is  true  that,  by  digging,  water  may  almost  everywhere  be  found  at
from  six  to  twenty  feet  deep,  but  this  is  generally  brackish,  and  the  supply  is  soon  exhausted.
Then  thirst  and  famine  supervene ;  and  unless  the  government  interferes,  the  villages  are  deserted.
From  this  it  results  that  the  condition  of  agriculture  is,  in  such  border  districts,  most  preca-
rious,"1 and  the  establishments  are  constantly  menaced  with  ruin ;  and  when  to  this  operation
of  natural  causes,  is  added  the  weight  with  which  the  exactions  of  the  government  press  upon
the  cultivator,  it  must  often  seem  the  better  choice  to  lead  a  wandering  life  than  to  reside  in  a
fixed  habitation  and  rely  on  agriculture  for  subsistence.

In  those  districts  where  the  soil  is  stony  and  sandy,  as  in  the  deserts  between  Palestine  and
Sinai,  in  which  the  hosts  of  Israel  spent  forty  years,  and  in  those  of  the  Hedjaz  and  the
Nedjed,  these  winter  rains  make  the  seeds  of  the  wild  plants  shoot,  and  revive  the  thickets,  the
ranunculuses,  the  wormwood,  the  kali,  and  the  numerous  other  plants  and  herbs  with  which  the
desert  then  abounds.  They  render  the  lower  grounds  marshy,  which  then  produce  reeds  and
grass,  and  the  plain  assumes  a  tolerable  degree  of  verdure.

Major  Skinner,  who  crossed  at  this  season  the  desert  between  Damascus  and  Babylonia,
describes  it  as  having  then  nothing  appalling  but  the  name, — as  being,  in  fact,  a  perfect
garden,  in  which  it  is  easy  for  the  traveller  to  mark  his  progress  by  the  plants  he  meets,  as
every  day  exhibits  the  predominance  of  some  new  race.

But  all  this  glory  of  the  desert,  which  supplies  so  many  metaphors  to  the  prophetic  writers,
is  most  transitory.  On  the  return  of  the  heats,  everything  is  parched  up,  and  the  earth,  con-
verted into  a  gray  and  fine  dust,  presents  nothing  but  dry  stems,  as  hard  as  wood,  on  which
no  animals  can  feed.

Yet  even  the  desert  is  not  without  such  immunities  and  congenial  charms,  as  endear  it  to
its  wild  inhabitants,  as  much  as  the  most  fertile  and  pleasant  country  can  be  endeared  to  a
civilized  people.  Its  climate  is  more  fixed  and  salubrious  than  that  of  the  countries  by  which
it  is  bordered.  The  plague  is  scarcely  known ;  ophthalmia  is  very  rare ;  and  the  small-pox
may  be  described  as  the  only  endemic  malady.  The  Arab  tribes  have,  from  remote  times,
divided  these  wide  and  arid  sands  among  themselves.  These  territorial  divisions  are  neces-
sarily of  very  great  extent,  as  it  often  happens  that  the  desert  in  an  extent  of  thirty  miles  offers
only  a  few  roods  of  land  where  the  flocks  can  find  even  a  dry  and  scanty  herbage.  Thus,
in  order  to  obtain  nourishment  for  a  few  cattle,  the  Arabs  are  obliged  to  overrun  vast
tracts,  and  this  has  engaged  them  to  the  nomade  life.  But  besides  this  physical  reason,
which  explains  and  justifies  the  Bedouin  condition  of  existence,  there  are  others  of  a  political
sort  which  are  not  less  operative.  For  if,  in  fact,  their  migratory  habits  only  proceeded  from
the  nakedness  of  their  country,  they  could  advance  into  the  fertile  districts  along  their  frontiers,
and  form  there  nearly  permanent  encampments,  as  the  Hebrew  patriarchs  did  in  Palestine, —

B  Even  the  Haouran  comes  within  this  description.   There  are  times  when  all  the  hopes  of  the  year  are  destroyed  by  the  failure
or  inadequacy  of  the  winter  rains.     Such  was  the  case  at  the  time  of  Mr.  Buckingham's  visit  to  that  quarter.

cxlii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

ending  by  founding  villages,  like  the  Turkmanns  and  Koords.  But  they  do  not  this.  They
choose  rather  to  dwell  in  plains  the  most  naked,  in  steppes  the  most  inaccessible.  And  why  ?
It  is  because  that  which  the  Arab  values  before  all  other  things  is  his  independence,  his  com-
plete isolation  from  every  form  of  superiority  or  patronage,  whether  mild  or  onerous,  cruel  or
clement.  That  which  the  Bedouins  most  seek  is  to  keep  themselves  from  a  position  which
might  lead  or  compel  them  to  bear  arms  for  the  pashas,  and  leave  them  at  liberty  to  pursue
what  they  consider  their  proper  trade  of  rapine  and  theft.  This  is  the  great  motive  to
them  of  preserving  a  mode  of  life  which  renders  such  continual  and  fatiguing  removals
necessary.  But  if  they  chance  to  light  upon  a  place  where  they  think  they  can  enjoy  security
and  freedom,  joined  to  adequate  resources,  they  remain  there,  and  insensibly  pass  into  the  con-
dition of  settled  cultivators.  But  if  it  happens,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  vexatious  tyranny  of
a  governor  puts  an  end  to  the  patience  of  an  established  village,  it  is  no  unusual  thing  for  the
inhabitants  to  flee  in  a  body  to  the  mountains,  or  into  the  plains,  often  changing  their  stations
that  they  may  not  be  surprised.  Sometimes  it  happens  that  such  people,  after  having  become
robbers  from  the  necessities  of  their  position,  form  new  hordes  and  ultimately  class  themselves
into  tribes.  But  these  new  people,  born  in  a  cultivable  country,  almost  never  quit  the  fron-
tiers, and  never  without  great  difficulty  arrive  at  the  determination  to  throw  themselves  into
the  heart  of  the  desert.     The  desert  is  the  exclusive  domain  of  the  Arab,  who  is  born  in  it.

We  have  not  been  able  to  withhold  these  facts,  as  they  appear  to  us  to  contribute  much
illustration  to  many  circumstances  which  the  sacred  history  records,  and  to  the  conditions  and
mutations  of  life  which  it  exhibits.  We  thus  see  by  what  process  the  migratory  inhabitants  of
the  desert  become  like  the  Hebrews,  a  settled  agricultural  people ;  and  again,  how  the  people
settled  on  the  borders  may  melt  away  into  the  great  Bedouin  mass.  The  tendency  of  such
people  to  remain  as  near  as  possible  to  their  original  seats  would  be  a  most  interesting  circum-
stance if  it  should  authorise  us  to  conclude,  or  even  to  conjecture,  that  the  descendants  of  Lot
and  Esau  may  still  be  found  among  the  Bedouins,  who  are  now  almost  the  sole  inhabitants  of
the  lands  of  Moab,  Amnion,  and  Edom.

It  may  seem  proper  to  follow  this  general  statement  by  a  somewhat  more  particular  notice
of  the  country  between  Palestine  and  Egypt,  and  between  Palestine  and  Sinai,  which  forms
the  desert — or  rather  portion  of  the  desert — best  known  to  the  Hebrews  at  all  times,  and  un-
questionably that  in  which  their  forty  years  of  wandering  were  passed.  Indeed,  in  memory
of  this,  the  whole  still  bears  the  name  of  El  Tyh — the  Wandering — which  is  also  borne  by
the  ridge  of  mountains  that  separate  it  on  the  south  from  the  Upper  Sinai :  in  Scripture  dif-
ferent parts  of  it  seem  to  be  called  by  different  names ;  but  that  which  seems  capable  of  the
largest  application  to  the  whole  is  "  the  wilderness,  or  desert,  of  Paran."

"  The  space  comprised  between  the  Delta,  the  extremity  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  Mediter-
ranean, contains  in  the  north-west  some  cultivated  lands,  watered  by  the  derivations  of  the
Nile.  The  rest,  absolutely  arid,  forms  what  are  called  the  deserts  of  the  isthmus  of  Suez ;
towards  the  south-east  vast  sandy  plains  extend  along  the  Mediterranean  to  Syria  and  connect
themselves  with  those  which  adjoin  the  Dead  Sea  and  Palestine. "a  Such  is  the  information,
good  as  far  as  it  goes,  which  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  was  obtained  by  the  French  savans.
Since  then  more  detailed  information  has  been  supplied  from  various  sources.

The  reader  is  very  apt  to  imagine  that  the  whole  is  a  dead  and  arid  level.  But  this  is  by
no  means  the  case,  the  irregularity  of  the  surface  and  diversity  of  appearance  being  con-
siderable.

Only  the  maritime  borders,  on  either  hand,  of  that  part  of  the  peninsula  of  Sinai  which  lies
north  of  the  Tyh  mountains  have  been  described.  For  Mr.  Arundale,  who  did  traverse  the
interior,  gives  only  a  few  slight  hints,  which  just  enable  us  to  conclude  that,  as  the  connection
might  suggest,  one  general  character  belongs  to  all  the  desert  which  extends,  from  south
to  north,  about  100  miles,  from  the  ridge  of  El  Tyh  to  the  tract  of  high  and  barren  mountains
which  occur  about  75  miles  to  the  south  of  Hebron;  and  from  east  to  west,  about  240  miles,
being  from  the  vicinity  of  Cairo  to  the  Valley  of  Araba.    This  great  tract  of  country,  or  rather

a  Boziere,  •  De  la  Constitution  Physique  etc  l'Egypte,  30],  302.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxliii

that  principal  portion  of  it  which  lies  to  the  east  of  the  isthmus  of  Suez,  is  the  proper  El  Tyh
desert.

This  then  may  be  described,  after  the  information  of  Professor  Robinson,  as  a  vast  un-
bounded plain,  its  surface  not  sandy,  but,  for  the  most  part,  of  a  hard  gravel,  often  strewed
with  pebbles.  Numerous  wadys,  or  watercourses,  intersect  it ;  and  in  most  of  these  are  to  be
found  some  scattered  tufts  of  herbs,  or  shrubs,  on  which  the  camels  browse  as  they  pass  along,
and  which  serve  also  as  their  pasturage  when  turned  loose  at  night.  Irregular  ridges  of
limestone  hills  are  seen  in  various  directions.  The  mirage  frequently  occurs.  Wells  are
found  at  considerable  distances,  and  the  water  is  in  all  of  them  drinkable,  though  none  seem
to  be  exempt  from  that  mineral  [sometimes  sulphureous]  taste  so  commonly  found  in  the
wells  of  the  desert.  This  desert  is,  in  fact,  an  elevated  plateau,  much  above  the  level  of  the
Red  Sea,  and  as  high  or  higher  than  the  tops  of  the  mountains  by  which  we  ascend  to  it,
whether  from  the  southern  valleys  of  Sinai,  or  from  its  eastern  or  western  shore,  or  from
behind  Akaba,  or  from  the  Wady  el  Araba.a

Advancing  upon  this  plain  from  the  south  or  the  south-east,  we  have  before  us,  as  a  land-
mark, a  high  conical  mountain.  It  is  in  view  at  least  three  days  before  we  come  to  it,  and
in  the  distance  appears  isolated.  It  bears  the  name  of  Jebel  Araif-en-Nakah,  and  a  lower
ridge  extends  from  it  eastward.  As  we  approach  it,  the  country  becomes  undulating  and  un-
even and  the  hills  more  frequent.  The  mountain  itself  forms  the  south-eastern  corner  or
bulwark  of  a  mountainous  region  which  extends  hence  to  the  northward,  and  from  it  a  ridge
stretches  east  terminating  in  a  bluff  called  Makrah,  near  the  Araba  and  opposite  Mount  Hor.
After  passing  this  mountain  the  character  of  the  desert  is  changed.  On  our  right  is  now  a
mountainous  district  composed  of  irregular  limestone  ridges,  running  in  various  directions,
and  filling  the  whole  country  eastward  quite  to  Wady  Araba.  The  road  passes  along  the
western  side  of  this  mountainous  district  crossing  many  broad  wadys,  which  flow  down  from
it  westward,  with  elevated  ridges  of  table-land  between  them.  Beyond  the  district  thus
described,  the  country  opens  into  wide  sandy  plains,  in  which  Dr.  Robinson  [who  had  already
been  in  Egypt  and  Sinai]  had  his  first  experience  of  the  simoom.  This  character  of  the  desert
is  preserved  till  we  reach  Wady  Ruheibah,  which,  being  thus  on  the  borders  of  the  sandy
desert,  we  have  before  agreed  to  consider  as  the  southern  frontier  of  Palestine.

Of  the  extraordinary  visitations  to  which  the  deserts  are  subject,  the  hot  wind,  called  by  the
Arabs  the  simoom,  and  by  the  Turks  samiel,  both  of  which  words  mean  the  poison-wind,
seems  the  most  remarkable  and  injurious.  The  accounts  which  are  given  by  different  persons
vary  so  greatly,  that  it  is  difficult  to  deduce  from  them  a  connected  statement  of  facts ;  and
some  writers  have  gone  so  far  as  to  discredit  the  stronger  effects  which  have  been  ascribed  to
this  phenomenon.  The  fact  seems  to  us  to  be,  that,  in  this,  as  in  a  thousand  other  matters,
people  infer  analogies  between  what  they  do  see  and  what  they  do  not  see ;  and  in  this  they
may  be,  and  often  are,  wrong,  from  not  knowing,  or  not  taking  into  account,  the  circumstances
by  which  differences  and  modifications  may  be  and  are  produced.  Travellers,  whose  routes
almost  always  lie  along  the  borders  of  the  great  desert,  and  who  never  visit  those  vast  interior
solitudes  of  sand  which  only  the  natives  dare  to  traverse,  witness  only  these  phenomena  in  the
most  mild  and  mitigated  forms,  and  thoughtlessly  infer  that  they  must  be  equally  mild  in  the
very  heart  of  the  desert,  although  they  know  that  the  causes  which  produce  them  must  there
be  operating  with  more  intense  effect.  What  we  ourselves  deduce  from  the  balance  of  testi-
monies is,  that  these  phenomena  are  exhibited  with  diminished  force  the  greater  our  distance
from  the  heart  of  the  desert  is  increased ;  and  that  the  travellers  who  describe  those  mitigated
phenomena  which  alone  they  noticed  in  their  border  routes,  have  no  right  to  deny  the  concur-
rent testimony  of  history  and  of  the  natives,  which  ascribe  to  them  stronger  developments  and
more  ruinous  effects  in  the  interior  of  the  desert.

The  simoom  blows  generally  from  the  direction  of  the  nearest  sandy  deserts  ;  in  Syria  from
those  of  Arabia,  and  in  Egypt  from  those  of  Africa.     Dr.  Russell  informs  us  that  "  the  true

a  This  appears  from  comparing  the  intimations  of  Burckhardt,  Laborde,  Robinson,  and  Aruudale.

cxliv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

simoom  "  (by  which  expression  he  seems  to  have  felt  the  necessity  for  such  a  distinction  as
we  have  now  made)  never  reaches  so  far  north  as  Aleppo,  nor  is  common  in  the  desert  between
that  city  and  Basrah.  He  was,  however,  careful  to  collect  the  reports  of  the  Arabs,  which  he
thus  states : — "  They  assert  that  its  progression  is  in  separate  or  distinct  currents,  so  that  the
caravan,  which  in  its  march  in  the  desert  sometimes  spreads  to  a  great  breadth,  suffers  only
partially  in  certain  places  of  the  line,  while  the  intermediate  parts  remain  untouched.  That
sometimes  those  only  who  happen  to  be  mounted  on  camels  are  affected,  though  more  com-
monly such  as  are  on  foot ;  but  that  both  never  suffer  alike.  That  lying  flat  on  the  ground
till  the  blast  passes  over  is  the  best  method  of  avoiding  the  danger,  but  that  the  attack  is  some-
times so  sudden  as  to  leave  no  time  for  precaution.  Its  effects  sometimes  prove  instantly
fatal,  the  corpse  being  livid,  or  black,  like  that  of  a  person  blasted  by  lightning ;  at  other  times
it  produces  putrid  fevers,  which  prove  mortal  in  a  few  hours ;  and  that  very  few  of  those  who
have  been  struck  recover."  This  is  not  all  they  tell.  The  attention  of  Thevenot  was  strongly
drawn  to  the  subject,  and  he  made  particular  inquiries  concerning  it,  at  the  towns  on  the
borders  of  the  desert,  of  different  persons  in  different  places.  He  says  that  they  all  agreed  in
their  testimony,  which  is  the  same  in  substance  as  that  which  has  just  been  adduced,  with  the
additions, — which,  we  know,  form  part  of  the  current  account  among  the  natives. — "  No
sooner  does  a  man  die  by  this  wind  than  he  becomes  black  as  a  coal,  and  if  one  take  him
by  the  leg,  arm,  or  any  other  place,  his  flesh  comes  off  from  the  bone,  and  is  plucked  off  by
the  hand  that  would  lift  him  up.  They  say  that  in  this  wind  there  are  streaks  of  fire  as  small
as  a  hair,  which  have  been  seen  by  some,  and  that  those  who  breathe  in  those  rays  of  fire  die
of  them,  the  rest  receiving  no  damage."  We  willingly  confess  that  there  are  some  points  in
these  statements  which  savour  of  exaggeration ;  but  we  consider  that,  taking  the  whole  of
these  reports  at  their  lowest  value,  they  evince  at  least  that  the  simoom  is  sometimes  pro-
ductive of  immediately  fatal  effects  in  the  interior  of  the  deserts.  Most  of  the  described  phe-
nomena suggest  a  highly  electrical  state  of  the  atmosphere,  and  the  symptoms  of  immediate
putrefaction  are  such  as  occur  in  cases  of  death  by  lightning.

The  mitigated  effects  of  this  wind,  as  experienced  and  reported  by  European  travellers,  may
thus  be  described.

The  Arabs,  and  others  accustomed  to  the  deserts,  are  aware  of  the  signs  which  portend  a
coming  simoom,  and  if  they  make  the  discovery  before  a  day's  journey  is  commenced,  cannot
be  induced  to  depart  from  their  station  until  it  has  overpast.  Even  the  cattle  are  aware  of  the
approaching  evil,  and  manifest  their  uneasiness  by  plaintive  cries,  and  other  tokens  of  distress.
All  animated  nature  seems  to  take  alarm,  and  to  throw  itself  upon  the  defensive.  The  horizon
gradually  assumes  a  dull  purplish  or  violet  hue,  while  the  sun  becomes  shorn  of  its  beams,
and  looks  red  and  heavy,  as  through  a  London  fog.  Then  comes  on  the  hot  wind,  laden  with
a  subtile  and  burning  dust,  or  rather  fine  sand,  which  penetrates  to  all  things ;  the  atmosphere
becomes  exceedingly  hot,  and  the  air,  less  even  from  its  heata  than  from  its  noxious  qualities
and  the  particles  with  which  it  is  laden,  is  breathed  with  difficulty ;  and  even  under  the  shelter
of  a  tent,  and  with  every  possible  precaution  and  safeguard,  the  effect  is  most  distressing.  It
fires,  burns,  dries  up  the  lungs,  the  mouth  is  parched,  the  skin  dry,  and  a  feeling  of  universal
debility  prevails,  while  the  pulse  rises  as  in  fever.  Life  seems  attacked  in  its  most  delicate
organs ;  and  there  is  much  reason  to  think  that  any  prolonged  subjection  to  even  this  greatly
mitigated  form  of  the  evil  would  be  attended  with  serious  consequences ;  and  still  more  if  no
measures  of  protection  against  it  were  sought.  Mr.  Madden,  who  was  exposed  to  a  somewhat
slight  simoom  in  the  desert  of  Suez,  and  remained  in  his  tent  while  it  lasted  (above  seven
hours)  describes  the  sensation  as  inexpressibly  distressing ;  but  he  does  not  think  it  was  the
degree  of  heat  that  occasioned  it,  for  in  Upper  Egypt  he  had  suffered  an  equally  high  tem-
perature1" without  any  such  prostration  of  strength  and  spirits.     But  he  believes  the  hot  wind

a  Fynes  Moryson  (not  the  Morison  we  have  so  often  cited)  compares  the  inspiring  of  this  air  to  the  hasty  swallowing  of  too  hot
broth ! — a  homely  but  expressive  comparison.

"  The  thermometer  at  two  o'clock  rose  to  110°  in  the  shade ;  and  on  putting  the  bulb  in  the  sand,  outside  the  tent,  in  a  few
minutes  the  mercury  was  at  130°."

Chap.  V.]

VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.

cxlv

of  the  desert  to  be  connected  with  an  electrical  state  of  the  atmosphere,  which  has  a  depressing
influence  on  the  nervous  system.  And  this,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  the  opinion  of  a  medical
man.

In  Egypt,  where,  as  in  Palestine,  this  wind  is  much  less  alarming  than  even  in  the  border
deserts,  it  exchanges  its  name  of  simoom  for  that  of  kamseen  (fifty),  because  it  is  felt  the  mo6t
frequently  during  fifty  days  about  the  vernal  equinox.

[Sand-9torni.]

It  is  not  so  much  alleged,  generally,  that  the  naked  operation  of  the  simoom  is  so  destruc-
tive, even  in  the  interior  of  the  great  deserts,  as  the  immense  drifts  and  whirlwinds  of  sand
which  it  raises.  We  have  seen  that  there  are  some  indications  of  this, — that  it  fills  the  air  with
fine  sand,  even  in  the  border  deserts ;  and  how  much  more,  then,  in  those  vast  interior  ex-
panses, where,  even  in  a  state  of  rest,  the  immense  hills  a  of  sand  thrown  up  by  the  winds,
and  left  to  be  swept  away  and  removed  by  some  future  storms,  bear  evidence  to  the  operations
of  the  wind  upon  these  sandy  surfaces.  Immense  clouds  of  sand  are,  under  the  operation  of
the  wind,  raised  high  in  air,  and  in  their  ultimate  fall  overwhelm  whatever  lies  below.  Often
the  whirling  eddies  of  the  wind  condense  the  drifting  sands  into  more  compact  masses,  causing
them  to  spindle  up  into  tall  and  rounded  columns,  which,  still  acted  upon  by  the  power  which
reared  and  sustains  them,  keep  moving  over  the  plain  till  they  fall  in  a  hill  or  wide-spread
sheet  of  sand.  Thus  the  surface  of  the  desert  is,  to  a  considerable  depth,  in  frequent  motion  ;
and  thus,  we  are  told,  caravans  and  entire  armies  have  been  slain  and  buried  by  the  concurrent
effects  of  the  hot  wind,  and  of  the  immense  masses  of  sand  which  it  drifts  so  furiously
along.  To  such  a  cause  history  attributes  the  loss  of  the  army  which  the  mad  Persian  con-
queror, Cambyses,  sent  across  the  desert  against  the  inhabitants  of  the  oasis  of  Ammon.
Happily  these  sand-storms,  in  their  more  terrible  forms,  are  far  from  common  ;  else  no  one
could  adventure  to  pass  the  desert.  They  are  also  less  frequent,  and  less  formidable  in  the
deserts  of  south-western  Asia  than  in  those  of  Africa,  westward  from  Egypt,  where  the  tracts
of  sand  are  more  extensive,  and  seem  to  be  mere  easily  set  in  motion.

As  the  simoom  usually  moves  at  a  certain  height  in  the  atmosphere,  the  common  resource
against  its  effects  is,  as  already  intimated,  to  lie  flat  on  the  ground  till  they  pass  over.     Man

a  In  the  Caspian  steppes  (of  pure  sand)  we  have  seen  such  hills  at  least  thirty  feet  high,  by  about  the  same  diameter.
VOL.   II.  U

cxlvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  V.

was  probably  taugbt  tbis  resource  by  observing  tbat,  at  sucb  times,  camels  and  otber  animals
bend  their  beads  to  the  ground  and  bury  their  nostrils  in  the  sand.  Shelter  from  the  sand-
storm is  sought  in  nearly  the  same  manner.  The  traveller  generally  lies  down  on  the  lee
side  of  his  camel ;  but,  as  the  sands  are  soon  drifted  around  him  to  the  level  of  his  body,  both
the  beast  and  its  owner  are  obliged  frequently  to  rise  and  change  their  position,  to  avoid  being
entirely  covered.  If  the  storm  is  of  long  duration,  as  it  often  is,  this  constant  exertion,  with
the  effects  of  the  hot  wind,  and  the  dread  and  danger  of  the  sandy  inundation,  produces  such
weariness,  sleepiness,  or  despair,  that  both  men  and  animals  remain  on  the  ground,  and  a  very
short  time  suffices  to  bury  them  under  the  sands.  It  is  thus  chiefly  that  the  simoom  becomes
extremely  destructive  to  the  life  of  man  and  beast.  It  is  easy,  in  our  own  cool  and  quiet
country,  to  sit  down  and  doubt  about  these  things ;  but  the  whitened  bones  which  strew  the
desert  bear  witness  to  their  truth.  And  any  one  who,  at  even  a  safe  season  of  the  year,  has
passed  over  such  wastes,  and  during  the  halt  of  his  caravan  has  lain  down  for  rest  upon  the  sand,
wrapped  up  in  his  cloak,  must,  like  the  writer  of  this,  have  felt  a  very  serious  conviction  of
the  probability  of  such  events.  The  only  marked  objects  in  the  sandy  desolation  are  the  huge
hillocks  of  drifted  sand;  and  he  knows,  that  such  winds  as  formed  them  will  disperse  them
all  abroad  over  the  face  of  the  land ;  and  he  knows  not  but  that,  after  the  next  storm,  a  mound
of  sand  may  cover  the  place  whereon  he  lies.

These  showers  and  whirlwinds  of  sand,  or  of  sand  and  dust,  or  of  dust  only,  according  to
the  nature  of  the  country,  were  certainly  known  to  the  Hebrews.  Their  then  recent  expe-
rience in  the  desert,  taught  them  to  know  the  full  intensity  of  those  visitations  with  which
Moses  denounced  that  God  would  scourge  their  disobedience  : — "  Thy  heaven  that  is  over
thy  head  shall  be  brass  ;  and  the  earth  which  is  under  thee  shall  be  iron.  Jehovah  will  give
instead  of  rain  to  thy  land  dust ;  and  from  the  heavens  shall  dust  descend  upon  thee  until
thou  he  destroyed. "a

The  threat  of  dust  to  the  land  instead  of  rain,  brings  to  mind  the  tendency  of  the  drifted
sands  to  encroach  upon  the  cultivable  lands  of  the  borders.  The  tendency  of  actual  cultivation
is  to  repel  such  encroachments ;  but,  where  cultivation  is  discontinued,  a  very  serious  loss  of
cultivable  soil  is  in  the  course  of  time  incurred.  Ample  proof  of  this  may  be  seen  on  the
south  and  the  south-east  borders  of  the  Holy  Land,  showing  the  actual  fulfilment  of  the  de-
nunciation we  have  adduced.  Here  again  the  desert  is  comparable  to  the  sea ;  for,  as  the  sea
encroaches  on  the  land,  so  do  the  sands  encroach  upon  the  cultivable  soil.b

This  text  might  also  be  adduced  in  support  of  the  statement  that  ascribes  largely  destruc-
tive powers  to  these  visitations.  They  have  not  been  unknown  even  in  the  northernmost
parts  of  Syria.  Witness  William  of  Tyre's  account  of  the  whirlwind  of  sand  to  which
he  ascribes  the  victory  of  the  Moslems  over  the  prince  of  Antioch,  in  the  territory  of  that
name.e  And  we  might,  therefore,  expect  them  to  be  still  more  common  in  Palestine,  as  they
are  in  Egypt  and  in  other  countries  bordering  on  extensive  plains.  Moses  describes  the  desert
in  which  the  Israelites  wandered  for  forty  years  as  "  a  desert  land,  the  waste  howling  wilder-
ness;"4 and  as  "  that  great  and  terrible  wilderness,  where  were  fiery  serpents,  and  scorpions,
and  drought,  where  there  was  no  water  ;"e  and  of  which  Jeremiah f  more  amply  speaks  as  of
"  a  land  of  deserts  and  of  pits,  a  land  of  drought  and  of  the  shadow  of  death,  a  land  that  no
man  passed  through,  and  where  no  man  dwelt."  And  that  among  the  characteristics  indi-
cated in  these  terms,  those  which  we  have  described  may,  to  some  extent,  be  comprehended
is  shown  by  the  account  which  William  of  Tyre  gives  of  the  march  of  Syracon,  general  of  the
army  of  Noureddin  Emir  of  Damascus,  and  uncle  of  the  famous  Saladin,  into  this  very  desert,
between  Syria  and  Egypt,  in  which  the  Israelites  wandered  so  long.     During  the  march  the.

a  Deut.  xxviii.  23,  24.

V>  This  is,  perhaps,  more  strongly  manifested  in  Egypt.  Denon  says, — "  When  this  destructive  scourge  sets  in  from  the  desert,
the  inundation  of  sand  often  overwhelms  the  country,  changes  its  fertility  to  barrenness,  drives  the  labourer  from  his  house,  whose
walls  it  covers  up,  and  leaves  no  other  mark  of  vegetable  life  than  the  tops  of  a  few  palm-trees,  which  adds  still  more  to  the
dreary  aspect  of  desolation.  Thus  the  desert  is  continually  encroaching  on  the  fertile  land;  and,  were  the  waters  of  the  Nile
to  discontinue  their  inundations,  the  whole  vale  of  Egypt  would  eventually  become  a  desert,  or  a  vale  of  sand."

c  '  Hist.  Belli  Sacri.'  xii.  9.  <1  Deut.  xxxii.  10.  e  Deut.  viii.  15.  '  Jer.  ii.  6.

Chap.  V.]  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.  cxlvii

troops  were  encountered  by  a  whirlwind  of  such  force,  that  it  raised  into  the  air  vast  clouds  of
sand,  which  obscured  the  sun  and  occasioned  a  thick  darkness.  So  densely  filled  was  the  air
by  the  sandy  particles,  that  no  one  dared  to  open  his  mouth  or  eyes,  to  speak  to  another  or  to
look  around  him.  The  horsemen  deemed  it  prudent  to  dismount;  and  many  prostrated
themselves  and  dived  their  hands  deep  into  the  sand,  to  obtain  such  fast  hold  as  might  prevent
the  wind  from  whirling  them  up,  and  breaking  their  necks  or  legs  in  casting  them  again  to
the  ground.  Some  of  the  men  did  lose  their  lives ;  many  camels  also  were  lost,  and  most  of
the  provisions;  and  the  army  was,  for  the  time,  quite  dispersed  by  the  storm.  "  For  in  this
desert,"  says  the  historian,  using  the  standard  comparison,  "  waves  of  sand  are  raised  and
tossed  about,  like  the  waves  of  the  sea  when  troubled  by  tempestuous  winds ;  so  that  to
navigate  a  stormy  sea  is,  at  times,  not  more  dangerous  than  to  pass  such  deserts."11

Another  phenomenon  of  the  desert  is  the  mirage.  This  is  an  illusion,  producing  the  most
cruel  disappointment  to  those  who  traverse  the  dry  and  sandy  plains,  as  it  assumes  precisely
the  appearances  most  calculated  to  delight  the  traveller  and  to  seduce  him  from  his  way.
Sometimes  he  sees  before  him  a  fine  lake ;  but  if,  in  the  eagerness  of  thirst  and  heat,  he
hastens  towards  it,  the  margin  seems  to  retire,  so  that  the  surface  of  water  as  he  advances
becomes  narrower,  and  at  last  disappears  altogether ;  but  the  whole  appearance  may  be  again
exhibited  before  him  at  the  same  distance  as  that  at  which  it  was  first  observed.  All  this  time
the  impatient  traveller  will  seem,  to  those  who  have  remained  behind,  to  have  reached  the  mar-
gin, to  have  entered  the  lake,  and  to  have  forded  it  to  the  other  side.  Or  again,  there  may
seem  to  be  the  fair  similitude  of  a  green  oasis,  with  its  tufted  palms,  traversed  by  a  broad  river.
In  such  cases  the  illusion  of  water  is  complete:  for  not  only  are  the  bushes  or  other  objects
which  may  be  on  the  margin  reflected  in  it,  but  it  has  something  like  the  ripple  of  water ;
and  in  such  instances  as  the  first  is  streaked  by  those  numerous  shining  patches  observable  on
the  surface  of  lakes  when  viewed  from  a  distance.  The  best  prepared  travellers  are  unable
to  resist  the  force  of  this  illusion,  or  to  believe  that  which  they  see  to  be  unreal.  The  cruel
mockery  of  such  an  appearance,  in  the  midst  of  these  arid  steppes,  may  in  some  degree  be
conceived,  but  not  properly  appreciated  without  actual  experience.

This  phenomenon  is  very  common  even  on  the  skirts  of  the  desert,  and  must  have  been
tolerably  well  known  to  the  Hebrews.  They  called  it  by  the  name  2TW  serab,h  which  it  still
bears  among  the  Arabs,  who,  as  well  as  the  Persians,  often  use  it,  by  a  fine  metaphor,  to
express  disappointed  hope.  To  this  one  prophet  seems  to  allude  when  he  asks,  "  Wilt  thou
be  altogether  unto  me  as  unreal  waters  ?"c  And  there  is  every  reason  to  conclude  that  Isaiah
draws  his  beautiful  metaphors  from  the  apparent  effects  thus  exhibited  in  the  desert,  when
he  foretels  the  glories  of  the  Messiah's  reign d  in  glowing  language  which  a  poet  of  our  own
has  not  unworthily  imitated  : —

"  The  swain,  in  barren  deserts,  with  surprise
Sees  lilies  spring,  and  sudden  verdure  rise ;
And  starts  amidst  the  thirsty  wilds  to  hear
New  falls  of  water  murmuring  in  his  ear.
On  rifted  rocks,  the  dragons'  late  abodes.
The  green  reed  trembles,  and  the  bulrush  nods;
Wide  sandy  valleys,  lato  perplex'd  with  thorn,
The  spiry  fir,  and  shapely  box  adorn  ;
To  leafless  shrubs  the  flowery  palms  succeed,
And  odorous  myrtle  to  tho  noisome  weed  "e

a  '  Hist.  Belli  Saeri.'  xix.  15.  b  The  desert  water.  c  Jer.  xv.  18.

d  Isa.  xxxv.  In  verse  7  the  word  rendered  "  parched  ground  "  in  our  public  version  is  actually  this  word,  serab,  by  which  the
Arabs  describe  the  mirage.

e  Besides  the  authorities  cited  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  account  of  deserts  and  their  phenomena,  being  William  of  Tyre,
Volney,  Taylor,  Thevenot,  Russell,  Capper,  Roziere,  Denon,  Skinner,  Mr.  Robinson,  Madden,  Dr.  Robinson,  Arundale,  &c,  the
following  have  been  consulted: — Pietro  della  Valle,  '  Viaggi  in  Turchia,'  &c,  1.  xix.  Rauwolff,  ii.  5;  Da  Bois-Ayme,  '  Memoire
sur  les  Tribes  Arabes;'  Burckhardt,  '  Syria'  and  'Notes  on  the  Bedouins;'  Belzoni,  'Narrative  of  Operations,'  341-343;
Wellsted,  '  Travels  in  Arabia,'  ii.  31 ;  Stephens,  i.  236-238 ;  Coutelle,  '  Observations  sur  la  Topographie  de  la  Presqu'ile  de  Sinai.'

u  2

cxlviii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  V.

SUPPLEMENTARY     NOTES.

0)  Valley  op  Jehoshaphat,  p.  cxxi. —
When  different  names  are  applied  to  the  dif-
ferent parts  of  this  valley  it  is  usually  thus : —
The  valley  is  divided  into  three  parts,  of  which
the  northern  is  called  the  Valley  of  Kedron  ;
the  middle,  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat  ;  and
the  southern,  the  Valley  of  Siloam — from  the
fountain  of  that  name  on  the  one  side,  and  the
village  on  the  other,  These  three  names  are
also  applied,  respectively,  to  the  whole  extent
of  the  valley ;  but  that  of  the  Valley  of  Siloam
less  frequently  than  the  other  two,— being-
only,  that  we  recollect,  so  applied  by  Josephus.
But  it  is  more  common  to  distinguish  the
Valley  of  Siloam,  and  apply  one  of  the  other
denominations  to  all  the  rest.  The  other
Scriptural  names  which  have  been  generally
thought  to  apply  to  this  valley  are  the  follow-
ing:—

The  Valley  of  Shaveh,  where  Melchise-
deck  met  Abraham  when  lie  returned  from
the  slaughter  of  the  kings.  Gen.  xiv.  17.  This
seems  a  very  uncertain  conclusion.

The  King's  Dale,  which,  from  the  text  just
cited,  was  doubtless  the  same  as  the  Valley  of
Shaveh,  whether  the  same  as  the  Valley  of
Jehoshaphat  or  not.  In  this  King's  Dale
Absalom  erected  his  monumental  pillar.  2
Sam.  xviii.  18.  This  name  is  equivalent  to
that  of  the  Royal  Valley,  which  it  is  supposed
to  have  taken  from  the  gardens  and  pleasure-
houses  which  the  kings  reigning  in  Jerusalem
had  there.

The  Valley  of  Vision  is  the  name  figura-
tively given  to  it  by  the  prophet  Isaiah  (xxi.  2).
But  in  the  figurative  allusions  to  this  valley,
Jerusalem  itself  is  often  intended.

The  name  Jehoshaphat  means  the  Judgment
of  Jehovah.  Joel  is  the  only  prophet  who  uses
the  name  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  there  is  an
evident  play  upon  the  name  and  its  meaning  in
what  he  further  says,  thus, — "  Come  up  to  the
Valley  of  Jehoshaphat  [i.  e.  of  God*s  Judgment]
for  there  will  I  judge  all  the  heathen  round

about Multitudes,  multitudes  in  the  Valley

of  Judgment"  (Joel,  iii.  12, 14.)  This  last  name
is  rendered  Valley  of  Decision  in  our  public
version  ;  and  this  is  the  passage  on  which  is
founded  not  only  the  current  name  which  the
valley  bears,  but  the  popular  notion  as  to  its
being  the  scene  of  the  final  judgment.  If  these
names — even  that  of  Jehoshaphat — apply  to
any  natural  valley,  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that
they  apply  to  the  valley  to  which  this  note  re-
lates.    We  have,  therefore,  called  it  the  Valley

of  Jehoshaphat,  merely  because  it  is  the  name
by  which,  during  a  long  series  of  ages,  it  has
the  most  generally  been  described.

These  are  not  the  only  names  which  have
been  given  to  the  valley,  but  all  which  have  been
given  on  such  authority  as  requires  our  notice.

(2)  The  Cicer  Field,  p.  cxxiii.— It  seems
that  this  legend  is  told  with  considerable  va-
riations. One  account,  nearly  as  prevalent  as
the  other,  relates  the  story  of  Christ  himself,
and  is  thus  reported  by  Rauwolff : —

"  Before  you  is  a  large  valley,  which,  al-
though it  be  rocky,  yet  is  fruitful  both  of  corn
and  wine.  In  it,  towards  the  right  hand,  near
the  road,  is  an  acre  called  the  Cicer-Field,
which  had  its  name,  as  I  was  informed,  from
the  following  transaction.  It  is  said  that
when  Christ  went  by  at  a  certain  time,  and
saw  a  man  that  was  a  sowing  cicers,  he  did
speak  to  him  kindly,  and  asked  him  what  he
was  a  sowing  there?  The  man  answered
scornfully,  and  said,  '  He  sowed  small  stones.'
'  Then  let  it  be,'  said  our  Lord,  '  that  thou  reap
the  same  seed  thou  sowest.'  So,  they  say,  that
at  harvest  he  found,  instead  of  the  cicer-pease,
nothing  but  small  pebbles,  in  shape  and  colour
and  bigness  like  unto  them  exactly.  Now,
whether  there  be  anything  of  truth  in  it  or  no
I  cannot  affirm  ;  but  this  I  must  say,  that  there
are  to  this  day  such  stones  found  in  this  field.
For  as  we  went  by  some  of  us  went  into  it,  and
did  gather  a  great  many  of  them  that  were  in
bigness,  shape,  and  colour  so  like  unto  these
cicers  (by  the  Arabians  called  ommos,  and  in
Latin  cicer  arietinum)  that  we  could  hardly
distinguish  them  from  natural  ones."

The  stock  of  these  pebbles  seems  to  be  ex-
hausted ;  and  with  them  the  legend  appears  to
have  fallen  into  disuse,  as  the  attention  of  tra-
vellers is  not  now  directed  by  their  guides  to
this  spot.

(3)  Jacob's  Bridge,  p.  cxxxiii. — This  bridge
takes  its  name  (Jissr  Yakoub)  from  a  tradition
that  it  marks  the  spot  where  the  patriarch
Jacob  crossed  the  Jordan  on  his  return  from
Padan-Aram.  But  it  is  also  sometimes  called
Jissr  Bent  Yakoub,  the  Bridge  of  Jacob's  Sons,
which  may  suggest  that  the  name  is  rather
derivable  from  an  Arab  tribe  so  called.  It  is
about  two  miles  below  the  Lake  Houle.  The
river  here  flows  through  a  narrow  bed,  and  in  a
rapid  stream  ;  and  here,  to  very  remote  times,
has  been  the  high  road  from  all  parts  of  Pales-

Chap.  V.]

NOTES  TO  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.

cxlix

tine  to  Damascus.  The  bridge  is  a  very  solid
fabric,  well  built,  with  a  high  curve  to  the
middle,  like  all  Syrian  bridges.  It  is  composed
of  three  arches  in  the  style  of  these  construc-
tions. Near  this  bridge,  on  the  east,  is  a  khan
much  frequented  by  travellers,  in  the  middle
of  which  are  ruins  of  an  ancient  square  build-
ing, constructed  with  basalt,  and  having  co-
lumns at  its  four  angles.  This  is  explained  by
the  fact  that  the  khan  is  built  upon  the  re-
mains of  a  fortress  erected  by  the  Crusaders
to  command  the  passage  of  the  Jordan.  Its
foundation  is  attributed  to  Baldwin  IV.,  king
of  Jerusalem  ;  and  William  of  Tyre  states  that
it  was  erected  in  six  months.  The  possession
of  so  important  a  post  was  hotly  disputed  by
the  Moslems,  and,  after  several  unsuccessful
attempts,  Saladin  carried  it  by  assault,  and
caused  it  to  be  destroyed.  The  khan  is  the
common  rendezvous  of  the  caravans  to  and
from  Damascus  and  Acre.  A  guard  of  a  few
soldiers  is  always  maintained  here  by  the  go-
vernment, chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  collecting
the  ghaffer,  or  tax  paid  by  all  Christians  who
cross  the  bridge.  This  tax  is  ordinarily  about
ninepence  a-head ;  but  the  pilgrims  who  pass
at  Easter,  on  their  way  to  Jerusalem,  are  re-
quired to  pay  not  less  than  seven  shillings  —at
least  it  was  formerly  ;  but,  we  believe,  the  dis-
tinctive tax  on  Christians  has  been  abolished
by  the  Egyptian  government,  and  that,  instead
of  it,  a  general  tax  on  laden  beasts  has  been
substituted.  The  Rev.  R.  S.  Hardy  only  no-
tices that — "  A  tax  of  three  piastres  is  imposed
upon  every  laden  camel,  two  upon  every  mule,
and  one  upon  every  ass.  The  tax  was  last
year  (1832)  farmed  for  20,000  piastres."  3

(4)  The  Simoom,  p.  cxliv. — Lucan  had  most
correct  information.  His  account  of  the  de-
serts of  Lybia,  and  of  the  sand-storm  which  the
Roman  soldiers,  led  by  Cato,  encountered  in
their  march  through  them,  remarkably  agrees
with,  and  illustrates,  the  particulars  we  have
stated.  We  cannot  refrain  from  adducing  a
few  passages : —

"  No  leafy  shades  the  naked  deserts  know,
No  silver  streams  through  flowery  meadows  flow ;
But  horrors  there  and  various  deaths  abound,
And  serpents  guard  th'  inhospitable  ground.

No  harvest  there  the  scatter'd  grain  repays,
But  withering  dies,  and,  ere  it  shoots,  decays ;
There  uever  loves  to  spring  the  mantling  vine,
Nor  wanton  ringlets  round  her  elm  to  twine.
The  thirsty  dust  prevents  the  swelling  fruit,
Drinks  up  the  generous  juice,  and  kills  the  root;
Through  secret  veins  no  tempering  moistures  pass,
To  bind  with  viscous  force  the  mouldering  mass;
But  genial  Jove,  averse,  disdains  to  smile,
Forgets,  and  curses  the  neglected  soil.

a  '  Notices  of  the  Holy  Laud,'  1834.     For  the  other  particu-
lars see  Burckhardt,  Tuylor,  Skinner,  &c.

Thence  lazy  Nature  droops  her  idle  head,

As  every  vegetable  sense  were  dead  ;

Thence  the  wide,  dreary  plains  one  visage  wear,

Alike  in  summer,  winter,  spring  appear,

Nor  feel  the  turns  of  the  revolving  year.

Their  herbage  here  (for  some  ev'n  here  is  found)

The  Nasamonian  hiuds  collect  around.

Here  all  at  large,  where  nought  restrains  his  force,
Impetuous  Auster  a  runs  his  rapid  course  ;
Nor  mountains  here,  nor  stedfast  rocks  resist.
But  free  he  sweeps  along  the  spacious  list.
No  stable  groves  of  ancient  oaks  arise,
To  tire  his  rage,  and  catch  him  as  he  flies  ;
But  wide  around  the  naked  plains  appear,
Here  fierce  he  drives,  unbounded,  through  the  air,
Roars,  and  exerts  his  dreadful  empire  here.
The  whirling  dust,  like  waves  in  eddies  wrought,
Rising  aloft,  to  the  mid  heaven  is  caught ;
There  hangs,  a  sullen  cloud,  nor  falls  again,
Nor  breaks,  like  gentle  vapours,  into  rain.

Thus  wide  o'er  Lybia  raged  the  stormy  south,

Thus  every  way  assail'd  the  Latian  youth.

Each  several  method  for  defence  they  try,

Now  wrap  their  garments  tight,  now  close  they  lie  ;

Now  sinking  to  the  earth,  with  weight  they  press,

Now  clasp  it  to  them  with  a  strong  embrace  ;

Scarce  in  that  posture  safe,  the  driving  blast

Bears  hard,  and  almost  drives  them  off  at  last.

Meantime  a  sandy  flood  comes  rolling  on,

And  swelling  heaps  the  prostrate  legions  drown.

New  to  the  sudden  danger,  and  dismay'd,

The  frighted  soldier  hasty  calls  for  aid,

Heaves  at  the  hill,  and  struggling  rears  his  head.

Soon  shoots  the  growing  pile,  and,  rear'd  on  high,

Lifts  up  its  lofty  summit  to  the  sky  :

High  sandy  walls,  like  forts,  their  passage  stay,

And  rising  mountains  intercept  their  way  :

The  certain  bounds  which  should  their  journey  guide,

The  moving  earth  and  dusty  deluge  hide :

So  landmarks  siuk  beneath  the  flowing  tide,

As  through  mid  seas,  uncertainly  they  move,

Led  only  by  Jove's  sacred  lights  above."  Rowe.

Denon  writes  much  about  the  simoom  ;  and
from  him  we  are  tempted  to  cite  the  following
passage,  relating  to  the  march  of  a  party  of
Egyptian  Mamelukes,  who  took  the  pass  from
the  Kittah  by  the  way  of  Redisi : —

"  This  pass  is  never  frequented  by  the  mer-
chants, and  was  fatal  to  the  Mamelukes,  who,
by  taking  this  road,  lost  their  horses,  together
with  a  part  of  their  camels,  a  considerable
number  of  their  attendants,  and  twenty-six
women  out  of  twenty-eight.  Their  march  was
traced  by  their  disasters,  and  by  what  they  left
behind  them, — tents,  arms,  clothing,  the  car-
cases of  horses  starved  to  death,  camels  which
were  no  longer  able  to  support  their  burdens,
attendants,  and  their  women,  whom  they  aban-
doned to  their  fate.  I  figured  to  myself  the
sufferings  of  a  poor  wretch,  panting  with  fa-
tigue, and  expiring  with  thirst,  his  tongue
parched,  and  breathing  with  difficulty  the  hot
air  by  which  he  is  consumed.  He  hopes  that
a  few  minutes'  repose  will  enable  him  to  recover
his  strength :  he  stops,  and  sees  his  companions
pass  by,  calling  on  them  in  vain  for  help.  The
misery  to  which  each  one  is  a  prey  has  banished

a  The  south  wiud.

cl

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  V.

every  compassionate  feeling :  they  proceed  on
their  way  without  casting  a  look  on  him,  and
follow  in  silence  the  footsteps  of  those  who
precede  them.  They  are  no  longer  in  his  view,
— they  are  fled, — and  his  benumbed  limbs,  al-
ready overpowered  by  their  painful  existence,
refuse  their  office,  and  cannot  be  stimulated  to
action  either  by  danger  or  by  terror.  The  ca-
ravan has  passed:  it  appears  to  him  like  an
undulating  line  in  the  wide  expanse,  and,  be-
coming at  length  a  mere  point,  disappears
altogether,  like  the  last  glimmer  of  an  expiring
taper.  He  casts  around  him  his  wild  and
frantic  looks,  but  can  see  nothing :  he  turns
them  towards  himself,  then  closes  his  eyes  to
shun  the  aspect  of  the  terrible  vacuity  by  which
he  is  surrounded.  He  hears  nothing  but  his
own  sighs,  and  fate  hovers  over  him  to  cut  the
thread  of  his  existence.  Alone,  and  without  a
companion  to  do  him  the  last  offices,  he  is
about  to  expire  without  one  single  ray  of  hope
to  administer  comfort  to  his  departing  soul, —
and  his  corpse,  consumed  by  the  parched  and
burning  soil,  soon  becomes  a  bleached  skeleton,
which  will  serve  as  a  guide  to  the  uncertain
steps  of  the  traveller  who  shall  dare  to  brave
the  fate  that  has  befallen  him."

(5)  The  Mirage,  p.  cxlvii. — All  the  pheno-
mena of  the  mirage,  which  are  in  considerable
variety,  are  usually  regarded  as  examples  of
unusual  refraction.  "  As  a  general  definition,
we  may  say  the  mirage  is  an  optical  illusion
caused  by  the  refraction  of  light  through  con-
tiguous masses  of  air  of  different  density,  such
refraction  not  unfrequently  producing  the  same
effect  as  direct  reflection."*  This  difference
of  density  may  be  caused  either  by  moisture  or
by  heat.  Among  mountains  and  near  bodies
of  actual  water  it  is  often  seen,  and  is  then
caused  by  moisture ;  and  in  the  dry  sandy
deserts  by  heat.  In  the  former  case  it  is  most
usually  seen  by  night  or  in  the  morning,  and
in  the  latter  during  the  heat  of  the  day.  As
the  desert  mirage  is  that  which  engages  our
attention,  we  may  observe,  with  more  particular
reference  to  it,  that  the  case  is  there  one  of
diminished  density  in  the  lower  stratum  of  the
atmosphere,  caused  by  the  increase  of  heat,  com-
municated by  the  rays  of  the  sun  to  the  sand,
with  which  this  stratum  is  in  immediate  contact.

The  following  passage,  for  which  we  are  in-
debted to  the  'Penny  Cyclopaedia,'  shows  the
application  to  most  of  the  phenomena  of  the
mirage : —

"  All  these  phenomena,  and  their  various
modifications,  depend  on  the  different  density
of  the  lower  strata  of  the  air,  and,  as  this  dif-
ference of  density  may  be  occasioned  both  by

*  '  Penny  Cyclopaedia,'  art.  '  Mirage.'

heat  and  moisture,  and  as  heat  may  be  rever-
berated from  the  mountain's  side,  as  well  as
from  the  horizontal  surface  of  the  plains,  from
the  sea  as  from  the  land  ;  and  further,  as  con-
tiguous columns  of  air,  as  well  as  horizontal
strata,  may  be  of  different  densities,  it  is  easy
to  conceive  why  the  mirage  may  be  seen  in  very
different  situations,  as  also  why  it  presents  such
varied  appearances.  It  will  also  be  evident  that
any  cause  which  re-establishes  the  equilibrium
of  density  in  the  different  portions  of  the  air
must  cause  the  illusions  of  the  mirage  to  vanish.

"Supposing  the  nature  of  refraction  to  be
understood,  the  explanation  of  the  way  in  which
difference  of  density  in  different  strata  of  the
air  occasions  the  mirage  becomes  very  simple.

Let  A  represent  an  ob-
ject on  a  hill ;  a  b  c  d  a
stratum  of  air  heated  by
the  reverberation  from
the  soil  beneath,  so  as  to
have  a  less  density  than
that  of  the  air  above.  Now,
if  an  observer's  eye  be  at
E,  he  will  see  the  object
by  direct  vision  in  its
proper  place,  and  also  a
reversed  image  of  the
same  just  below  it  at  B,
because  the  rays,  coming
from  it  obliquely  towards
the  ground,  are  refracted
from  their  direct  course
on  entering  the  less  dense
inferior  stratum  of  air,
and,  taking  at  first  a  di-
rection inclining  to  the
horizontal,  are  afterwards
bent  up  so  as  to  meet  the  e   °

eye  of  the  observer  at  E,  who  thus  sees  the  in-
direct image  in  the  direction  B,  or  exactly  as
it  would  appear  if  reflected  ;  and  moreover,  as
the  rays  from  that  part  of  the  heavens  which
form  the  background  to  the  object  are  refracted
in  the  same  manner,  the  sky  is  reversed  as  well
as  the  object,  and  presents  the  appearance  of  a
sheet  of  water.

"  If  the  lower  stratum  of  air  be  denser  than
the  strata  above,  and  the  object  be  seen  by
direct  vision  through  the  denser  stratum,  then
the  curve  or  trajectory,  instead  of  being  convex
towards  the  earth,  will  be  concave,  and  the  re-
versed image  will  be  seen  as  if  suspended  in
the  air  above."

How  the  appearance  of  water  may  be  pro-
duced ;  how  actual  objects  may  exhibit  a  re-
versed image  in  this  apparent  water ;  and  how
distant  objects  may  be  elevated  and  brought
near  by  such  refraction,  is  thus  capable  of  most
satisfactory  explanation.      But  there  still  ap-

Chap.  V.]

NOTES  TO  VALLEYS,  PLAINS,  AND  DESERTS.

cli

pear  to  be  some  points  which,  in  all  the  ac-
counts we  have  ever  met  with,  we  have  never
found  explained  to  our  full  satisfaction.  For
example,  an  apparent  lake,  surrounded  by  all
the  objects  which  a  lake  in  such  a  climate  might
be  expected  to  exhibit,  may  be  seen  in  situations
known  to  be  at  least  200  miles  distant  from
any  place  where  a  real  lake  can  be  found.3
Is  this  the  image  of  a  real  lake,  brought  near
by  refraction?  Or  is  it  purely  an  optical
fantasy,  produced  in  the  manner  which  has
been  described?  Considering  that  the  point
of  view  is  low,  and  that  the  lake,  if  it  exists,
must  be  positively  and  comparatively  lower,
and  taking  into  account  the  curvature  of
the  earth  in  a  distance  of  200  miles,  the
first  supposition  gives  a  refractive  power  to
the  atmosphere  infinitely  greater  than  any
accredited  examples  of  apparent  approxima-
tion, by  even  "  unusual  refraction,"  would  re-
quire us  to  believe.  The  extent  of  the  required
power  may  be  estimated  by  the  fact  that  the
curvature  of  the  earth  would  alone  exclude
from  view,  at  the  distance  of  200  miles,  a
mountain  more  than  20,000  feet  high.  Then
as  to  the  other  alternative,  although  the  ap-
pearance of  water  may  be  produced  by  optical
illusion,  whence  come  the  trees  and  verdure
by  which  the  lake  often  seems  to  be  surrounded

a  Wollstcd's  'Travels  in  Arabia,'  ii.  31.

in  deserts  absolutely  destitute  of  all  vegetation  ?
The  appearance  of  a  body  of  water,  and  of
water  only,  being  produced  in  the  manner  de-
scribed,— is  it  not  possible  that,  in  a  region
where  water  is  always  known  to  give  birth  to
vegetation,  the  imagination  supplies  in  these
cases  the  customary  association  ?  Or,  in  other
words,  that  the  appearance  of  water  is  a  phy-
sical, and  that  of  trees  and  verdure  a  mental
illusion.  That  all  the  members  of  a  caravan
see  it  does  not  render  this  unlikely  ; — they  all
see  the  physical  illusion  of  water,  but  we  have
no  evidence  that  they  all  think  they  see  sur-
rounding trees  and  other  objects,  and  still  less
that  they  see  the  same  objects  in  the  same
spots  with  their  companions.  But  great  simi-
larity of  excitement  among  many  men  would
be  not  only  accountable  but  natural ;  for  a
greater  marvel  than  the  mirage  itself  is  offered
in  the  psychological  phenomenon  of  the  similar
influence  upon  many  minds  of  a  continued
subjection  to  the  same  atmospherical  modifica-
tions, the  same  scenery,  the  same  diet  and
manner  of  life,  and,  above  all,  the  same  priva-
tions and  desires.

We  are  content  to  state  this  as  an  alternative
to  those  whom  the  other  explanations  leave
unsatisfied.  The  corroboratory  considerations,
for  which  we  cannot  afford  room,  will  probably
occur  to  the  minds  of  most  of  our  readers.

--^—^Jm.^msS^  at

[Plain  of  Acre.  — See  p.  exxiii.]

CHAPTER  VI.

LAKES  AND  RIVERS.

-  ■  — -

-JK1EI||

*^Bf

[The  River  Jordan.]

If  we  sail  along  the  coast  of  Syria  and  Palestine,  we  cannot  fail  to  notice  the  mountain  ranges
which  extend  through  the  entire  length  of  the  land.  We  shall  observe  that  they  run  parallel
to  the  shore  at  various  distances,  but  nowhere  at  any  considerable  distance  from  it.  We  shall
then  consider,  that  the  streams  which  water  the  country  before  us,  arise  from  springs  in  those
mountains  ;  and,  seeing  that  the  course  that  they  have  to  run  must  needs  be  short,  and  conse-
quently that  no  time  is  afforded  them  to  collect  such  tribute  in  their  way  as  might  give  them
importance,  we  shall  infer  that  no  stream  deserving  to  be  called  a  river  can  reach  the  sea.
And  when  we  further  take  into  account  the  warmth  of  the  low-lying  country,  and  the  want  of
rains  in  summer,  we  shall  consider  it  very  likely  that  there  are  few  if  any  streams  which  con-
tinue to  flow  all  the  year,  or  which,  in  fact,  are  other  than  winter  torrents.  As  the  other,  or
inland,  side  of  the  water-shed  which  these  mountains  form  is  unknown  to  us,  and  as  it  is
reasonable  to  suppose  that  all  its  waters  are  thrown  in  an  opposite  direction — that  is  inland,
or  eastward — we  shall  not  calculate  on  any  accidents  which  may  bring  round  to  the  western
coast,  through  openings  in  the  mountains,  any  of  the  perhaps  more  considerable  streams  which
have  their  rise  in  the  farther  side  of  the  water-shed.  All  these  conclusions  from  the  natural
organization  of  the  country,  as  viewed  from  the  coast,  would  prove  to  be  correct.  Nearly
all  the  streams  which  flow  from  the  western  water-slope  are  mere  torrents,  rendered  important
during  winter  and  spring  by  the  rains  and  melted  snows,  but  the  course  of  which  can  only  be
discovered  during  the  remainder  of  the  year  by  the  rounded  stones  and  fragments  of  rock
with  which  their  beds  are  filled.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  cliii

In  all  Palestine  Proper  not  a  single  stream  from  a  perennial  source  reaches  the  coast.  It
is  only  in  the  plains  under  the  Lebanon  mountains  that  such  streams  occur ;  and  even  there,
such  as  maintain  their  existence  throughout  the  year  shrink  to  mere  brooks  during  summer.
Two  of  the  only  three  streams  in  Syria  that  can  strictly  claim  the  name  of  rivers  do  find
their  way  to  the  western  shore,  although  they  rise  on  the  eastern  slopes :  the  third — the  one
that  does  not  this — is  the  Jordan.

The  particular  information,  as  to  the  geographical  construction  of  the  country,  which  we
have  already  given,  in  the  chapter  on  mountains,  will  enable  the  reader  to  understand  that,
when  the  summit  is  attained  of  the  frontier  range  of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  it  is
found  that  the  waters  of  the  eastern  slope  have  a  still  shorter  run  than  those  of  the  western.
Instead  of  stretching  off  afar  into  the  eastern  plains,  the  waters  of  this  slope  fall  short  into
hollow  basins — plains  or  valleys — which  slope  northward  and  southward,  and  collect  and
carry  off  the  streams  in  channels  running  parallel  to  the  mountains,  in  the  form  of  the  three
most  considerable  rivers  which  the  country  offers.  The  channels  of  these  three  rivers  traverse
the  entire  length  of  Syria.  The  course  of  two  of  them — the  Leontes  and  the  Jordan — is  to
the  south,  and  that  of  the  Orontes  is  to  the  north.  The  opposite  courses  of  the  Orontes
and  Leontes  demonstrate  that  the  highest  level  in  all  Syria  is  at  that  part  of  the  Lebanon
chain,  which  to  this  day  bears  the  distinctive  name  of  Jebel  Libnan :  for  in  the  valley  of  Baal-
bec,  or  on  the  lower  slopes  of  these  mountains,  are  the  springs  in  which  those  rivers  rise  ;a
and  although  the  sources  are  not  ten  miles  apart,  they  take  opposite  courses — the  one  to  the
north  and  the  other  to  the  south.  The  Orontes,  impelled  northward  by  the  slope  of  the  land
in  that  direction,  proceeds  through  the  plains  and  valleys  which  are  overlooked  by  the  eastern
slopes  of  the  northern  mountains,  and  owes  all  its  relative  importance  to  the  fact  that  it  has
to  traverse  150  miles  before  it  can  find  an  outlet  to  the  Mediterranean.  At  last  the  chain  of
mountains  terminates  in  Mount  Casius,  and  then  the  river  turns  and  hastens  to  the  Mediter-
ranean through  the  plain  of  Antioch.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Leontes,  rising  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Baalbec,  hastens  southward,  and  finds  a  much  speedier  access  to  the  sea.  It
follows  the  course  of  the  great  Lebanon  valley,  keeping  nearly  in  its  centre,  and  passes  through
its  opening  termination  towards  the  sea,  which  it  reaches  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tyre,
eighty-five  miles  from  its  source.

The  river  Jordan  rises  nearly  in  the  latitude  in  which  the  Leontes  terminates.  But  this
river  never  reaches  any  maritime  shore ; — after  traversing  two  lakes,  its  course  is  cut  short,
and  its  waters  lost  in  a  third — the  Dead  Sea.  Its  basin  drains  the  eastern  water-slopes  of
Palestine  Proper  ;  but  it  drains  them  only  of  winter  torrents,  for  all  the  country  does  not  con-
tribute one  perennial  stream  to  the  Jordan.  But  it  receives  also  the  waters  from  the  high
eastern  plains,  and  among  these  are  the  Jarmuch,  the  Jabbok,  and  the  Arnon, — all  of  which,
though  their  waters  get  very  low,  and  almost  extinct,  towards  the  end  of  summer,  are  perennial
streams.

Of  these  three  rivers  the  Leontes  is  the  least  important ;  and  although  in  length  of  course
the  Orontes  much  exceeds  the  Jordan,  its  volume  of  water  is  so  inconsiderable,  that,  were  it
not  impeded  by  successive  obstructions,  it  would  be  quite  dry  during  the  summer .b  The
Jordan  is,  therefore,  entitled  to  take  its  place  as  the  chief  of  Syrian  rivers ;  and  perhaps  this
is  distinction  enough  for  it :  but  besides  this,  it  may  be  said  that  for  a  line  of  nearly  3000
miles  along  the  coast  of  Africa  and  of  Syria,  no  one  stream,  except  the  Nile,  contributes  as
large  a  volume  of  water  to  the  Mediterranean  as  the  Jordan  contributes  to  the  Dead  Sea,  and
that  all  Arabia  has  not  one  river  comparable  to  it.  Such  comparisons  as  this,  among  similar
things,  are  more  just  to  the  Jordan  than  those  which  it  was  some  years  ago  fashionable  to
make,  to  its  disparagement,  as  compared  with  the  great  rivers  of  Europe.     Yet  there  are

a  It  is  true  that  both  rivers  originate  in  springs  which  rise  both  from  Lebanon  and  Anti-Lebanon,  and  which  unite  in  the
plain.  Any  of  these  may  be  considered  the  source  ;  and,  in  fact,  the  spring  which  is  considered  the  source  of  the  Orontes  is  on
the  Lebanon  'side,  and  that  which  is  regarded  as  the  source  of  the  Leontes  is  on  the  Anti-Lebanon  side  near  Baalbec.  But  the
question  of  the  highest  water-level  is  not  affected  by  the  determination  as  to  the  particular  springs  which  are  to  be  regarded  as
the  sources  of  the^e  rivers.

b  SoVolney,  i.  287,  note.

VOL.   I.  X

cliv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

many  small  rivers  of  Europe  which,  aggrandized  by  the  Atlantic  tides,  appear  of  much  import-
ance, although,  intrinsically,  of  little  more  consequence  than  the  Jordan.  But  the  dignity  of
the  Jordan  arises  from  other  circumstances  than  the  volume  of  its  waters  or  the  extent  of  its
course.

Seeing  that  the  lakes  of  Palestine  are  intimately  connected  with  the  Jordan,  their  waters
being,  in  fact,  contained  in  enlarged  hollows  of  its  basin,  it  seems  best  not,  for  the  mere  sake
of  classification,  to  separate  them  from  this  natural  connection,  but  to  trace  the  river  from  its
source  to  its  termination,  describing  the  lakes  we  have  to  pass  in  our  way.

When  several  springs  contribute  their  waters  to  form  a  river,  it  is  often  not  easy  to  say
which  of  them  is  to  be  regarded  as  its  source ;  and  perhaps  the  usual  practice  of  selecting
some  one  of  them  to  be  regarded  as  the  source  of  the  river  in  preference  to  the  others,  is
nothing  more  than  a  convenient  inaccuracy.  It  would  seem  that  the  spring  which  is  most
remote,  and  whose  stream  receives  and  is  aggrandized  into  a  river  by  the  others  which  rise
below  it,  has  the  best  claim  to  be  regarded  as  the  source.  But  this  is  seldom  the  case;  various
accidental  circumstances  having,  in  most  instances,  operated  to  give  the  distinction  to  some
one  of  the  less  remote  springs.  So,  with  respect  to  the  Jordan,  the  stream  which  issues  from
the  cave  at  Panias  h  s  been  usually  considered  the  source  of  that  river :  but  its  claim  to  this
distinction  may  well  be  disputed ;  for,  although  very  copious,  it  is  by  no  means  the  most  distant
of  the  fountains  of  the  Jordan.  This  opinion  is  by  no  means  recent.  Josephus  mentions  it
as  having  been  currently  regarded  as  the  fountain  of  the  Jordan  ;  but  that  the  stream  which
proceeds  from  the  cave  originated  in  it,  began  to  be  questioned  in  his  time.  It  was  held  that,
in  reality,  the  stream  which  came  from  the  cave  was  carried  thither  after  some  secret  manner
[subterraneously  ?]  from  the  lake  of  Phiala,  which  lake,  as  he  states,  lay  about  fifteen  miles
from  Csesarea  Philippi,a  not  far  on  the  right  hand  of  the  road  as  one  journies  to  Tracho-
nitis.  This  lake  had  its  name,  Phiala  [vial  or  bowl],  by  a  very  appropriate  allusion  to  its
cup-like  appearance,  its  circumference  being  as  round  as  a  wheel.  The  water  of  this  lake
continued  always  up  to  the.  edges  without  sinking  or  running  over.  That  it  supplied  the
stream  which  issued  from  the  cave  at  Panias  was  discovered  in  the  time  of  Philip  the  tetrarch,
when  some  chaff  which  had  been  cast  into  the  lake  was  brought  by  the  stream  out  of  the
cave.

Little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  such  an  experiment  as  this ;  and  the  conclusion  deduced
from  it  has  not  been  supported  by  later  observations.  Indeed,  in  the  first  place,  there  seems
to  have  been  some  difficulty  in  finding  the  lake  of  which  the  historian  speaks.  Seetzen,
Burckhardt,  and  Irby  and  Mangles  differ  on  this  question.  The  lake  which  the  latter  found
on  their  route  by  a  new  track,  from  Damascus  to  Panias,  is  the  most  important  in  itself,  and
agrees  best  in  its  situation  and  character  with  the  intimations  which  Josephus  offers.  They
describe  it  as  a  very  picturesque  lake,  apparently  perfectly  circular,  of  little  more  than  a  mile
in  circumference,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  sloping  hills,  richly  wooded.  The  singularity  of
this  lake  is,  that  it  has  no  apparent  supply  or  discharge,  and  its  waters  appeared  perfectly  still
though  clear  and  limpid.  A  great  many  wild-fowl  were  swimming  in  it.  Captain  Mangles
thinks,  we  doubt  not  justly,  that  this  is  the  Lake  of  Phiala;  but  observes,  that  the  alleged
communication  with  the  stream  of  Panias  is  impossible,  as  in  that  case  the  discharge  must
pass  under  a  rivulet  which  some  regard  as  the  true  source  of  the  Jordan.  We  readily  give  up
the  alleged  communication ;  but  we  do  not  know  that  it  is  rendered  impossible  by  the  cir-
cumstance stated.  As  the  object  of  the  chapter  is  to  describe  the  various  bodies  of  water  in
Palestine,  it  may  be  well  to  mention  those  which  Seetzen  and  Burckhardt  have  mistaken  for
the  Lake  Phiala.  The  former  places  it  two  leagues  to  the  east  of  Panias,  and  says  that  it  now
passes  by  the  name  of  Birket  el  Ram.     It  is  difficult  to  make  anything  of  this  :  for  while,

a  In  its  origin  this  town  was  probably  the  Laish  or  Leshem,  which  the  Danites  took  from  the  Canaanites  and  called  Dan.
Heathen  writers  called  it  Panias.  Philip,  the  youngest  son  of  Herod  the  Great,  having  enlarged  and  improved  it,  and  made  it
the  capital  of  his  tetrarchy,  gave  it  the  name  of  Caesarea,  to  which  his  own  name  was  added,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  more  im-
portant city  of  the  same  name  on  the  coast.  The  name  of  Panias  is  that  which  is  still  preserved  in  the  form  of  Banias.  The
visit  of  Jesus  Christ  to  this  place  is  recorded  in  Mark  viii.

Chap.  VI.]

LAKES  AND  RIVERS.

civ

on  the  one  hand,  the  distance  is  too  small  for  the  lake  of  Irby  and  Mangles,0  on  the  other,
the  lake  which  Burckhardt  describes  under  the  name  of  Birket  el  Ram  is  not  east  of  Panias,
nor  two  leagues  from  it,  but  upwards  of  twenty  miles  to  the  south-east,  on  the  road  to  Jacob's
Bridge.

Burckhardt  informs  us  that  what  the  Bedouins  call  the  Birket  el  Ram,  and  the  peasants
Birket  Abou  Ermeil,  is  a  reservoir  of  water,  a  few  hundred  paces  to  the  south  of  the  road,
at  the  foot  of  Tel  Abou  Nedy,  and  is  supplied  by  two  springs  which  are  never  dry.  One  of
these  is  in  the  bottom  of  a  deep  well  in  the  midst  of  the  Birket.  Just  by  this  reservoir  are
the  ruins  of  an  ancient  town,  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  circuit,  of  which  nothing  remains
but  large  heaps  of  stones.  Five  minutes  farther  is  another  Birket,  which  is  filled  by  rain-
water only.  The  neighbourhood  of  these  reservoirs  is  covered  by  a  forest  of  short  oak-trees.
The  rock  of  the  mountain  consists  of  sandstone  and  the  basalt  of  the  Haouran.  Beyond  these
Birkets  the  road  (towards  Jacob's  bridge)  begins  to  descend  gently ;  and  at  a  distance  of
about  four  miles  from  them,  just  by  the  road,  on  the  left,  is  a  large  pond,  called  Birket  Nefah
or  Tefah,  about  200  paces  in  circumference.  Some  of  Burckhardt's  companions  asserted  that
the  pond  contained  a  spring,  but  some  denied  it ;  and  from  this  he  inferred  that  the  water
never  dries  up  completely.  "  I  take  this,"  he  adds,  "  to  be  the  Lake  Phiala,  laid  down  in  the
maps  of  Syria,  as  there  is  no  other  lake  or  pond  in  the  neighbourhood."  He  was  evidently
not  aware  of  the  lake  which  Mangles  describes ;  and  he  would,  doubtless,  have  admitted  its
superior  claims  to  that  which  he  indicates.  Indeed,  none  of  these  Birkets  are  at  all  in  the
situation  indicated  by  Josephus,  being  about  twenty  miles  to  the  S.E.  and  S.S.E.  of  the  cave
at  Panias.

[Supposed  Source  of  the  Jordan.]

To  that  cave  we  now  return.  It  is  on  the  north-east  side  of  the  village  of  Panias.  The
spacious  cavern  under  which  the  river  rises  is  shown  in  our  engraving.  Over  the  source  is  a
perpendicular  rock,  in  which  several  niches  have  been  cut  to  receive  statues.     The  largest  of

a  By  a  singular  oversight,  Irby  and  Mangles  fancy  that  their  lake  is  that  described  by  Seetzen  and  Burckhardt  under  the  name
of  Birket  el  Ram,  observing, — *'  It  appears  that  this  lake  has  only  been  remarked  by  Burckhardt  and  Seetzen  ;  those  who  have
gone  from  Damascus  to  Panias  having  taken  the  route  by  Raehia  and  Hasbeya."  But  this  was  the  route  of  Seetzen  ;  and  Burck-
hardt notices  the  Birket-el-Ram  while  travelling  the  lower  route  from  Damascus  to  Jacob's  Bridge.  His  Birket  is  full  fifteen
miles  to  the  south  of  their  lake  ;  and  he  takes  no  notice  of  any  lake  or  Birket  when  travelling,  on  auother  occasion,  on  a  route
partly  parallel  to  theirs.

x  2

clvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

these  niches  is  above  a  spacious  cavern,  and  is  six  feet  broad  and  as  much  in  depth,  with  a
smaller  niche  at  the  bottom  of  it.  Immediately  above  it,  on  the  perpendicular  face  of  the
rock,  is  another  niche,  adorned  with  pilasters,  supporting  a  shell  ornament.  Here  are  two
other  niches  near  these,  and  twenty  paces  farther  two  more,  nearly  buried  in  the  ground,
at  the  foot  of  the  rock.  In  the  middle  niche  of  the  three  represented  in  the  engraving,  the
base  of  the  statue  which  it  once  contained  is  still  visible.  Each  of  these  niches  has  an  inscrip-
tion annexed  to  it ;  but  Burckhardt  could  only  decipher  part  of  one  of  them.  The  niche  in
the  cavern  probably  contained  a  statue  of  Pan,  from  whose  worship  the  place  acquired  the
name  of  Panias,  and  the  whole  mountain  that  of  Panium ;  and  in  the  other  niches  were  pro-
bably other  statues  with  suitable  dedicatory  inscriptions.  There  are  a  number  of  hewn  stones
about  the  source  of  the  copious  stream  which  here  rises,  and  which  may,  perhaps,  as  Colonel
Leake  conjectures,  have  belonged  to  the  temple  of  Augustus  built  here  by  Herod.  The  stream
flows  on  the  north  of  the  village  of  Panias,  where  there  is  a  well-built  bridge  and  some
remains  of  the  ancient  town.  This  stream  is  called  by  Burckhardt  "  the  river  of  Panias,"  as
he  doubted  its  claim  to  be  considered  the  source  of  the  Jordan.

This  traveller  and  some  others  would  rather  refer  the  source  of  this  celebrated  river  to  the
spring  which  rises  between  three  and  four  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Panias.  It  is  in  the
plain  near  a  hill  called  Tel-el-Kadi.  Here  there  are  two  springs  near  each  other,  one  smaller
than  the  other,  whose  waters  unite  immediately  below.  Both  sources  are  on  a  level  ground,
among  rocks  of  tufwacke.  The  larger  source  immediately  forms  a  river  twelve  or  fourteen
yards  across,  which  rushes  rapidly  over  a  stony  bed  into  a  lower  plain.  There  are  no  ruins  of
any  kind  near  the  springs ;  but  the  hill  over  them  seems  to  have  been  built  upon,  though
nothing  now  is  visible.

There  is  another  stream,  only  noticed  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  which,  as  being  more  remote,
has  a  better  claim,  geographically,  than  either  of  the  above,  to  be  regarded  as  the  source  of  the
Jordan.  It  appears  to  rise  from  the  southern  slopes  of  Mount  Hermon,  at  the  distance  of  about
twelve  miles  due  east  of  the  source  at  Panias.  It  was  first  noticed  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  when
they  descended  into  a  little  plain,  at  the  immediate  foot  of  that  mountain  (Jebel  Sheikh,  or
Mount  Hermon),  not  long  before  they  came  to  the  lake  Phiala.  The  stream  "  runs  along  the
western  side  of  the  plain  in  a  southerly  direction,  when  its  course  turns  more  to  the  westward,
and  rushing  in  a  very  picturesque  manner  through  a  deep  chasm,  covered  by  shrubs  of  various
descriptions,  it  joins  the  Jordan  at  Panias."  That  it  does  unite  with  the  other  two  streams  to
form  the  Jordan  is  unquestionable,  from  the  direction  of  its  course;  but  that  the  union  takes
place  at  Panias  seems  very  doubtful :  at  all  events,  it  were  to  be  wished  that  this  assertion  had
been  made  by  the  travellers  when  they  were  themselves  at  Panias,  rather  than  here,  where  it
looks  much  like  a  conjecture.

The  fourth  stream  which  requires  to  be  noticed  is  that  which  rises  at  Hasbeya,  and  which
has  been  slightly  noticed  in  a  preceding  page  (cviii).  On  geographical  principles  its  claim  to
that  distinction  would  not  be  disputed,  as  it  is  the  most  remote  and  considerable  of  the  streams
which  form  the  river.  It  is  twelve  miles  of  direct  distance  to  the  north-east  of  the  source  of
the  Panias  river ;  and  the  road  to  Panias  from  that  quarter  lies  through  the  valley  of  this
stream.  Its  source  is  a  large  spring  that  wells  out  from  the  west  side  of  Jebel  Sheikh,  near
the  village  of  Hasbeya,  from  which  it  takes  the  name  of  Moiet  Hasbeya,  or  river  of  Hasbeya.
There  is  a  bridge  over  it  at  the  village,  and  its  banks  are  covered  with  numerous  plantations  of
the  midberry-tree.  Its  ultimate  course  has  not  been  well  traced.  Buckingham,  who  kept  it
in  view  almost  from  its  source  to  a  point  about  three  miles  west  of  Panias,  says  that  it  is
there  as  broad,  as  deep,  and  as  rapid  as  the  Jordan  near  Jericho.  It  is  said  to  take  its  further
course  to  the  lake  Houle  without  joining  any  of  the  streams  which  have  been  described,  or
the  single  stream  formed  by  their  junction.  This,  if  true,  would  explain  Iioav  it  happens  that
this  stream  was  not  regarded  as  the  source  of  the  Jordan.  But  even  in  case  it  does  inde-
pendently pursue  its  course  to  the  lake,  it  might  still  be  regarded  as  the  source,  if  the  name
of  Jordan  be  confined  to  the  single  stream  which  issues  from  the  lake,  leaving  to  those  which
enter  it  their  separate  denominations.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clvii

Seetzen,  who  was  not  acquainted  with  the  stream  described  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  thus  states
the  relative  claims  of  the  other  three : — "  The  ancients  give  the  name  of  the  source  of  the
Jordan  to  the  spring  from  which  the  Panias  rises,  and  its  beauty  might  entitle  it  to  that  name.
But  in  fact  it  appears  that  the  preference  is  due  to  the  spring  of  the  river  Hasberia,  so  he  calls
it,  which  rises  half  a  league  to  the  west  of  Hasbeya,  and  which  forms  the  longest  branch  of
the  Jordan.  The  spring  of  Tel-el- Kadi,  which  the  natives  lake  for  the  source  of  the  Jordan,
is  that  which  least  merits  the  name."

After  this  statement,  and  before  proceeding  to  what  may  be  called  the  history  of  the
question,  it  is  well  to  see  the  connection  of  these  three  streams  as  far  as  it  has  been  ascer-
tained. Mr.  Buckingham's  route  from  Panias  was  favourable  to  comparative  observation,  as
it  enabled  him  to  take  them  all  in  succession,  on  nearly  the  same  parallel,  from  east  to  west.
His  information  is  thus  conveyed  : —

"  We  quitted  Panias,  and,  going  west  for  a  little  more  than  a  mile,  came  to  a  small  eleva-
tion in  the  plain,  with  a  flat  space  on  the  top,  like  an  artificial  mound.  It  is  called  Tel-el-
Kadi.  Here  the  springs  of  the  Jordan  (?)  rise,  rushing  out  of  five  or  six  places,  rendered
difficult  of  access  by  rushes,  trees,  &c.  These  springs  are  called  by  the  Arabs  Nubb-el-Etheari.
They  form,  even  here,  a  pretty  large  basin,  and  go,  in  a  single  stream,  to  the  southward,
passing  by  a  place  where  there  is  a  white  tomb  called  Seedy  Yooda  Ibn  Yacoob,  and  keeping
near  the  foot  of  the  eastern  range  of  hills.  This  tomb  is,  perhaps,  a  mile  to  the  south  of  the
springs  here  described ;  and  two  miles  to  the  southward  of  that,  the  water  of  Panias,  which
keeps  always  east  of  the  Jordan  [the  stream  from  Tel-el-Kadi]  thus  far,  here  joins  it,  and
they  go  together  into  the  Bahr-el-Houle,  which  is  said  to  be  six  hours,  though  it  looks  not
more  than  ten  miles  from  hence.

"  We  went  up  in  a  north-west  direction  from  hence,  and  in  an  hour  crossed  the  river
Hheuzbhani a  over  a  bridge  of  three  arches,  the  stream  being  here  both  wide  and  deep,  with
steep  rocky  banks  on  each  side.  The  river  goes  from  hence  southerly  into  a  small  lake  called
Birket  Jehouly,  about  five  miles  to  the  south  of  this  ;  and,  from  thence  it  continues  to  the  Bahr
el  Houley, — a  much  larger  lake, — not  mixing  its  waters  with  those  of  the  Jordan  till  then."

This  passage  is  conclusive  for  the  fact  that  the  Hasbeya  river  is  a  large  and  important
stream  at  a  point  between  three  and  four  miles  to  the  north-west  of  Banias,  and  between  two
and  three  from  Tel-el-Kadi.  The  concluding  passage,  which  we  have  marked  by  italics,  is,
in  terms,  no  less  conclusive  for  the  point  that  this  stream  does  not  join,  or,  rather,  does  not
receive,  the  others  till  it  reaches  the  lake  Houle.  It  is  on  this  authority  that  the  course  of  the
Hasbeya  has  been  represented  in  our  own  and  some  other  maps  of  recent  date ;  but  rather
because  it  is  the  only  positive  information  which  has  been  offered  on  the  subject  than  that  it
is  entitled  to  implicit  reliance.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  traveller  does  not  state  more
distinctly  the  source  of  his  information.  He  did  not  himself  journey  to  the  south  of  the
bridge ;  and  he  does  not  say  distinctly  that  his  statement  is  founded  on  a  survey  from  a
commanding  position.  Such  a  survey  over  all  the  country  to  the  lake  Houle  may,  from  more
than  one  point,  be  obtained ;  and  when  he  acquaints  us  that  the  lake  looked  not  more  than
ten  miles  distant  from  Tel-el-Kadi,  we  are  left  to  infer  that  his  information  concerning  the
course  of  the  Hasbeya  was  so  obtained.  As  it  is,  we  consider  this  question  remains  to  be
settled  positively.

In  favour  of  the  conclusion  that  this  river  does  reach  the  lake  Houle  alone,  is  the  fact  that
some  of  the  old  Biblical  geographers  do  make  a  tolerably  broad  river  enter  the  lake  Houle  to
the  west  of  the  Jordan ;  but,  then,  their  doing  so  is  founded  on  what  Reland  seems  to  prove
an  erroneous  interpretation  of  Josephus,  and,  accordingly,  he  rejects  this  stream  from  his
map.  D'Anville,  however,  restored  it,  and  carried  its  source  far  off  to  the  hills  in  the  north-
west ;  and  in  this  shape  it  has  been  preserved,  even  to  our  own  time.  Unless  we  suppose
that  this  was  founded  on  some  information  that  a  river  actually  did  enter  the  Houle  at  this
point,  not  much  of  confirmation  for  the  independence  of  the  Hasbeya  is  obtainable  from  this
circumstance.

a  This  is  certainly  the  same  that  Seetzen  calls  Hasberia,  and  Burckhardt  Hasbeya.

clviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chai>.  VI.

Against  it  is  the  fact,  that  no  travellers  who  have  been  at  the  head  of  the  lake  Houle  speak
of  any  considerable  stream,  but  the  single  one  of  the  Jordan,  as  entering  there.  Pococke,
Richardson,  and  Irby  and  Mangles,  say  not  a  word  of  any  such  stream.  The  information
which  the  latter  offer  is  most  to  the  purpose,  although  somewhat  negative.  Departing  from
Panias,  and  "  having  been  directed  to  follow  the  course  of  the  Jordan,  we  endeavoured  to
perform  that  route.  The  beautiful  wooded  country  does  not  continue  more  than  two  miles
from  Panias,  when  we  entered  into  open,  but  rich  plains.  We  found  the  ground  very  marshy;
and,  after  winding  about  to  find  fords  among  the  innumerable  streams  that  water  the  plains,
we  crossed  the  Jordan  itself.  But  the  country  on  the  other  side  was  as  full  of  marshes  and
ravines  as  that  we  had  left,  and  in  several  places  we  nearly  lost  our  horses.  At  length  we
succeeded  in  finding  the  road  that  leads  to  Safet,  which  runs  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  on  the
other  side  of  the  plain."

They  travelled  in  early  spring — the  watery  season ;  and  this  extract  will  serve  to  remind  the
reader  of  the  description  of  this  plain  which  we  gave  in  the  preceding  chapter.  They  crossed
the  Jordan  between  two  and  three  miles  above  the  lake;  and,  after  that,  they  make  no  mention
of  crossing  any  other  river,  although,  unless  the  Hasbeya  had  previously  joined  the  Jordan,  its
stream  must  have  been  crossed  by  them  after  they  had  passed  that  river  ;  and  the  passage,  in
the  season  of  overflow,  of  a  river  which,  ten  miles  above  the  lake,  appears  as  considerable
as  the  Jordan  near  Jericho,  could  hardly  fail  to  have  been  noticed.  Yet  the  only  answer  to
this  which  occurs  to  us  is,  that,  at  a  time  of  the  year  when  so  many  powerful  torrents,  which
they  found  difficult  to  ford,  rushed  towards  the  lake,  the  river  might  have  been  passed
without  being  distinguished  from  them  ;  and  this  is  rendered  the  more  possible  by  their  not
expecting  to  find  such  a  river,  as  they  appear  to  have  entertained  the  opinion  that  the  Hasbeya
was  one  of  the  streams  that  joined  the  Jordan  before  entering  the  lake  Houle.

On  the  other  hand,  Buckingham's  visit  was  at  a  more  advanced  season  of  the  year,  when
the  marshiness  of  the  country  and  the  strength  of  the  winter-torrents  must  have  subsided,
and  many  of  the  latter  had  dried  up ;  and  when,  therefore,  it  was  more  easy  to  distinguish
the  course  of  such  a  river.  So,  upon  the  whole,  there  seems  a  doubt  in  the  matter  which  it
must  be  left  for  future  observations  to  solve.

After  this  statement  as  to  the  physical  state  of  the  question,  the  reader  will  be  the  better
able  to  apprehend  the  questions  connected  with  this  matter  which  have  been  elaborately  dis-
cussed by  the  various  writers  on  Biblical  geography.

Although  Josephus  speaks  of  the  stream  from  Panias  as  the  visible  source  of  the  Jordan,
he  yet  mentions  a  Little  Jordan  and  a  Great  Jordan.  In  one  place  he  tells  us  that  the  marshes
of  the  lake  Samochonitis  (Houle)  extend  as  far  as  the  place  Daphne,  which,  in  other  respects,
is  a  delicious  place,  and  has  fountains,  which  supply  water  to  what  is  called  little  Jordan,
under  the  temple  of  the  golden  calf,  whence  it  is  sent  into  the  greater  Jordan*  The  mean-
ing of  this  was  considered  to  be  helped  out  by  the  statement  of  Jerome,b  who  says  that  the
Jordan  has  its  roots  in  Lebanon,  and  springs  from  two  fountains,  the  one  called  Jor  and  the
other  Dan,  and  that  the  names  join  in  the  confluent  stream. (')

This  statement  has  been  repeated  by  various  ancient  and  modern  writers.  Some  of  them
were  actual  travellers ;  but  whether  they  speak  after  Jerome,  or  on  their  own  information,  it
is  not  possible  to  find.  The  only  one  who  professes  to  acquaint  us  with  the  distance  of  the
two  fountains  is  Philostorgius,c  a  writer  of  the  fifth  century,  who  makes  it  160  stades,  a  dis-
tance much  greater  even  than  that  between  Panias  and  the  sources  of  the  Hasbeya,  but
agreeing,  even  by  remote  approximation,  only  with  these  two,  and  showing  that  the  distance
was,  at  any  rate,  deemed  to  be  greater  than  the  mile  which  separates  the  sources  of  the  streams
of  Panias  and  Tel-el- Kadi.

On  this  information  (excepting  that  as  to  distance)  the  old  maps  of  Ziegler,  Solinus,
Adrichomius,  Quaresmius,  Fuller,  and  others,  deduced  one  stream  from  some  arbitrary  point,
and  called  it  Jor,  and  another  from  the  source  at  Panias,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of
Dan.     They  made  the  distances,  generally,  too  small  for  that  between  the  sources  of  Panias

"  De  Bell.  1.  iv.  c.  1.  t  See  Matt.  xvi.  c  Cited  by  Salinasius  in  a  note  on  Solinus,  cnj).  xxxviii.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clix

and  Hasbeya,  and  too  great  for  that  between  Panias  and  Tel-el-Kadi.a  When  these  streams
are  made  to  unite,  the  name  Jordan  is  given  to  the  enlarged  river  formed  by  their  confluence.
In  all  cases  they  consider  that  the  "  Little  Jordan  "  was  that  not  coming  from  Panias.

Lightfoot  objected  to  this  state  of  the  question,  with  which  he  does  not,  however,  indicate
much  acquaintance ;  as  he  assumes  that  the  theory  of  two  originating  streams  arose  from  Jose-
phus's  mention  of  a  great  Jordan  and  a  little  Jordan,  and  are  intended  to  represent  them.  He
proves,  at  large,  that  both  Josephus  and  the  Talmudists  place  the  spring  of  the  Jordan  at
Panias,  and  name  no  other ;  and  that  this  Panias  was  at  the  springs  of  the  "lesser  Jordan,"
or,  in  other  words,  that,  while  Josephus  distinctly  traces  the  Jordan  to  the  source  at  Panias,
he  as  distinctly  assigns  that,  and  no  other,  as  the  source  of  the  "  lesser  Jordan,"  without
giving  to  the  great  Jordan  any  separate  source.  Thus,  he  alleges  there  is  no  authority  in
Josephus  for  two  distinct  sources  of  the  Jordan,  and  seems  unacquainted  with  the  authority
on  which  they  were  exhibited.  He  might  well,  therefore,  express  his  amazement  that  the
fountain  of  the  lesser  Jordan  should  be  known,  and  that  of  the  supposed  greater  unknown.
He,  therefore,  concludes, — "  We  think,  therefore,  that  Jordan  is  called  the  Greater  and  the
Less,  not  upon  account  of  two  fountains,  different  and  distinct  from  one  another,  but  upon
account  of  the  distinct  greatness  of  the  same  river.  Jordan,  rising  out  of  Panias,  was  called
Little  until  it  flowed  into  the  lake  Samochonitis ;  but  afterwards  coming  out  of  that  lake,
when  it  had  obtained  a  great  increase  from  that  lake,  it  was  thenceforth  called  Jordan  the
Greater.  Samochonitis  received  Little  Jordan  and  sent  forth  the  Great  For  since  both  that
lake  and  the  country  adjacent  was  very  fenny,  the  lake  was  not  so  much  increased  by  Jordan
flowing  into  it,  as  it  increased  Jordan  flowing  out  of  it."  Therefore  he  represents  the  Jordan
as  a  single  stream,  issuing  from  Panias,  and  called  the  Little  Jordan  from  its  source  to  the
lake,  and  not,  till  it  leaves  the  lake,  acquiring  the  name  of  the  Great  Jordan.  This  view  of  the
question  received  more  authority  and  importance  from  its  subsequent  adoption  by  Reland.

The  greatly  enlarged  information  which  we  now  possess  enables  us  to  see  a  little  more
clearly  into  the  matter  than  these  old  theoretical  geographers.

It  seems  to  be  proved  that  Josephus  means  the  river  of  Panias  by  the  Little  Jordan,  and
that  he  describes  it  as  running  into  another  river  called  the  Great  Jordan,  not  as  forming  the
Great  Jordan  by  its  junction  with  another  river ;  and,  if  the  Great  Jordan  were  not  formed
till  the  river  leaves  the  lake,  he  would  surely  have  described  the  Little  Jordan  as  running  into
the  lake,  rather  than  as  flowing  into  the  Great  Jordan.b  His  account,  therefore,  may  be  taken
to  concur  in  assigning  two  distinct  sources  to  the  Jordan  ;  and  seeing  that  one  of  these  sources
is  that  which  issues  from  the  cave  at  Panias,  the  other  only  remains  to  be  sought.

If  the  river  of  Hasbeya  does  not  pursue  its  course  alone  to  the  lake,  but  receives  the  stream
of  Panias  in  its  way,  the  fact  could  not  be  unknown  to  Josephus,  and  we  might  deem  this  to
be  the  Great  Jordan  into  which  the  lesser  runs.  But  if  the  claim  of  this  river  be  regarded  as
doubtful,  for  the  reasons  which  we  have  stated,  then  the  river  noticed  by  Irby  and  Mangles
would  seem  to  take  the  next  place ;  and  the  distance  given  by  Philostorgius  would  appear  to
point  to  one  of  these  rather  than  to  any  nearer  source ;  and  his  statement  seems  the  more
entitled  to  attention,  as  he  was  nearer  in  time  to  Jerome  than  any  other  writer  who  mentions
the  subject.  We  have,  however,  satisfied  ourselves  that  later  travellers,  commencing  two  or
three  centuries  after  Philostorgius,  considered  the  Jor  and  Dan  as  represented  by  the  proxi-
mate streams  of  Panias  and  Tel-el-Kadi.  It  is  true  they  do  not  name  the  latter,  or  state  the
exact  distance  ;  but  their  indications  of  proximity  are  too  distinct  to  be  mistaken.0  It  might
be  well,  however,  to  recollect  that  the  Holy  Land  had,  in  the  interval,  fallen  into  the  hands  of

"  Fuller  is  an  exception.  He  makes  the  distance  just  enough  for  that  between  the  sources  of  Panias  and  Hasbeya  ;  and  instead
of  calling  the  first  Dan  and  the  other  Jor,  as  usual,  reverses  this  order.  In  all  the  maps  the  second  source  is  made  to  be  east  of
that  at  Panias.

b  The  following  are  the  passages  of  Josephus  which  bear  more  or  less  on  the  question : — '  Antiq.'  lib.  v.  cap.  2 ;  viii.  8 ;  xv.  13 ;
xviii.  3  ;  '  Do  Bello,'  lib.  i.  cap.  16;  iii.  15  and  35;  iv.  1.

c  Compare  Willibald,  (a.d.  765)  '  Hodceporicon,  et  Vita,'  in  Canasius,  torn.  ii.  Ill,  119  ;  Arculphus  in  Adamn.  Scotus,  '  de
Locis  Sancta,'  1.  ii.  c.  16;  Brocard  (a.d.  1230)  in  Canasius,  iv.  13;  Baldensel  (a.d.  1336)  in  idem,  352.  Willibald,  the  earliest
of  these,  is  very  clear  on  this  point.

ck  PHYSICAL  HTSTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

the  Arabians,  in  consequence  of  which  the  actual  knowledge  of  the  country  had  declined
among  European  Christians,  pilgrimages  having  become  more  rare,  and  travelling  difficult
and  dangerous.  It  is  easy,  therefore,  to  conceive  that  the  few  who  penetrated  so  far  as  Panias
easily  satisfied  themselves  that  the  two  proximate  streams  were  the  two  sources  of  the  Jordan,
the  Jor  and  the  Dan,  of  which  they  had  read.  It  was  so  natural  for  them  to  conclude  so,  that
it  is  likely  they  did  it ;  and,  therefore,  their  conclusions  are  no  evidence  of  more  ancient
opinions  on  the  subject.

Burckhardt  informs  us  that  the  stream  from  Tel-el-Kadi  still  bears  the  name  of  Dan,  or  (as
he  spells  it)  Dhan ;  and  a  little  farther  on,  he  adds,  "  I  was  told  that  the  ancient  name  of  the
river  of  Banias  was  Jor  (Djour),  which  added  to  the  name  of  Dhan  made  Jourdan:  the  more
correct  etymology  is  probably  Or  Dan.  Lower  down,  between  the  Houle  and  the  lake  of
Tabaria,  it  is  called  Orden  by  the  inhabitants  :  to  the  southward  of  the  lake  of  Tabaria  it
bears  the  name  of  Sherya,  till  it  falls  into  the  Dead  Sea."

The  question  to  which  we  have  given  this  rather  large  portion  of  our  attention  is  not  of
much  geographical  importance  :  but  its  critical  and  historical  interest  is  considerable ;  and
the  reader  is  so  liable  to  be  perplexed  by  the  remarkable  differences  which  maps  and  books
exhibit,  that  this  attempt  to  elucidate  the  whole  question  will,  perhaps,  be  regarded  as  a  useful
service.  It  has  also  been  our  desire  to  make  travellers  acquainted  with  the  points  on  which
information  is  still  wanted.0

The  description  given  in  the  last  chapter,  and  the  incidental  notices  in  the  preceding  para-
graphs will  give  some  notion  of  the  enclosed  land — the  head  of  the  Jordan  valley — which  is  so
abundantly  watered  by  the  perennial  streams  which  we  have  described,  and  by  the  innumerable
torrents  which  rush  down  in  every  direction  from  the  surrounding  hills  from  the  middle  of
autumn  to  the  end  of  spring.  From  these  accounts  we  may  understand  the  glowing  terms  in
which  it  was  described  by  the  Danites  from  the  thirsty  south : — "  We  have  seen  the  land,  and
behold  it  is  very  good — a  large  land — a  place  where  there  is  no  want  of  anything  that  is  in  the
earth."b

Before  quitting  it  entirely,  it  may  be  well  to  state  the  leading  geographical  incidents  of  the
northern  portion  of  the  valley  which  encloses  the  upper  portion  of  the  Jordan  and  two  of  its
lakes.

This  valley,  commencing  at  the  roots  of  Anti-Libanus — or  rather  of  that  portion  of  it  which
bears  the  name  of  Jebel-es-Sheikh — takes  the  name  of  Wady  Sezeban,  or  Steziban,  and
Buckingham  says  that  it  continues  all  the  way  to  be  so  called,0  even  to  the  Dead  Sea,  although
the  part  south  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias  is  more  frequently  called  El  Ghor.  He  further  states,
— "  The  name  of  Jebel-el-Wast,  which  is  applied  to  the  Anti-Libanus  of  the  ancients,  extends
even  to  the  southward  of  the  Jebel-es-Sheikh  as  far  as  Panias.  From  thence,  southerly,  to
the  eastern  shore  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias  is  an  even  range  of  hills,  called  Jebel  Jowalan,
which,  with  the  portion  of  Jebel-el-Wast  from  Hibl  thus  far,  forms  the  eastern  boundary  of
Wady  Stezeban.  The  western  boundary,  which  is  also  a  range  of  hills  of  no  considerable
height  or  marked  form,  is  called  Jebel  Jowaleen.  The  valley  itself  extends,  perhaps,  thirty
miles  from  its  commencement  at  Hibl  to  its  interruption  at  the  north  end  of  the  Lake  of
Tiberias,  where  the  water  occupies  all  the  breadth  of  the  plain.  To  the  northward  of  the
Bahr-el-Houle  it  varies  in  breadth  from  five  to  ten  miles,  and  to  the  southward  of  Panias  it
seems  well  cultivated  throughout. "d

a  Canasius,  '  Thesaurus  Monumentorum  Ecclesiasticorum  et  Historicorum,'  tom.ii.  iv.,  as  before  cited;  Adrichomius,  *  Theat,
T.  S.'  122  ;  Quaresmius,  torn.  ii.  lib.  vi.  cap.  4  ;  '  Terrae  Sancta;  Descriptio,'  authore  Jacobo  Zieglero,  p.  21 ;  '  Altera  Descriptio,'
authore  Wolffgango  Weissenburgio,  p.  128 ;  C.  Julii  Solini  '  Polyhistor,'  cap.  xlviii. ;  Lightfoot's  '  Chorographical  Century,'
chap,  lxvii. ;  Reland,  '  Palaestina,'  cap.  xliii.;  Seetzeu,  16,  &c. ;  Burckhardt,  39-43,  314  ;  Irby  and  Mangles,  283-290  ;  Bucking-
ham's '  Arab  Tribes,'  401-406.  It  may  prevent  misapprehension  if  we  state,  that  in  this  and  other  notes  in  which  reference  is
made  to  Latin  authorities,  the  names  of  the  authors  have  always,  unless  through  inadvertence,  been  intentionally  reduced  to  the
nominative.  It  has  even  been  considered  best  to  give  the  national  name  of  the  author,  when  it  could  be  ascertained,  freed  alto-
gether from  its  Latin  disguises.

b  Judges,  xviii.  9,  10.

c  This  is  not  at  variance  with  the  statement  already  cited  from  Burckhardt :  for  what  he  gives  are  the  names  of  the  subdivisions
of  the  river;  whereas  this  applies  to  the  valley  through  which  the  river  flows.

d  Not  "  throughout,"  but  to  a  very  considerable  extent.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxi

It  should  be  observed  that  the  distance  from  the  head  of  the  valley  to  the  head  of  the  Lake
Houle  varies  considerably  with  the  time  of  the  year,  as  the  dimensions  of  the  lake  are  greatly
contracted  during  summer.  And  although  the  spring  of  Panias  rises  from  among  the  moun-
tains which  form  the  head  of  the  valley,  it  is  not  at  the  head  of  the  valley  from  which  Buck-
ingham computes.  The  proper  head  of  the  valley  is  about  five  miles  to  the  north  of  Panias.
The  distance  from  the  head  of  the  valley  to  the  lake  is  about  fifteen  miles ;  but  only  ten  from
Banias.

The  B  ahr-el-Houle  a  is  called,  in  the  Old  Testament,  "  the  waters  of  Merom,"  b  and  is
celebrated  chiefly  from  the  defeat  of  the  confederate  kings  of  Canaan  by  Joshua  on  its  borders.
It  is  not  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament.  Josephus  calls  it  the  Lake  Samochonitis,  which
appears  to  be  a  Greek  rendering  of  the  native  name  Samaco,  which  it  bears  in  the  Jerusalem
Talmud.  But  in  the  same  Talmud  it  is  sometimes  called  "  the  Sea  of  Cobebo,"  while  the
Babylonian  Talmud  names  it  "  the  Sibbechean  Sea."

The  dimensions  of  this  lake  are  variously  stated,  probably  in  consequence  of  its  different
appearance  at  different  times  of  the  year.  In  the  season  of  flood  it  seems  almost  to  rival  the
Lake  of  Tiberias  in  extent ;  while,  by  the  latter  end  of  summer,  it  has  shrunk  to  about  half
its  former  dimensions.  Josephus  seems  to  make  it  seven  miles  long  by  half  that  breadth :  (2)
Pococke  seems  to  allow  this  length,  but  says  it  cannot  be  more  than  two  miles  broad,  except
at  the  northern  extremity :  Mariti  makes  it  six  (Italian  ?)  miles  long  by  four  broad :  Roger
reduces  it  to  one  league  long  by  a  less  breadth;  while  the  latest  observer,  Dr.  Robinson,
describes  it  as  eight  or  ten  miles  long  by  four  or  five  miles  broad,  but  adds,  that  the  northern
half  is  a  mere  marsh  covered  with  tall  reeds  or  flags.  This  observation  was,  it  appears,  made
in  June.  At  a  more  advanced  season  of  the  year,  this  mere  marsh,  to  which  the  northern
part  of  the  lake  is  reduced  in  June,  becomes  quite  dry,  bringing  down  the  dimensions  to
about  the  lowest  estimate.  On  the  other  hand,  the  lake  is  not  at  the  highest  in  June,  but
is  then  on  the  decline.  Earlier  in  the  year,  the  marshy  northern  portion  is  deep  water  and
of  greater  extent.  But  by  the  time  the  northern  half  is  dried  up,  the  southern  portion  itself
becomes  little  more  than  a  marsh.  The  contraction  is  more  in  length  than  in  breadth  ;  and
by  casting  up  the  above  estimates,  it  will  appear  that  Josephus  gave  nearly  the  average
dimensions.

The  lake  does  not  occupy  the  centre  of  the  valley,  It  is  much  nearer  to  the  eastern  than
to  the  western  side.  There  is  a  space  of  about  five  miles  between  its  border  and  the  western
hills ;  but  the  distance  from  its  opposite  border  to  the  eastern  hills  is  much  less  considerable.

In  the  marshes  which  surround  this  lake,  or  rather  in  the  marshy  parts  of  the  lake,  the
reeds  with  which  the  Orientals  write  grow  abundantly,  as  well  as  other  reeds  with  which
arrows  and  lances  are  made.  The  outer  border  is  surrounded  by  shrubs  and  trees— many  of
them  fruit-trees — which  in  the  distance  present  the  aspect  of  a  forest.  This  is  a  resort  of
various  wild  animals  when  driven  from  the  mountains  by  the  snows  of  winter,  or  from  the
plains  by  the  heat  and  drought  of  summer;  but  few  of  them  make  it  their  constant  abode.
Water-fowl  are  also  most  abundant  about  the  lake,  particularly  on  the  marshes  to  the  north.

The  banks  of  the  lake  are  very  low ;  but  the  lake  itself  is  on  a  considerably  higher  level
than  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.  It  is  inhabited  only  on  the  eastern  borders ;  and  even  there,  if
we  rightly  understand  Burckhardt,  there  are  only  two  villages,  called  Es-Seira  and  El-Deir.
The  south-west  shore  bears  the  name  of  Melaba,  from  the  ground  being  covered  with  a  saline
crust.  The  lake  abounds  in  fish,  and  its  fisheries  were,  in  the  time  of  the  last-named  traveller,
rented  of  the  Mutsellim  of  Szaffud  by  some  fishermen  of  that  town.

Pococke  informs  us  that  "  the  waters  are  muddy,  and  esteemed  unwholesome,  having
something  of  the  nature  of  the  water  of  a  morass.  This  is  partly  caused  by  their  stopping
the  brooks  on  the  west  side,  in  order  to  water  the  country,  so  that  the  water  passes  through
the  earth  into  this  lake  :  it  is  also,  in  some  measure,  owing  to  the  muddiness  of  its  bed.  After
the  snows  are  melted  and  the  water  fallen,  it  is  only  a  marsh,  through  which  the  river  Jordan

a  We  take  this  as  the  most  received  orthography.     Buckingham  spells  it  Houly ;  Dr.  Robinson  Hiileh.

b  Joshua  xi.  5.

VOL.   I.

clxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

runs.  The  waters  by  passing  the  rocky  bed  towards  the  sea  of  Tiberias,  settle,  purify,  and
become  fit  for  use."a

The  distance  between  the  Lakes  Houle  and  Tabaria  is  estimated  by  Pococke  at  ten  miles,
which  agrees  nearly  enough  with  most  other  statements.  In  consequence  of  the  higher  level
of  the  Lake  Houle,  and  the  narrow  and  rocky  character  of  its  channel,  the  Jordan  flows  down
to  the  Lake  of  Tabaria  with  considerable  rapidity  and  noise  ;  but  in  the  two  first  and  two  last
miles,  its  course  is  more  quiet  than  in  the  intermediate  distance.  In  this  part  of  its  course  the
stream  is  almost  hid  by  the  shady  trees  which  grow  on  each  side  and  make  the  prospect  most
delightful.     The  trees  are  chiefly  of  the  plane  family.

Pococke  travelled  along  the  western  border  of  the  river  and  the  lakes,  from  the  town  of
Tabaria  to  the  head  of  the  Lake  Houle.  Dr.  Richardson  followed  part  of  the  same  track,  but
turned  off  to  the  N.N.W.  before  he  reached  the  southern  extremity  of  that  lake.  The  follow-
ing, therefore,  applies  to  most  of  that  part  of  the  river  which  lies  between  the  two  lakes.
"  The  river  is  bounded  by  a  chain  of  mountains  [hills]  on  each  side.  On  the  east  they  rise
up  almost  precipitously  from  the  bed  of  the  river.  On  the  west  there  is  a  fine  fertile  vale,
averaging  about  half  or  three-quarters  of  a  mile  broad,  between  the  river  and  the  mountain.
The  mountains  on  the  east  are  bolder,  and  continue  with  little  interruption  all  the  way.  On
the  west  side,  along  which  we  travelled,  the  interruptions  are  frequent,  and  charming  defiles,
irrigated  by  small  streams  of  water,  pass  off."  After  some  time  they  came  to  a  point  where
"  the  river  passed  through  a  small  lake,  which  at  first  sight  appeared  to  us  to  be  a  continuation
of  the  Lake  Gennesareth ;  but  when  we  obtained  a  view  of  it  from  higher  ground,  we  were
satisfied  that  it  was  not."  From  the  description,  this  lake  seems  to  have  been  about  midway
between  Jacob's  Bridge  and  the  Bahr-el-Houle.  We  have  felt  much  difficulty  about  this
lake.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Dr.  Richardson  saw  it :  but  it  is  not  mentioned  by  any
other  travellers,  not  even  by  those  who  have  been  in  situations  to  overlook  the  whole  course  of
the  river  between  the  Lakes  of  Houle  and  Tabaria;  and  Dr.  Robinson,  who  in  his  journey
particularly  watched  the  statements  of  Richardson,  distinctly  affirms  that  between  the  two
lakes  "  the  Jordan  flows  in  a  narrow  valley,  and  forms  no  intervening  lake"  This,  we  doubt
not,  is  intentionally  levelled  at  Dr.  Richardson's  statement.  The  only  explanation  which  can
remove  this  difficulty  is  to  suppose  that  the  expanse  of  water  which  this  traveller  tells  us  he
saw,  was  merely  a  temporary  exhibition  in  the  season  of  overflow,  at  which  time  his  visit  took
place,  and  which  disappears  when  the  waters  fall.  But  in  the  present  state  of  the  question  it
seems  best  to  wait  for  further  information  than  to  form  any  decided  opinion.

Leaving  this  question,  it  only  remains  to  state  that  the  Jordan  ultimately  advances  to  the
Lake  of  Gennesareth  in  a  widened  but  still  rapid  stream  among  the  nebbek-trees  and  thick
groves  of  oleanders  to  which  it  gives  life.a

The  Lake  of  Tiberias  is,  from  its  associations,  the  most  interesting  body  of  water  in  the
Holy  Land — far  more  so  than  the  Dead  Sea,  although  the  latter  is  considerably  larger,  and  is,
physically,  much  more  remarkable.  Neither  of  these  lakes  is  mentioned  or  alluded  to  in  the
Old  Testament  as  often  as  might  be  expected.  In  the  New  Testament  the  Dead  Sea  is  not
once  mentioned ;  but  the  name  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias  very  often  occurs,  as  the  town  of
Capernaum,  on  its  border,  was  the  usual  residence  of  Christ,  and  the  lake  or  its  shores  the
scene  of  some  of  the  most  remarkable  transactions  of  his  life.

It  was  usual  for  the  Jews  to  call  every  natural  expanse  of  water  a  sea,  which  name  was  even
applied,  partly  by  metaphor,  doubtless,  to  the  brazen  reservoir — "  the  brazen  sea" — which
stood  in  the  court  of  the  Temple.  Accordingly,  the  evangelists  Matthew,  Mark,  and  John,
being  native  Jews,  invariably  call  the  Lake  of  Tiberias  a  "  sea ;"  but  Luke,  who  was  a  native
of  Asia  Minor,  and  whose  geographical  terms  are  always  more  distinctive,  calls  it  generally
a  "lake."0     The  present  inhabitants,  like  those  of  ancient  times,  still  call  their  water  a  sea,

a  Joseph,  de  Bello,  lib.  iv.  cap.  1 ;  Pococke,  ii.  71;  Roger,  68;  Mariti,  ii.  325 ;  Burckhardt,  316;  Irby  and  Mangles,  290 ;
Buckingham,  A.  T.  309;  Richardson,  450,  451 ;  Dr.  Robinson,  in  '  Am.  Bib.  Repos.'  No.  34,  p.  430.

b  Pococke,  72;  Burckhardt,  514;  Richardson,  ii.  445,  446  ;  Dr.  Robinson,  430  ;  Lindsay,  ii.  91.

c  Fuller  adjusts  the  matter  in  his  own  peculiar  way  : — "  Indeed,  among  lakes,  it  may  be  accounted  for  a  sea,  such  the  greatness  ;
among  seas  reported  for  a  lake,  such  the  sweetness  and  freshness  of  the  wuter  therein."

Chap.  VI.]

LAKES  AND  RIVERS.

clxiii

and  reckon  it  and  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  south  of  them  to  be  the  two  largest  known,  except  the
great  ocean.

It  is  mentioned  by  many  names.     The  most  ancient  seems  to  have  been  that  of  "  Sea  of
Cinnereth,"  a  or,  in  the  plural  form,  Cinneroth.  b     The  Targumists,  who  sometimes  accommo-

[Lake  and  Town  of  Tiberias.]

dated  the  old  names  to  those  which  existed  in  their  time,  use  "  the  Sea  of  Genesar;"  some-
times "of  Genosor,"  or  "  of  Ginosar."  Josephus  uses  "Gennesar."0  The  Talmudists
employ  the  same  names,  but  more  usually  call  it  "  the  Sea  of  Tabaria,"  J  which  is  exactly  the
name  it  now  bears,  being  the  Oriental  form  of  Tiberias.  The  evangelists  employ  both  the
principal  names,  "  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth,"  e  "  the  Sea  of  Tiberias,"  f  and,  sometimes,  "  the
Sea  of  Galilee,"  8  from  the  bordering  province,  on  the  west,  to  which  the  lake  was  considered
to  belong.

There  was  a  city  and  district  of  the  name  of  Cinnereth  h  on  the  borders  of  the  lake  from
which  it  appears  to  have  derived  its  name.1  The  name  Cinnereth  might  easily  pass  into
Gennesareth,  which  name,  as  applied  to  the  lake,  is  expressly  declared  by  Josephus  to  have
been  derived  from  an  adjacent  district,  which  district  appears  to  have  bordered  on,  if  it  did
not  include,  Tiberias.  The  Jewish  writers  tell  us  that  the  district  itself  took  this  name  from
the  delightful  gardens  and  paradises  which  were  there.  Some  make  them  royal  gardens,
deducing  the  name  from  CTlD  *3J,  geni  sarim :  "  so  that,"  says  Lightfoot,  "  by  the  Jews'
etymology,  the  name  was  taken  from  some  royal  gardens  that  lay  upon  it ;  which  may  very
well  be,  since  Herod's  palace  was  at  Tiberias,  and  as  from  the  royalty  of  that  city  the  sea  was

a  Num.  xxxiv.  11;  Josh,  xiii.27;  JV1J3-  b  Josh.  xi.  2;  xii.  3;  jyp^.

e  Luke,  v.  1.  The  et  or  eth,  if  not  borrowed  from  the  old  name,  may  be  regarded  as  a  Greek  termination  for  euphony.  So
in  Hazsaeth,  of  which  the  proper  Hebrew  name  is  Nazar.

{  John,  xxi.  1.  S  John,  vi.  1.  h  Josh.  xix.  35.

'  "Others  conceive  that  it  is  so  named  from  Kinnor,  a  harp  in  Hebrew,  which  it  is  said  in  shape  to  resemble  :  sure  the  high
winds  sometimes  make  but  bad  musick  (to  the  ears  of  mariners)  when  playing  thereupon."— Fuller.

y2

clxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

called  '  the  Sea  of  Tiberias ;'  so,  possibly,  from  the  orchards  and  gardens  upon  it,  it  might  be
called  '  Genesar,'  or  the  place  of  princely  gardens."

The  dimensions  of  this  lake  have  been  differently  stated  by  different  authorities ;  a  and  this
is  much  more  remarkable  in  the  present  case  than  in  that  of  the  Lake  Houle,  as  the  Lake  of
Tiberias  has  its  boundaries  very  distinctly  marked  by  the  mountains  by  which  it  is  enclosed.
These  differences  doubtless  proceed  from  the  different  experience  of  travellers  in  measuring
distances  by  the  eye.  As  experienced  mariners  can  make  the.  best  estimates,  by  the  eye,  of
distances  over  water,  Mr.  Buckingham  seems  the  traveller  on  whose  opinion  we  should  be
most  disposed  to  rely ;  and  he  says,  "  Its  greatest  length  runs  nearly  north  and  south  from
twelve  to  fifteen  miles,  and  its  breadth  seems  to  be  in  general  from  six  to  nine  miles."  Dr.
Clarke's  naval  friends  also  computed  the  breadth,  from  Tabaria  to  the  opposite  shore,  at
six  miles  ;  of  the  length  they  made  no  estimate,  as  the  whole  extent  of  the  lake  is  not  visible
from  that  place.  Taking  Buckingham's  highest  number,  it  offers,  for  the  length  of  the  lake,
a  fair  average  deducible  from  the  other  statements,  particularly  if  we  reckon  that  Josephus
used  not  the  Roman  but  the  Greek  itinerary  stade  in  his  measurements.

Viewing  the  whole  extent  of  the  lake  from  its  southern  extremity,  Mr.  Hardy  compares  its
figure  to  that  of  a  boy's  kite,  or  of  a  bird  flying,  which  last  seems  the  better  comparison  of
the  two.

The  Jewish  writers  enlarge  in  the  most  glowing  terms  on  the  excellencies  of  this  lake,  and,
considering  their  limited  materials  for  comparison,  they  had  reason  to  do  so.  "  Seven  seas,"
says  the  Talmud,  "  have  I  created,  saith  God,  and  of  them  all  have  I  chosen  none  but  the
Sea  of  Gennesareth."  b  Josephus  dwells  on  the  sweetness  and  softness  of  its  water,  of  its
pebbly  bottom,  and,  above  all,  of  the  salubrity  of  the  surrounding  atmosphere.  He  affirms
that  the  water  was  so  cold  in  its  nature,  that  its  temperature  was  not  affected  by  being  exposed
to  the  sun  during  the  hottest  season  of  the  year.  He  also  expatiates  largely  on  the  extraor-
dinary fertility  and  valuable  products  of  the  land  of  Gennesareth,  by  which  he  evidently
means  the  tract  on  the  eastern  borders  of  the  lake.c  All  this  praise  of  the  water  and  so  forth
is  allowed  by  modern  travellers ;  and  what  is  said  of  the  peculiar  fertility  of  its  borders  is
true  to  an  extent  which  a  more  fitting  place  will  require  us  to  notice.

Of  all  modern  descriptions,  perhaps  that  of  Dr.  Clarke  is  the  best  in  conveying  a  general
impression  of  the  scene  which  is  offered,  from  the  summit  and  descent  of  the  western  moun-
tains. It  is  true  that,  like  many  other  of  this  ardent  traveller's  pictures,  it  is  highly  coloured
and  the  shades  skilfully  softened ;  but  what  he  omits  is  easily  supplied  from  other  sources.
His  point  of  view  was  very  favourable ; d  and  we  observe  that  those  who,  like  him,  describe  it
as  viewed  from  the  hills,  use  much  warmer  language  than  those  who  picture  it  from  the  shore

"  A  view  was  presented,  which,  for  its  grandeur,  independently  of  the  interest  excited  by  the
different  objects  contained  in  it,  has  nothing  equal  to  it  in  the  Holy  Land.

"  From  this  situation  we  perceived  that  the  plain  over  which  we  had  been  so  long  riding
[from  the  west]  was  itself  very  elevated.  Far  beneath  appeared  other  plains  one  lower  than  the
other,  in  a  regular  gradation,  reaching  eastward,  as  far  as  the  surface  of  the  Sea  of  Tiberias.
This  immense  lake,  almost  equal,  in  the  grandeur  of  its  appearance,  to  that  of  Geneva,  spreads
its  waters  over  all  the  lower  territory.  Its  eastern  shores  exhibit  a  sublime  scene  of  moun-
tains towards  the  north  and  south,  and  they  seem  to  close  in  at  either  extremity  ;  both  towards
Chorazin,  where  the  Jordan  enters,  and  the  Anion,  or  Campus  Magnus,  through  which  this
river  flows  to  the  Dead  Sea.  The  cultivated  plains,  reaching  to  its  borders,  which  we  beheld
at  an  amazing  depth  below  our  view,  resembled,  by  the  different  hues  their  various  produce
presented,  the  motley  pattern  of  a  vast  carpet.     To  the  north  appeared  many  snowy  summits

a  Josephus,  140  (some  copies  have  100)  stades  by  40  ;  Pliny,  16  (Koman)  miles  by  6;  Minister,  80  B.  miles  in  compass;
Bunting,  12  miles  by  more  than  4 ;  Roger,  6  leagues  by  from  2  to  3  ;  Biddulph,  24  miles  by  15  ;  Sandys,  12  miles  by  6  ;  Hayes,
10  or  12  miles  by  4 ;  Mariti,  18  miles  by  6 ;  Clarke,  6  miles  broad  ;  Jowett,  20  miles  by  12.

b  But  it  is  possible  that,  as  Lightfoot  conjectures,  this  was  invented  for  the  praise  of  the  famous  Jewish  university  at  the  town
of  Tiberias,  contiguous  to  the  lake.

c  Joseph,  de  Bell.  lib.  iii.  c.  10.

J  In  fact,  no  one  has  described  the  lake  from  the  same  point  of  view,  which  was  the  top  of  the  (so  culled)  Mount  of  Beatitudes.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxv

towering  beyond  a  series  of  intervening  mountains.  We  considered  them  as  the  summits  of
Libanus;  but  the  Arabs  belonging  to  our  caravan  called  the  principal  eminence  Jebel-el-Sieh.a
The  summit  was  so  lofty  that  the  snow  entirely  covered  the  upper  part  of  it,  investing  all  the
higher  part  with  that  perfect  white  and  smooth  velvet-like  appearance,  which  snow  only  ex-
hibits when  it  is  very  deep."

Continuing  his  way  over  the  plain,  before  reaching  the  edge  of  the  steep  declivity  which
conducts  down  to  the  shore,  the  same  traveller  writes  :  — "  The  lake  continued  in  view  to  our
left.  The  Avind  rendered  its  surface  rough,  and  called  to  mind  the  situation  of  our  Saviour's
disciples,  when,  in  one  of  the  small  vessels  which  traversed  these  waters,  they  were  tossed  in  a
storm,  and  saw  Jesus,  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,  walking  to  them  upon  the  waves.
Often  as  the  subject  has  been  painted,  which  combines  a  number  of  circumstances  favourable
to  a  sublime  representation,  no  artist  has  been  aware  of  the  uncommon  grandeur  of  the  scenery
memorable  for  the  transaction.  The  Lake  of  Gennesareth  is  surrounded  by  objects  well  cal-
culated to  heighten  the  solemn  impression  made  by  such  a  picture ;  and,  independently  of
the  local  feelings  likely  to  be  excited  in  its  contemplation,  it  affords  one  of  the  most  striking
prospects  in  the  Holy  Land.  It  is  by  comparison  alone  that  any  due  conception  of  its  appear-
ance can  be  communicated  to  the  minds  of  those  who  have  not  seen  it.  Speaking  of  it  com-
paratively, it  may  be  described  as  longer  and  finer  than  any  of  our  Cumberland  and  West-
moreland lakes,  although  it  be,  perhaps,  inferior  to  Loch  Lomond  in  Scotland.  It  does  not
possess  the  vastness  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  although  it  much  resembles  it  in  certain  points  of
view.  In  picturescpie  beauty  it  perhaps  comes  nearest  to  the  Lake  of  Locarno  in  Italy,
although  it  be  destitute  of  anything  similar  to  the  islands  by  which  that  majestic  piece  of
water  is  adorned.  It  is  inferior  in  magnitude  and,  perhaps,  in  the  height  of  the  neighbouring
mountains,  to  the  Lake  Asphaltites ;  but  its  broad  and  extended  surface,  covering  the  bottom
of  a  profound  valley,  surrounded  by  lofty  and  precipitous  eminences,  when  added  to  the
impression  under  which  every  Christian  pilgrim  approaches  it,  gives  it  a  character  of  unparal-
leled dignity."

From  lower  points  of  view,  on  the  descent  to  the  lake,  and  from  the  plain  by  which  the
lake  is  bordered,  much  of  all  this  grandeur  is  lost ;  and  much  that  looks  beautiful  in  the  dis-
tance becomes  bald  and  barren  in  the  nearer  view.  That  nearer  view  is  still  grand,  especially
from  the  plain  at  the  northern  extremity  of  the  lake.  On  the  east  rise  the  mountains,  not
precipitously,  but  rolling  back  from  the  shore,  green  and  verdant  after  rain,  but  destitute  of
trees.  On  the  west,  hill  rises  above  hill  in  beautiful  succession,  and  the  loftiest  visible
summit  is  crowned  with  a  city,b  whose  commanding  position  is  probably  unequalled  in  the
world.  In  two  places  the  mountains  here  come  down  to  the  lake  ;  the  rest  is  a  beautiful  and
uncultivated  plain — that  rich  and  fertile  "  land  of  Gennesareth,"  which,  for  its  combination  of
natural  advantages — soil,  scenery,  climate,  temperature — is,  perhaps,  exceeded  by  no  other
spot  on  earth.  In  winter  and  spring  this  plain  is  traversed  by  numerous  torrents,  some  of
which  are  so  large  and  rapid  as  not  to  be  passed  without  difficulty.  "  Nothing  can  surpass
the  beauty  and  grandeur  of  the  surrounding  scenery,"  says  Elliot ;  and  he  had  travelled
widely.

The  feathered  tribes  seem  to  make  the  lake  a  favourite  resort.  Multitudes  of  song-birds
harbour  in  the  northernmost  groves,  and  their  innumerable  happy  voices  mingle  with  the
rush  of  waters,  where  the  river  hastens  to  the  lake.  The  margin  and  surface  of  the  lake
itself  presents  large  flocks  of  storks,  wild  ducks,  and  diving  birds ;  pelicans  are  not  wanting ;
while  here  and  there  vultures  are  assiduously  engaged  with  their  carrion  prey  :  or  eagles,
heavily  flapping  their  broad  wings,  rise  to  their  aeries  in  the  mountains.     But  when  the  heat

H  Jebel  Essheikh,  or  Hermon,  coucerniug  which  see  p.  xxxii.  The  lower  points  of  view,  from  which  most  travellers  describe
the  lake,  do  not  take  in  this  magnificent  background;  hence,  perhaps,  the  comparative  tameness  of  their  descriptions.  Stephens
rather  sneers  at  the  comparison  to  the  lake  of  Geneva,  particularly  on  the  score  of  the  absence  of  a  Mont  Blauc ;  whereas,  in  fact,
the  very  presence  of  Mount  Hermon,  capped  with  snow,  in  the  distance,  probably  first  suggested  the  comparison  to  Dr.  Clarke.
Clarke  was  right  in  describing  impressions  from  what  he  saw,  and  he  did  see  the  snowy  Hermon  ;  and  Stephens  is  right  in  describ-
ing from  what  he  saw — and  he  cuutd  not  see  the  splendid  background  which  that  mountain  forms.

*>  Safet.

cxlvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

of  the  summer  sun — intensely  concentrated  on  the  borders  of  this  deep  basin — has  absorbed
all  the  moisture  which  the  earth  contained,  and  utterly  dried  up  the  green  herbage  which
gave  a  cheerful  aspect  to  the  scene,  the  effect  of  the  whole,  in  the  entire  absence  of  trees,  is
very  different, — more  dull,  heavy,  sad,  but  not  less,  perhaps,  in  unison  with  the  general  tone
of  feeling  with  which  the  Christian  pilgrim  is  prepared  to  regard  this  memorable  lake.  Its
surface  is  usually  in  a  state  of  dead  calm  ;  and,  in  the  universal  stillness,  the  gentle  plash  of
its  water  upon  the  pebbles  of  the  shore  is  distinctly  heard,  and  is,  indeed,  almost  the  only
sound  that  strikes  the  ear.  Not  a  single  boat  of  any  kind  is  seen  upon  the  lake  ;  and,  now
that  the  Arab  has  removed  his  tents  to  the  higher  country,  the  eye  may  wander  around  its
borders  in  vain,  seeking  for  any  other  signs  of  habitation  than  the  mean  town  of  Tabaria,
and  one  or  two  miserable  villages.  The  saddened  traveller  may  gaze  for  hours  over  the  scene
without  observing  a  single  human  being,  or,  indeed,  any  living  creature,  save  the  large  water-
fowl, whose  sole  presence  tends  rather  to  increase,  than  to  diminish,  the  desolation  of  the
view.

How  different  this  view  from  that  which  was  presented  to  the  eye  about  the  time  of  Christ !
Then  the  borders  of  the  lake  were  thickly  populated,  and  the  eye  rested  in  turn  upon
fortresses  and  cities,  towns  and  villages.  There  was  not  only  the  royal  city  of  Tiberias,  but
the  woe-doomed  cities  of  Chorazin  and  Capernaum,  both  the  frequent  witnesses  of  His
"mighty  works," — the  latter  his  most  usual  place  of  residence, — "exalted  unto  heaven"
once,  but  now  so  utterly  "  cast  down"  that  men  know  not  where  it  stood.  There  also  was
Bethsaida, — "  the  city  of  Andrew  and  Peter," — Hippos  and  Gamala,a  Tarichea  and  Beth-
Meon,  Ammaus  and  the  strong  Magdala  ;  doubtless  with  many  other  places  of  less  note,  the
names  of  which  history  has  found  no  occasion  to  preserve.  Then,  also,  the  surface  of  the  lake
was  enlivened  with  the  numerous  boats  passing  constantly  across,  and  from  town  to  town,
with  passengers  and  goods,  while  the  fishers  launched  forth  to  cast  their  nets  in  the  deep
waters.  Then  the  shores  were  everywhere  richly  planted  and  cultivated,  and  offered  numerous
delightful  gardens  and  paradises,  while  numerous  people,  busy  or  unoccupied,  were  seen
passing  to  and  fro  ;  and  then,  instead  of  this  silence,  were  heard  the  voices  of  men  calling  to
each  other,  the  joyous  shouts  of  happy  children,  the  sound  of  the  song  and  harp,  the  noise  of
the  millstones,  and  the  lowing  of  the  herds  upon  the  sides  of  the  hills.  Amidst  the  present
vacancy  and  silence,  the  mind  can  better  fill  out  the  details  of  such  a  picture,  than  were  the
scene  actually  occupied  with  other  and  different  objects  than  those  which  the  imagination
wishes  to  supply.

As  the  waters  of  the  lake  lie  in  a  deep  basin,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  lofty  hills,  except
at  the  outlet  and  entrance  of  the  Jordan,  long-continued  tempests  from  any  quarter  are  un-
known. This  is  also  true,  and  for  the  same  reasons,  of  the  Dead  Sea.  But  these  same  local
features,  which  preclude  any  long  agitation  of  its  surface,  render  it  liable  to  whirlwinds,
squalls,  and  sudden  gusts.  But  these,  as  in  every  similar  basin,  are  of  short  duration,  and
the  most  furious  squall  is  speedily  followed  by  a  calm.  Winds  from  the  south-east  are  those
by  which  a  boisterous  sea  is  most  usually  raised  in  this  lake.

It  has  been  affirmed  of  this — as  of  other  lakes  which  receive  and  discharge  a  river — that
the  Jordan  makes  its  passage  through  it  without  mingling  its  waters.b  We  only  know  that
its  course  through  the  middle  of  the  lake  is  distinctly  marked.  There  is  a  current  throughout
the  breadth  of  the  lake,  even  to  the  shore ;  and  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  through  it  is  observ-
able by  the  smooth  state  of  the  water's  surface  in  that  part.

It  is,  probably,  on  account  of  this  current  that  the  old  Jewish  doctors  decided  that  "  the
sea  of  Tabaria  is  like  the  gliding  waters."  It  was  once  a  mighty  question  whether  those
waters  were  fit  for  use  in  which  unclean  fish  swam  about  with  the  clean ;  and  the  conclusion

a  A  few  of  these  names  are  collected  from  the  Rabbins.  We  do  not  hnow  that  Gamala  was  visible  from  the  bed  of  the  lake,
but  the  mountain,  from  the  shape  of  which  it  took  its  name  (which  means  Camel),  and  on  which  it  stood,  is  one  of  those  which
bound  the  lake.

b  "  The  river  of  Jordan  runneth  through  the  midst  of  this  sea,  and  mingleth  not  therewith,  but  preserveth  his  own  stream
entire  :  which  some  impute  to  the  swiftness,  yea  rapidncss,  of  his  course,  not  at  leisure  to  take  notice  of  (much  less  to  unite  with)
any  water  he  meets  in  his  way,  before  he  comes  to  his  journey's  end  at  the  Dead  Sea." — Fuller.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  cxlvii

was, — "  Flowing  and  gliding  waters  are  fit,  those  that  do  not  glide  are  not  fit ;  and  the  lake
of  Gennesareth  is  to  he  numbered  with  gliding  waters."  After  the  praise  of  its  water,  which
has,  in  a  former  page,  been  adduced  from  Josephus,  it  may  be  well  to  add  that  it  is  perfectly
clear  and  sweet,  although  it  receives  several  hot  saline  springs,  so  impregnated  with  gases
that  they  change  the  colour  of  the  stones  over  which  they  pass.  Dr.  Clarice  describes  it  as
being  clear  as  the  purest  crystal,  sweet,  cool,a  and  most  refreshing  to  the  taste.  He  swam  to
a  considerable  distance  from  the  shore,  and  found  it  so  limpid  that  he  could  discern  the
bottom  covered  with  shining  pebbles.  Among  these  stones  was  a  beautiful  but  diminutive
kind  of  shell,  being  a  nondescript  species  of  Buccinum,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Buc-
cinum  Galilceum.  He  and  his  friends  amused  themselves  with  diving  for  specimens ;  and
the  very  circumstance  of  their  being  able  to  discover  6uch  small  objects  beneath  the  surface
may  prove  the  high  transparency  of  the  water.  The  lake  generally  presents  a  dark  appear-
ance, on  account  of  the  high  mountains  by  which  it  is  enclosed.

The  fishing  operations  upon  this  lake  which  were  anciently  of  so  much  importance,  and
connected  with  which  so  many  interesting  circumstances  are  recorded  in  the  New  Testament,
have  altogether  ceased.  There  is  not,  or  was  not  very  lately,  a  single  boat  upon  the  lake.
There  were  none  even  in  the  time  of  D'Arvieux  (1660).  Hence  the  country  derives  no
advantage  from  the  immense  quantity  of  very  excellent  fish  which  now,  as  formerly,  the  lake
contains.  A  small  supply  is  obtained  by  nets  cast  from  the  beach ;  but  this  process  is  neces-
sarily so  unproductive,  that,  even  at  Tiberias,  fish  bears  the  same  price  per  pound  as  meat.
Most  travellers  have,  naturally,  desired  to  eat  fish  at  this  place,  but  have  not  always  succeeded.
Hayes  was  prevented  by  the  Lenten  prejudices  of  his  Greek  host ; b  Irby  and  Mangles  almost
lived  on  fish,  and  praise  it  highly.  According  to  them,  there  are  excellent  fish,  but  the  variety
is  small.  Stephens,  in  his  journey  along  the  shore,  observes,  "  I  thought  to  enhance  the
interest  of  this  day's  journey  by  making  my  noon-day  meal  from  the  fish  of  the  Lake  of
Gennesareth ;  and  having  on  my  way  up  seen  a  net  drying  on  the  shore,  I  aroused  the  sleeping
Arabs,  and  they  had  promised  to  throw  it  in  for  me ;  but  when  I  returned  I  found  that,  like
Simon  Peter  and  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  '  they  had  toiled  all  the  day  and  had  caught'  nothing."
Elliot  and  his  friend  were  more  fortunate.  They  halted  at  the  same  place  (near  the  presumed
site  of  Bethsaida),  and  requested  a  man  to  throw  his  line  and  let  them  taste  the  produce  of
the  lake.  In  a  few  minutes  each  of  them  was  presented  with  a  fish  broiled  on  a  plate  of  iron,
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country, c  and  wrapped  in  a  large  wafer-like  cake,  a  foot  in
diameter,  of  which  one  was  spread  as  a  table-cloth  and  two  others  served  for  napkins.
"  Thus,"  observes  the  traveller,  "  we  made  a  repast,  on  the  banks  of  the  Sea  of  Tiberias,  of
what  was  almost  literally  "  five  loaves  and  two  small  fishes."d

The  Great  Jordan,  to  which  all  general  statements  refer,  may  be  said  to  be  formed  as  soon
as  the  river  leaves  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth.  The  valley  through  which  it  passes  to  the
Dead  Sea  has  already  been  fully  described  (pp.  cix.,  ex.)  ;  and  it  has  been  stated  that  the  proper
bed  is  a  lower  valley,  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  in  breadth,  covered  with  high  trees  and
the  most  luxuriant  herbage.  In  the  winter  the  swollen  river  inundates  the  plain  in  the  bottom
of  this  lower  valley,  but  never  rises  to  the  level  of  the  upper  plain  of  the  Ghor,  which  is  at
least  forty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  river.  The  wild  animals  which  harbour  during  summer
amid  the  shade  and  freshness  of  the  lower  valley  are  then  obliged  to  ascend  to  the  upper
plain,  and  seek  some  other  refuge  for  the  winter.  This  swelling  of  the  river,  and  the  retreat
of  the  wild  animals  before  it,  are  more  than  once  alluded  to  by  Jeremiah. e

The  Jordan,  even  in  this  part  of  its  course,  is  fordable  in  many  places  during  summer ;  but

a  '*  In  the  water  of  the  lake  my  thermometer  stood  at  70°,  in  the  sun  at  90°." — Fisk.    This  was  in  November.

b  The  Greeks  do  not,  like  the  Roman  Catholics,  indulge  themselves  with  fish  during  their  fast-days.

c  Luke,  xxiv.  42.

d  Lightfoot,  '  Chorog.  Cent.'  chap,  lxx ;  Roger,  62,  63;  D'Arvieux,  ii.  176,  177;  Hayes,  125-130;  Mariti,  ii.  157;  Clarke,  iv.
199-225;  Burckhardt,  332 ;  Buckingham,  chap,  xxvi.;  Irby  and  Mangles,  295  ;  Jowett,  172-176;  'Memoir  of  Rev.  Pliny  Fisk,"
Boston,  U.  S.  344-7  ;  Hardy,  237-241 ;  Skinner,  ii.  283,  291,  292;  Stephens,  ii.  329-333;  Elliot,  ii.  342-350;  Lindsay,  ii.  89—93.

e  *'  Thou  land  of  peace,  thou  mayest  have  confidence  ;  yet  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  Jordan?"  xii.  5.  '"  Behold  as  a
lion  Cometh  up,  a  strong  one  from  the  swelling  of  Jordan,"  xlix.  19  ;  repeated  in  chap.  1.  44.— Blayney's  Translation.

clxviii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VI.

the  few  spots  in  which  it  may  be  crossed  during  the  rainy  season  are  known  only  to  the
Arabs.  On  leaving  the  Lake  of  Tiberias  it  flows  for  about  three  hours  near  the  western
hills,  and  then  turns  towards  the  eastern,  on  which  side  it  continues  its  course  for  several
hours.

Dr.  Richardson  states  that  three  streams  issue  from  the  lake,  which  soon  unite  to  re-form
the  Jordan.     This  was  in  May  ;  and  the  circumstance  is  not  noticed  by  other  travellers,  who

[The  Jordan  leaving  the  Lake.]

describe  the  issuing  river  as  a  single  stream.  The  Jordan  rushes  from  the  lake  with  consi-
derable force  in  a  stream  which  is  about  fourteen  yards  across  at  the  end  of  April.  There  are
some  remains  of  a  bridge,  a  little  below,  but  the  stream  is  now  crossed  at  this  point  in  a  crazy
ferry-boat.  It  will  be  recollected  that  there  were  ferry-boats  on  the  river  in  the  reign  of
David.a  We  find  no  notice  of  its  being  in  use  later  than  April  :  so  it  seems  probable  that  the
river  cannot  here  be  forded  in  winter  and  early  spring,  when,  of  course,  the  river  must  even
there  have  its  volume  of  water  greatly  increased  by  the  rise  of  the  waters  in  the  lake.

In  May  (15th)  we  find  it  said  that  at  this  place  the  stream  "  is  now  forded  by  the  Arabs,
who  swim  their  animals  across."  b  The  Rev.  P.  Fisk,  who  was  here  in  November  (11th),  and
rode  a  little  way  down  the  bank,  says, — "  The  river  bends  often,  and  varies  much  in  width,
perhaps,  from  30  to  100  yards.  It  is  so  shallow,  that  cattle  and  asses  were  fording  it  without
difficulty."  Mr.  Buckingham  states  the  stream  to  have  been  "  barely  fordable  "  at  two  or
three  miles  below  the  lake,  in  the  beginning  of  February,  and  that  it  had  then  and  there  a
current  of  about  two  knots  an  hour.

The  river  appears  to  diminish  its  speed  as  it  proceeds.  One  of  the  fords,  practicable  even
in  February,  occurs  about  four  miles  below  the  lake.  There,  however,  the  water  is  so  deep
near  the  banks  as  to  throw  the  horses  off  their  legs  and  oblige  them  to  swim  :  but  they  regain
their  footing  as  they  approach  the  middle  of  the  stream ;  and  in  the  very  centre  it  is  found  to
be  quite  shallow.

a  "  There  went  over  a  ferry-boat  to  carry  over  the  king's  household,  and  to  do  what  he  thought  good,"  2  Sam.  xix.  18.

b  Maddox,  ii.  251.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxix

About  ten  miles  below  the  lake,  there  is  a  large  stone  bridge  of  one  large  and  two  small
arches.  The  river  has  here  a  considerable  depth  of  water,  and  is  about  forty  feet  wide.  The
water  is  of  a  white  sulphureous  colour,  but  without  any  unpleasant  smell  or  taste,  and  it  rolls
over  a  very  stony  bed.  A  little  above  the  bridge  the  stream  is  smoother  and  the  bottom
more  practicable  than  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood.

About  ten  miles  below  this  bridge,  and  twenty  below  the  lake,  we  come  opposite  the  town
of  Bysan,a  which  stands  ab^ut  two  miles  from  the  river  to  the  west.  In  this  neighbourhood
there  are  two  or  three  fords  over  the  Jordan.  Indeed  the  river  is  here  so  generally  fordable,
that,  in  ancient  times,  as  now,  it  was  much  crossed  in  this  direction.  It  is,  however,  not
usually  forded  opposite  the  town,  but  about  three  miles  lower  down.  Here  it  was  crossed  by
Captain  Mangles,  who  observes  (March  12)  that  the  stream  is  much  more  swift  here  than  it
is  nearer  to  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.  The  depth  at  the  ford  reached  above  the  bellies  of  the
horses;  and  the  measured  breadth  was  found  to  be  145  feet.  Burckhardt,  who  crossed
above  two  miles  lower  down  in  the  midst  of  summer,  found  the  river  eighty  paces  broad  and
about  three  feet  deep.b

We  proceed  southward  from  this  point  for  as  much  as  twenty-seven  miles  (direct  distance),
without  finding  any  point  where  the  river  has  been  visited  or  crossed  by  any  modern  travellers;
and  this  important  central  tract,  with  the  country  on  either  hand,  may  be  pointed  out  to  future
travellers  as  a  part  of  Palestine  absolutely  unvisited,  and  therefore  undescribed,  although  it  is
a  portion  of  the  country  in  which  some  valuable  discoveries  relating  to  ancient  sites  might  very
probably  be  made.

We  become  acquainted  with  the  Jordan  again  at  a  point  about  twenty  miles  to  the  north  of
the  Dead  Sea.  It  was  here  crossed  by  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles  at  the  latter  end  of
March.c  Approaching  the  river  from  the  east,  they  observe,  "  The  plain,  from  the  foot  of  the
mountains,  is  about  half  way  pretty  level,  but  barren ;  thence  it  becomes  rugged,  consisting  of
a  quantity  of  hills,  vales,  and  deep  chasms,  in  a  dry  soil  of  very  white  appearance,  and  of  a
saltish  nature  :  this  continues  to  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  river's  bank ;  whence  the
rest  is  a  rich  flat  plain  to  the  margin  of  the  river,  which  is  in  the  bottom  of  a  deep  ravine,
beautifully  wooded,  and  so  overgrown,  that  the  stream  is  not  seen  till  you  are  close  to  it."
They  found  the  river  quite  swollen,  and  it  was  not  without  much  delay  and  difficulty,  and
some  danger,  that  they  were  able  to  cross,  and  then  only  by  swimming  their  horses.

Another  place  of  passage,  about  four  miles  below  this,  has  been  fully  described  by  Mr.
Buckingham.  The  great  vale  of  Jordan  is  here  about  ten  miles  across,  from  the  eastern  to
the  western  mountains,  while  the  lower  valley  in  which  the  Jordan  runs,  is,  as  far  as  observed
from  this  point,  about  a  mile  wide  in  its  widest  parts  and  a  furlong  in  the  narrowest.
Descending  into  this,  the  white  chalky  cliffs  on  either  side  appear  to  be  about  200  feet  high..
The  river  flows  through  the  midst  of  the  lower  vale,  between  banks  which  are  fourteen  or  fif-
teen feet  high ;  but  this  is  when  the  stream  (January)  was  at  its  lowest  ebb ;  for  there  are
indications  that,  when  swollen  by  rains,  it  may  overflow  its  banks  sufficiently  to  inundate  the
lower  plain,  though  it  could  never  reach  the  upper  one.  The  stream  appeared,  at  this  place
and  at  this  season,  to  be  little  more  than  twenty-five  yards  in  breadth,  and  so  shallow  as  to  be
easily  forded  by  horses.  The  banks  are  thickly  lined  with  tall  rushes,  oleanders,  and  a  few
willows.  The  stream  is  extremely  rapid ;  the  waters  tolerably  clear,  from  its  flowing  over  a
bed  of  pebbles,  and  is  pure  and  sweet  to  the  taste.  Mr.  Buckingham  inquires  whether  the
Israelites  did  not  cross  the  river  at  this  point,  but  we  think  it  must  have  been  lower  down.

The  place  where  Christ  received  baptism  from  the  hands  of  John  the  Baptist  is  that  which
has  for  ages  engaged  the  interest  of  the  Catholic  and  Oriental  Christians ;  and  which  has  been
far  more  frequented  than  any  other  part  of  the  river.  Indeed  the  spot  has,  from  the  most
remote  times  until  now,  been  a  place  of  annual  pilgrimage,  at  Easter,  to  thousands  of  Chris-
tians from  all  parts  of  the  world.d   The  true  site  of  this  interesting  event  is,  however,  probably

a  The  Scriptural  '  Bethshan,'  and  the  classical  '  Scythopolis.'     To  the  walls  of  this  towu  the  Philistines  fastened  the
Saul.   1  Sam.  xxxi.  10.
b  Kichardson,  ii.425;   Irby  and  Mangles,  304  ;  Burckhardt,  345.
c  Irby  and  Mangles,  326;  Buckingham's  '  Palestine,'  i.  90—93.  d  See  the  cut  at  the  head  of  this  chupter.

VOL.   I.  Z.

clxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

not  known.  The  Catholics  disagree  with  the  Greek  and  Oriental  Christians  on  this  point.
The  latter  place  the  site  three  or  four  miles  further  towards  the  Dead  Sea  than  the  former ;
and  this  is  so  far  happy,  as  it  prevents  interference  in  their  pilgrimages  to  and  their  ablutions
in  the  sacred  stream.  The  Catholics  place  the  site  about  seven  miles  from  the  Dead  Sea,  the
Greeks  not  more  than  four.  Some  confusion  arises  from  the  indistinct  manner  in  which  tra-
vellers speak  of  the  place  of  pilgrimage,  without  stating  which  of  the  two  places  they  mean.
But  this  may  be  sometimes  collected  from  circumstances.  The  old  travellers  invariably  speak
of  the  place  which  the  Catholics  have  chosen  ;  while  those  of  more  recent  date  more  commonly
have  in  view  the  point,  lower  down,  which  the  Orientals  prefer  to  consider  as  "  the  place
where  John  was  baptising."  To  both  parties,  the  places  to  which  they  respectively  repair,  is
of  additional  interest  to  them,  from  the  belief  that  the  place  where  Christ  was  baptized  was
that  also  where  the  Israelites  crossed  the  river.  And  this  is  not  unlikely  ;  for  John  is  said  to
have  been  baptizing  at  "  Beth-abara  beyond  Jordan,"  and  Beth-abara  means  "  the  house  of
passage,"  with  a  very  possible  reference  to  the  passage  of  the  Israelites  at  that  place.

Both  points  are  two  of  the  most  beautiful  places  on  the  river  ;  and  as  there  seems  little
difference  in  the  appearance  of  the  stream  or  its  banks,  we  shall  be  content  to  notice  that
which  is  nearest  the  Asphaltic  Lake,  and  which  has  been  the  most  frequently  visited  and
described.  But  it  may  enliven  these  details  if  we  join  the  annual  pilgrimage  in  its  visit  to
this  spot,  taking  that  of  1837,  which  has  been  so  well  described  by  the  Rev.  C.  B.  Elliot.

The  cavalcade  consisted  of  about  3000  Greek  and  Oriental  pilgrims  from  every  part  of  the
world  where  the  eastern  churches  have  members,  together  with  muleteers,  camel-drivers,
Turkish  and  Arab  soldiers,  and  half-a-dozen  Frank  travellers,  who  swelled  the  amount  to
5000.

"  On  these  occasions  every  beast  in  Judea  is  put  in  requisition ;  and  horses,  donkeys,  mules,
ponies,  and  camels,  flocking  from  all  quarters,  throng  Jerusalem  for  several  days  previous.
The  young  and  the  aged  are  placed  in  panniers  on  either  side  of  a  camel :  women  who  never
before  mounted  a  horse  now  cross  themselves  in  an  orthodox  manner  (for  their  safety  depends
on  the  exact  mode  of  forming  the  cross!),  and  stride  manfully  the  saddle  :  boys  and  girls  are
seen  siding  two  and  two,  beguiling  the  length  of  the  journey  with  an  occasional  dispute  as  to
which  shall  sit  on  the  pad,  and  which  on  the  less  comfortable  back-bone  of  the  beast,  sharpened
by  a  perpetual  fast.  Hundreds  who  cannot  afford  to  ride,  having  already  bestowed  on  the
priests  the  earnings  of  many  years,  trudge  on  foot ;  at  first  briskly  leading  the  way,  then
merged  in  the  equestrian  cavalcade,  till  at  length  they  are  worn  out  with  fatigue,  and  their
pilgrim  staves  bring  up  the  rear.  A  singular  variety  of  costume  characterises  the  barbarous
Russian,  the  sportive  Athenian,  the  patriotic  islander,  the  Greek  priest,  the  austere  Armenian,
the  poor  Copt,  and  the  dark-skinned  Syrian ;  while  all  these  blend  picturesquely  with  the
uniform  of  the  Turkish  and  Arab  cavalry,  who  gallop  their  well-trained  horses  up  and  down
among  the  motley  crowd,  now  urging  them  to  full  speed,  and  now  suddenly  curbing  them
with  a  rapidity  that  excites  as  much  alarm  as  admiration."

We  cannot  afford  to  follow  Mr.  Elliot  through  all  the  details  of  the  journey;  although  they
are  well  worth  perusal,  as  forming,  altogether,  the  best  description  we  possess  of  this  pilgrim-
age. The  caravan  usually  arrives  towards  evening  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rihha  (the  sup-
posed) Jericho,  and  encamps  near  the  stream  which  flows  by,  issuing  from  a  spring,  supposed
to  be  the  same  which  the  prophet  Elisha  healed : —

"  A  little  after  midnight  the  pilgrims  put  themselves  in  motion,  in  order  to  reach  by  sunrise
the  banks  of  the  sacred  river ;  but  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  start  a  caravan  of  5000  persons,  and
it  was  three  o'clock,  a.m.,  before  the  cavalcade  was  in  progress.  A  number  of  torch-bearers
preceded,  carrying  flambeaux,  which  threw  a  wild  blaze  of  light  over  the  plain  and  the  moving
host.  The  Arab  cavalry  marched  next,  their  spirited  horses  curveting,  while  they  plunged
into  the  high  grass  and  jungle,  to  drive  out  any  lurking  Bedouins ;  the  governor,  with  the
Greek  archbishop,  followed;  and  lastly  the  whole  host  of  pilgrims,  hurrying  along  with  anxious
expectation  to  wash  in  a  stream  which  they  vainly  suppose  to  be  endowed  with  a  cleansing
moral  efficacy.     In  such  a  multitude,  moving  without  order,  subject  to  no  discipline,  and

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxi

wrought  up  to  an  unnatural  pitch  of  excitement  by  superstitious  zeal,  it  is  not  surprising  that
many  accidents  occur.  Some  of  the  party  are  generally  left  dead,  many  are  wounded,  and
all  are  kept  in  a  state  of  feverish  alarm  for  their  personal  safety.  One  thing  struck  us  forcibly,
— the  entire  absence  of  sympathy  among  these  professors  of  piety.  If  an  aged  man,  a  feeble
woman,  or  helpless  child  fell  from  his  seat,  no  friendly  hand  was  stretched  out  to  aid,  and  no
fellow-pilgrim  halted  to  ascertain  the  extent  of  injury  received.  The  groans  and  cries  of  the
sufferer  were  responded  to  by  a  laugh,  and  the  cavalcade  moved  on  regardless  of  their  brother,
who,  if  he  met  with  sympathy  and  aid,  found  it  at  the  hand  of  some  '  good  Samaritan,'  united
to  him  by  no  ties  of  country  or  of  faith.

"  The  sun  arose  above  the  mountains  of  Moab  just  as  we  reached  the  Jordan,  after  a  ride  of
more  than  two  hours  over  a  tract  utterly  steril,  deserted  even  by  the  samphire  and  low  shrubs
which  appear  on  other  parts  of  the  plain.    Instantly  a  rush  was  made,  and  the  pilgrims,  young
and  old,  rich  and  poor,  sick  and  sound,  men,  women,  and   children,  plunged  into  the  stream.
Some  of  the  females  and  children,  however,  evinced  a  degree  of  nervousness,  and  here  and
there  the  father  of  a  family  might  be  seen  gently  chiding  his  spouse,  or  more  roughly  handling
his  young  ones ;  now  religiously  forcing  the  head  of  a  little  girl  under  the  water,  and  now
struggling  with  a  well-grown  urchin,  whose  fears  had  got  the  better  of  his  love  of  pilgrimage.
Of  the  men,  some  jumped  boldly  in,  communicating  a  rotatory  motion  to  the  body  as  it  passed
through  the  air ;  a  few  considerately  occupied  themselves  in  aiding  the  weaker  sex,  rendering  to
a  tottering  mother  or  timid  sister  the  support  of  filial  or  fraternal  strength ;  others  resigned
themselves  composedly  to  the  priests,  who,  standing  like  the  Baptist  in  the  river,  poured  the
sacred  water  three  times  on  the  head  of  the  devotee.     All  were  clad  in  their  winding-sheets,
or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  all  carried  with  them,  either  attached  in  some  way  to  the  body,  or
held  loosely  in  the  hand,  the  piece  of  cloth  with  which  they  wished  to  be  enveloped  after  death,
for  to  make  certainty  more  sure,  the  hajee,  who  has  preserved  the  taper  once  touched  by  the
holy  fire,a  secures  likewise  a  winding-sheet  dipped  in  Jordan,  which  possesses  an  equal  charm,
and  is  supposed  to  protect  from  the  power  of  the  devil  both  the  corpse  so  shrouded,  and  the
spirit  that  shall  reanimate  it.     Some  of  these  promiscuous  bathings  are  occasions  of  great
indecorum,  but,  in  the  present  instance,  we  saw  no  more  than  the  ghat  of  every  populous  town
on  the  Ganges  exhibits  daily.     When,  however,  the  scene  is  contemplated  as  a  religious  cere-
mony, and  when  the  Turkish  governor  is  observed,  with  his  Moslem  satellites,  ridiculing  with
proud  disdain  these  vain  ablutions,  and  this  violation  of  female  modesty,  the  Protestant  cannot
but  lament  the  errors  of  those  who,  like  himself,  profess  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  the  consequent
degradation  of  that  sacred  name  in  the  eyes  of  infidels."  b

The  bed  or  valley  of  the  river,  as  distinguished  from  the  plain,  exhibits  in  this  quarter  a
series  of  terraced  depressions  from  the  plains  of  Jericho  to  the  stream.  The  first  occurs  about
a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  Jordan,  where  a  descent  of  about  eight  feet  is  made.  This  descent
is  rather  irregular,  the  edges  of  the  strata  much  washed,  and  there  are  many  irregular  masses
of  earth  along  the  edge,  that  have  resisted  the  wastings  which  removed  the  strata  to  this  extent.
The  whole  surface  of  this  part  of  the  plain  is  very  destitute  of  vegetation.  At  the  distance  of
about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  there  is  another  depression,  nearly  as  considerable  as  the
former,  the  edge  of  which  has  much  the  same  washed  and  irregular  appearance.  The  land,
or  vale,  which  is  now  entered,  has  many  of  those  irregular  mounds  of  earth  which  have  been
mentioned  as  lying  along  the  water's  edge  of  the  former  descent.  A  recent  American  traveller,0
who  has  given  the  best,  or,  indeed,  the  only  description  of  these  appearances,  says : — "  It
looked  as  if  the  whole  plain  had  once  been  on  a  level  with  the  part  above  the  first  descent,
and  that  a  sweeping  torrent,  extending  out  to  where  the  first  bank  is,  had  passed  over  it,  and
swept  away  about  ten  feet  of  earth,  except  a  few  hard  spots  near  the  edge  ;  then,  that  another

a  This  alludes  to  the  shocking  imposition  practised  by  the  priests  upon  the  people  on  Easter-day,  in  the  church  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre,  whereby  they  are  made  to  believe  that  a  light,  kindled  by  some  artificial  means  within  the  Sepulchre,  and  produced .
to  their  admiration  and  reverence,  has  been  the  result  of  a  miracle.

t>  Elliot,  i.  74— 77

c  The  Rev.  J.  D.  Paxton,  whose  very  instructive  little   volume  of  '  Letters  on  Palestine,'  has  been  re-published  in  this
country.

z  2

clxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

torrent  had  come  down,  reaching  out  only  to  the  place  where  the  second  bank  is,  and  within
its  range  had  carried  off  ten  or  twelve  feet  of  earth,  leaving  a  large  number  of  spots  that
resisted  its  force;  for  tbe  mounds  between  the  first  and  second  banks  nearly  agreed  in  height
with  the  plain  above  that  bank,  while  those  below  the  second  bank  agreed  in  height  with  the
land  between  the  first  and  second  banks."  From  this  traveller's  further  account  it  appears,
that  in  the  space  between  the  second  and  third  banks,  much  of  the  ground  looked  as  if  it  was
often  covered  with  water,  like  the  dried  mud  on  which  water  has  long  lain,  thus  evincing  that
the  Jordan  sometimes  overflows  its  proper  channel  to  this  extent.  This  is  not  the  general
character  of  the  district.  There  are  in  many  places  small  bushes,  and  in  some  parts  a  con-
siderable crop  of  weeds.  There  is  a  third  descent  to  what  may  be  considered  the  immediate
bank  of  the  stream  in  its  ordinary  channel.  It  is  about  the  same  depth  as  the  former;  and
on  and  near  this  last  bank,  down  to  the  water's  edge,  there  are  numerous  bushes  and  small
trees  of  the  kinds  already  noticed.

The  terraced  appearances  here  described  are  very  common  where  rivers,  subject  to  periodical
overflows,  traverse  a  plain,  the  soil  of  which  may  be  easily  disintegrated  or  undermined  by  the
action  of  water.  It  certainly  seems  to  us  to  prove  that  the  Jordan,  in  its  annual  overflows,
once  reached  to  the  upper  water-mark.  That  it  does  not  do  so  at  this  time  may  be  owing  to
the  stream  (which  is  here  very  rapid)  having  worn  itself  a  deeper  channel  than  of  old.
These  different  banks,  so  distinctly  marked,  are  probably  of  old  origin,  and  if  they  existed
when  the  Israelites  crossed  the  river,  we  obtain  a  clearer  and  more  intense  meaning  from  the
explanation  that  "  the  Jordan  overfloweth  all  its  banks  at  the  time  of  harvest."  a

It  is  singular  that  no  travellers  have  visited  the  river  at  the  time  when  they  might  fairly
expect  to  see  it  in  its  most  enlarged  condition.  This  is  owing  to  their  visits  having  been
generally  paid  in  company  with  the  pilgrim  caravan,  for  the  sake  of  the  protection  thus
obtained.  Maundrell,  and  others  after  him,  are  wrong  in  expecting  that  if  the  river  were  at
all  much  enlarged  in  our  day,  thai  would  be  the  time  of  the  year  to  find  it  overflown.  In  the
cases  of  rivers,  the  overflow  of  which  is  caused  by  the  melting  of  the  snows  in  or  near  which
they  have  their  source,  we  have  always  found  the  season  more  advanced  before  this  effect
takes  place,  as  is  indeed  obvious  from  the  increased  warmth  which  is  required  to  dissolve  the
immense  quantities  of  snow  which  have  been  deposited  upon  the  mountains.  We  should  expect,
therefore,  to  find  the  river-flood  rather  in  May  than  in  March  or  the  early  part  of  April.  This
is  the  case  with  the  Euphrates,  Tigris,  and  other  rivers  liable  to  increase  from  the  same  cause;
and  this,  by-the-bye,  incidentally  corroborates  the  statement  in  a  preceding  page,  that  April,
rather  than  March,  was  anciently  the  initial  month  of  the  Hebrew  year,  for,  according  to  that,
the  "  tenth  day  of  the  first  month"  (or  say,  of  the  first  moon  after  the  vernal  equinox)  brings
the  time  of  overflow  forward,  in  accordance  with  the  statement  we  have  just  made ;  and  in
reference  to  this  statement  we  have  the  satisfaction  to  find  Lord  Lindsay  say,  that  in  June
"the  upper  bed  of  the  river  was  still  moist  from  the  floods."  By  the  "upper  bed"  we
presume  he  intends  to  indicate  that  which  Paxton  describes  as  being  covered  with  alluvial
sediment.  Now  that  travellers  are  beginning  to  visit  the  river  at  different  times  of  the  year,
we  may  soon  hope  for  more  positive  information  on  the  subject.b

Several  streams  in  Palestine,  which  are  absolutely  dry  in  summer,  become  large  and
powerful  streams  in  the  season  of  flood,  and  there  is  not  the  least  reason  to  question  that  there
is  still — since  the  physical  causes  still  endure — a  corresponding  increase  in  the  stream  of  the
Jordan  during  the  same  season.  The  difference  in  the  appearance  of  rivers  liable  to  this
periodical  increase,  when  overflown,  and  when  in  its  ordinary  state,  cannot  perhaps  be  better
illustrated  than  by  reference  to  the  vast  difference  in  the  appearance  of  many  of  our  own  rivers,
near  their  estuaries,  when  the  tide  is  at  ebb  and  when  at  flow.

The  breadth  and  depth  of  the  Jordan,  in  its  ordinary  condition,  at  the  place  where  we  have
so  long  detained  the  reader,  are  not  very  considerable.     But  both  the  breadth  and  depth  01

a  Josh.  iii.  15.

t>  Since  this  was  written,  we  have  found  the  conclusion  we  have  hazarded  confirmed  in  Dr.  Robinson's  account  of  his  recent
journey.  He  was  at  the  Jordan  in  the  middle  of  May —the  time  of  wheat  harvest  in  the  valley  of  the  Jordan — and  found  it  there
overflowing  the  banks  of  its  ordinary  channel.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxiii

this  river  varies  so  greatly  in  different  parts  of  its  course,  that  no  general  inference  is  to  be
deduced  from  that  circumstance.  Indeed,  this  spot  is,  properly  speaking,  one  of  the  fords  of
the  river,  and  therefore  more  practicable,  both  as  to  breadth  and  depth  than  other  points,  above
and  below.  As  to  the  breadth  here,  accounts  vary  between  twenty  and  thirty  yards,  and  an
average  may  therefore  be  struck  at  twenty-five.  The  depth  is  not  so  well  ascertained.  Shaw
says,  three  yards  at  the  brink ;  but  it  does  not  appear  at  what  point  he  made  this  observa-
tion. Maundrell,  who  certainly  was  at  the  Catholic  place  of  ablution,  says,  that  its  depth
was  there  greater  than  his  height.  Mr.  Paxton,  who  was  at  the  lower  point  in  the  month  of
October,  thought  it  might  then  have  been  forded  but  for  the  rapidity  of  the  current ;  and  Mr.
Arundale,  who  was  there  in  the  same  month,  actually  represents  it  as  being  forded,  in  the
drawing  (furnished  by  him)  at  the  head  of  this  chapter.  Mr.  Paxton,  notwithstanding  the
strong  current,  swam  across  the  river  and  back  again  in  safety ;  and  in  the  same  month  of
October,  the  Marquis  of  Waterford  performed  the  same  feat  "  without  difficulty."  We  sus-
pect, however,  that  this  could  not  be  done  at  the  time  of  pilgrimage  in  early  spring,  when  the
stream  appears  to  be  fuller,  and  the  current  stronger  than  in  the  fall  of  the  year.  At  all
events,  the  current  is  then  so  strong,  that,  according  to  all  accounts,  many  of  the  pilgrims  are
swept  away  by  it ;  and  although  most  of  them  save  themselves,  by  getting  hold  of  the  willows
or  bushes  that  overhang  the  stream,  a  year  seldom  passes  in  which  some  of  them  are  not
drowned.a

The  water  has  here,  and  for  the  remainder  of  its  course,  a  muddy,  or,  as  some  describe  it,  a
sulphurous  white  appearance,  derived,  it  would  seem,  from  its  having  passed  through  beds  of
sandy  clay.  It  is,  however,  very  wholesome,  always  cool,  and  nearly  tasteless.  Although
passing  through  some  saline  tracts,  it  does  not  contain  more  than  one  three-hundredth  of  its
weight  of  salts ;  but  these  are  of  the  same  kinds  which  are  found  more  abundantly  in  the
waters  of  the  Dead  Sea.

Such  travellers  as  have  proceeded  from  this  point  to  the  head  of  the  Dead  Sea,  have  gene-
rally journeyed  at  some  distance  west  from  the  river.  Mr.  Stephens,  however,  tracked  it
down  to  the  lake,  following  all  its  flexures.  He  states  that  below  the  place  of  pilgrimage,
there  is  no  point  on  the  river  that  offers  any  natural  attractions  to  the  traveller.  The  stream
contracts  to  about  thirty  paces  wide  a  little  below  the  place  of  bathing,  but  again  widens  as  it
approaches  its  termination.  Speaking  generally  of  this  portion  of  the  river,  Mr.  Stephens  says,
"  It  is  a  small,  broken,  and  muddy  stream,  running  between  banks  of  barren  sand,  without
beauty  or  verdure  ;  and  if  it  were  not  for  the  associations  connected  with  it,  a  man  would  turn
from  it  as  the  most  uninteresting  of  rivers."  This,  it  will  be  remarked,  is  the  observation  of
an  American,  accustomed  to  magnificent  rivers : — but  we  will  not  repeat  what  has  been  said
on  this  point,  in  a  preceding  page.  This  traveller  in  one  place  saw  some  Arabs  wading  across ;
and  yet  the  river,  as  far  as  he  could  judge,  had  not  fallen  more  than  two  feet. — "  For  the  last
two  or  three  miles  it  runs  between  perpendicular  banks  of  sand,  from  five  to  ten  feet  high,
and  its  pure  waters  are  already  contaminated  by  the  pestiferous  influence  of  the  bituminous
lake.  On  the  left  it  stops  even  with  the  shore  ;  but  on  the  right  the  bank  runs  out  to  a  low,
sandy  point,  round  which  a  quantity  of  drift  wood  is  collected ;  and  here,  with  a  gentle  ripple
of  its  waters,  the  Jordan  enters  the  Dead  Sea."  If  this  account  is  different  from  others,  it  is
doubtless  because  of  the  difference,  at  different  times  of  the  year,  to  which  we  have  already
adverted.  Thus  Mr.  Jolliffe  describes  the  stream  as  being,  at  its  embouchure,  deep  and  rapid,
rolling  a  considerable  volume  of  waters  into  the  Dead  Sea.  Its  width  appeared  to  him  to  be
from  200  to  300  feet.b  The  current  was  so  violent  that  a  Greek  servant  who  attempted  to
cross  it,  though  strong,  active,  and  an  expert  swimmer,  found  it  impracticable.     This  was  the

a  "  While  I  was  looking  on,  two  men,  a  Russian  and  a  Greek,  were  overpowered  by  the  torrent,  and  as  neither  of  them  could
swim,  they  clung  to  each  other,  and  were  soon  under  water.  The  Russian  was  entangled  among  the  roots  of  trees,  and  rose  to
the  surface  ;  but  though  he  seized  some  overhanging  branches,  with  the  grasp  of  a  perishing  man,  the  current  was  ton  strong,  and
he  was  again  carried  away  by  the  stream.  He  was,  however,  saved  at  some  distance  lower  down,  but  the  Greek  was  never  seen
after  he  first  sunk.  I  was  told  that  a  Turk  was  also  drowned  at  the  same  place,  but  I  did  not  witness  the  circumstance.  It  ex-
cited little  attention  among  the  people,  and  they  continued  to  enter  the  water  with  the  same  fearlessness  as  before." — Hardy's
'  Notices  of  the  Holy  Land.'

b  Mr.  Robinson  says  about  fifty  yards.

clxxiv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VI.

more  to  be  regretted  as  he  was  to  have  taken  across  one  end  of  a  measuring  line,  whereby  the
actual  breadth  might  have  been  ascertained.  It  appears  that  the  river  does  not  extend  its
current  into  the  Dead  Sea,  as  some  of  the  older  writers  allege ;  but  is  stopped  at  once  by  the
denser  waters  of  the  lake.

Having  examined  the  river  Jordan  thus  in  detail,  there  is  little  need  of  other  collective  obser-
vations, than  the  above  account  has  comprehended.  It  may  be  well,  however,  that  the  reader
should  remember  that  the  described  points  are  for  the  most  part  fords ;  and  where,  therefore,
from  the  very  nature  of  the  distinction,  the  river  is  more  shallow  than  in  other  places.  Several
attempts  have  been  made  to  estimate  the  average  breadth  and  depth  of  the  Jordan  between  the
two  lakes.  Dr.  Shaw  took  its  average  breadth  at  thirty  yards,  and  its  depth  at  nine  feet,  and
assumed  its  speed  to  be  two  miles  an  hour ;  on  which  data  he  calculated  that  the  river  dis-
charged into  the  Dead  Sea  daily,  6,090,000  tuns  of  water.  Volney  makes  the  breadth  from
sixty  to  eighty  feet,  and  the  depth  ten  or  twelve  feet.  Mariti  reckons  the  average  breadth,  at
ordinary  times,  as  sixty  feet,  and  the  breadth  from  seven  to  nine  feet ;  and  he  affirms  that  at
the  seasons  of  its  overflow,  the  inundation  extends  for  four  miles,  and  that  sometimes  the  in-
equality of  the  soil  then  parts  it  into  two  different  beds.  Legh  compares  the  river  to  the  Thames
below  Oxford,  but  describes  it  as  more  rapid.  Elliot  reckons  that  between  the  two  lakes  the
breadth  of  the  stream  varies  from  thirty  to  sixty  yards,  and  its  depth  from  six  to  sixteen.  If
we  collate  these  statements  with  the  observations  (already  recorded)  of  other  travellers  made  at
various  points,  we  shall  see  reason  to  conclude  that  the  true  average  breadth  may  be  about
thirty  yards,  and  the  depth  eight  or  nine  feet.

We  have  already  had  occasion  to  remark  how  singularly  low  the  valley  through  which  this
river  flows  lies,  as  compared  with  the  central  part  of  Canaan,  and  with  the  country  beyond
Jordan.  Some  notion  of  this  may  be  formed  from  the  fact  that  according  to  Mr.  Russegger,
the  bathing-place  of  the  pilgrims  is  not  less  than  1269  feet  below  the  level  of  the  Mediter-
ranean, while  at  the  head  of  the  Dead  Sea,  the  depression  reaches  to  1319  French  feet,  or
nearly  1400  English  feet,  below  the  same  level.  This  depression  occasions,  along  the
borders  of  the  river,  a  marked  distinction  of  climate,  which  we  shall  find  another  occasion  to
describe.

Although  the  water  is  always  turbid  in  the  latter  part  of  the  river's  course,  it  is  said  that
when  taken  from  the  stream  and  left  in  a  vessel,  it  soon  clears  itself,  and  deposits  a  black

[The  Dead  Sea  ]

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxv

sediment,  containing  bituminous  particles.  Nevertheless  it  is  soft,  incorruptible,  and  abounds
in  fish.  In  all  times  pilgrims  have  been  accustomed  to  take  home  with  them,  not  only  willow-
staves  cut  from  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  and  pebbles  from  its  bed,  but  also  bottles  of  the
water,  to  which,  by  reason  of  its  alleged  sanctity,  peculiar  virtues  of  healing  to  the  body  and
the  soul  were  ascribed.  Vases  of  Jordan  water  were  received  as  valuable  presents  by  the
princes  of  Christendom,  who  made  use  of  it  in  the  baptism  of  their  children,  it  being  deemed
far  more  efficacious  than  any  other  water  in  cleansing  from  the  taint  of  original  sin.a

Having  now  attended  the  Jordan  to  the  Dead  Sea,  that  singular  body  of  water  next  requires
our  attention.

The  awful  catastrophe  whereby  the  fruitful  plain  of  Siddim  underwent  that  change  by
which  this  lake  is  usually  supposed  to  have  been  formed,  has  already  been  noticed  in  the
historical  portion  of  this  work,  and  need  not  detain  us  in  this  place.

This  lake  is  known  by  various  names  in  the  Scriptures,  as  the  Sea  of  the  Plain,h  from  its
situation  in  the  great  hollow  or  plain  of  the  Jordan,  or,  perhaps,  from  its  covering  the
ancient  and  beautiful  plain  of  Siddim — The  Salt  Sea,c  from  the  extreme  saltness  of  its
waters;  and  the  East  Sea,A  from  its  situation  with  respect  to  the  east  of  Judea,  and  in
contradistinction  to  the  West  Sea,  or  the  Mediterranean.  By  Josephus  and  the  classical
writers  in  general,  it  is  also  called  Lacus  Asphaltites,  from  the  quantities  of  asphaltum  which
are  found  in  it  and  on  its  borders.  Mare  Morluum,  or  the  Dead  Sea,  was  another  of  its
names,  and  that  by  which  it  is  now  generally  known  in  Europe.  But  the  natives  now  call  it
Bahr  Lout,  the  Sea  of  Lot,  or  Bahr  Mutneh,  the  Stinking  Sea.

This  very  remarkable  body  of  water  was  as  much  an  object  of  curiosity  and  wonder  in
ancient  as  it  has  been  in  modern  times.  But  the  ancient  genius,  being  essentially  exagge-
rative, it  became  invested  with  many  circumstances  of  horror  and  wonder  which  do  not  pro-
perly belong  to  it,  and  from  which  it  has  hardly  been  yet  cleared.

As  the  lake  has  not  yet  been  fully  explored  and  surveyed,  as  there  is  much  reason  to  hope
it  will  soon  be,  it  may  be  still  said  that  there  is  no  authority  for  the  description  of  it  equal  to
that  of  Josephus,  whose  account  necessarily  embodies  the  information  possessed  by  those  who
had  for  ages  been  inhabitants  of  the  country,  and  by  whom  it  must  have  been  intimately
known  in  every  part.  We  shall,  therefore,  as  the  most  eligible  course,  give  his  account,  and
then  offer  our  observations  in  the  same  order  in  which  his  details  are  given,  to  illustrate  or
explain  the  several  particulars.

The  length  of  the  lake  he  states  as  580  stades,  and  its  breadth  150.  This  is  rendered  by
his  translators  and  interpreters  into  72  miles  long  by  18  broad,  it  being  very  convenient  to
consider  the  stade  as  equivalent  to  the  furlong,  of  which  eight  make  one  mile.  In  fact,  the
word  stade  is  usually  rendered  by  furlong  in  most  old  translations  and  descriptions  from
ancient  sources.  But  it  is  forgotton  that  while  of  the  Roman  stades  there  were  indeed  600  to
the  degree,  there  was  the  older  and  shorter  Greek  stade  of  700  to  the  degree,  that  is  of  about
ten  to  the  mile.  Now  we  have  satisfied  ourselves,  by  comparing  the  measurements  of
Josephus  between  known  points,  that  he  employs  this  shorter  measure ;  and  that,  therefore,
he  intends  to  describe  the  Asphaltic  Lake  as  not  more  than  56  miles  long  by  15  broad.

The  shores  he  describes  as  unfruitful ;  the  waters  were  very  bitter,  and  so  dense  of  body,
that  they  bore  up  the  heaviest  things  that  were  thrown  into  it ;  nor  would  it  be  easy  for  any
one  to  sink  therein  even  if  he  wished.  Accordingly,  when  Vespasian  visited  the  lake,  he
made  experiment  of  this,  by  causing  some  men  who  could  not  swim  to  have  their  hands  tied
behind  them  and  to  be  cast  into  the  lake,  when  it  was  seen  that  they  were  buoyed  up  by  the
water  even  as  light  bodies  are  impelled  upward  by  the  wind.

The  colour  of  the  water  was  observed  to  change  in  a  very  remarkable  manner.  It  altered
its  appearance  regularly  three  times  every  day,  according  to  the  difference  in  the  direction  in

n  Lindsay,  ii.  65  ;  Paxton,  158  ;  Arundale,  80  ;  Stephens,  ii.  361—363  ;  Jolliffe,  1 15;  Robinson,  70  ;  Elliot,  ii.  477;   Shaw,  ii.
156;  Mariti.ii.  326,  327;  Nau,  2?2.
b  Deut.  iii.  17,  iv.  19.  o  Deut.  iii.  17  ;  Josh.  xv.  5.  d  Ezek.  xlvii.  18 ;  Joel  ii.  20.

clxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

which  the  rays  of  the  sun  shone  upon  and  were  reflected  from  it.     But  this,  we  may  observe,
is  very  natural,  and  occurs  more  or  less  in  every  lake  hemmed  in  by  high  mountains.

It  appears  that  then,  as  now,  masses  of  black  bitumen,  of  which  we  have  spoken  in  another
place  a  were  thrown  up  to  the  surface.  Josephus  compares  these  masses,  quaintly  enough,  to
headless  bulls,  both  in  shape  and  size ;  adding,  that  men  went  out  in  boats  to  collect  it,  which
was  a  work  of  some  labour,  from  the  tenacity  of  the  mass,  which  rendered  it  difficult  to  pro-
portion the  quantity  taken  on  board  to  the  burden  of  the  vessel.  It  was  used  for  caulking
ships,  and  in  embalments,  as  well  as  for  various  medicinal  purposes.

Josephus  speaks  of  Ike  land  of  Sodom,ihe  desolation  of  which  has  been  recorded  elsewhere,
not  as  the  land  now  covered  by  the  lake,  but  as  the  land  which  still  bordered  on  this  lake.
This,  he  says,  was  once  a  happy  and  blessed  country ;  but,  for  the  iniquities  of  its  people,  was
burnt  up  and  consumed  by  the  fires  of  heaven.  Of  this  Divine  judgment  the  land  still  offered
abundant  traces.  Even  some  remains  of  the  ruined  cities  might  still  be  perceived.  The  fruits
which  grew  there  were  also  appropriate  monuments  of  its  condition  ;  for  while  to  the  eye  they
seemed  pleasant  and  good  for  food,  they  were  crushed  in  the  hand  that  plucked  them,  and
offered  nothing  but  dust  and  ashes.

From  other  Jewish  sources  we  get  little  further  information.  We  only  learn  that  its  bitumen
was  one  of  the  ingredients  in  the  holy  incense,  perhaps  to  render  it  inflammable  ;  and  that  it
was  usual  among  the  later  Jews  to  devote  to  'the  Salt  Sea,' anything  destined  to  rejection
and  cursing,  and  that  might  by  no  means  be  used.

It  is  surprising  how  little  has  been  added,  until  very  recently,  to  the  account  which  Josephus
gives.  The  older  travellers  seldom  saw  anything  but  what  they  went  purposely  to  see,  or  did
anything  but  what  they  had  purposed  to  do.  The  journey  to  that  quarter  has  always,  from  the
time  of  Christ  till  now,  been  dangerous  from  being  infested  by  robbers  and  Bedouins.  And  it
was  so  great  a  thing  to  visit  the  Jordan,  and  in  its  stream  to  leave  the  taint  of  original  sin,  and
to  secure  the  soul  and  body  from  the  power  of  hell,  that  few  of  the  pilgrims  concerned  them-
selves about  so  comparatively  trifling  and  foreign  a  matter  as  a  visit  to  the  Dead  Sea.  The
best  information  is  that  supplied  by  the  monks  and  missionaries,  whose  long  residence  in  the
country  afforded  them  many  opportunities  of  obtaining  information  which  could  not  be  equally
open  to  the  pilgrim  or  passing  traveller.  And,  upon  the  whole,  as  far  as  substantial  facts  are
concerned,  it  is  probable  that  very  nearly  as  much  information  concerning  this  sea  existed  in
books  a  hundred  and  sixty  years  ago  as  at  the  present  time,  notwithstanding  the  seeming  dis-
coveries which  have  been  made  in  that  quarter  within  the  last  thirty  years.  The  accounts  of
the  old  travellers  do  not  differ  from  one  another  more  than  those  of  the  modern — and  the  dif-
ferences in  both  cases  may  be  referred  to  the  same  causes — the  different  times  of  the  year  in
which  the  visits  were  made,  and  the  difference  of  temperament  in  the  visitors,  and  the  greater
or  less  manifestation  in  them  of  those  imaginative  faculties  which  give  their  own  hue  to  the
objects  they  regard.

With  respect  to  the  dimensions  of  the  lake  the  old  travellers  differ  less  among  themselves
perhaps  than  those  of  later  date.  The  average  of  their  accounts  would  make  it  about  forty-five
miles  in  length  by  ten  in  breadth,  which  differs  little  from  the  measurement  we  have  inter-
preted Josephus  to  give,  and  agrees  as  nearly  as  may  be  with  the  dimensions  given  to  it  in
the  map  lately  published  by  the  Geographical  Society .b

Antoninus  Martyr  merely  speaks  of  the  bitumen  and  sulphur  of  the  lake,  and  the  absence
of  any  living  thing  on  its  waters,  or  of  trees  or  verdure  on  its  shores.  But  he  adds  that  in
July  and  August  it  was  usual  in  his  time  for  lepers  to  resort  to  the  lake,  and  bathing  in  its
waters,  it  sometimes  pleased  God  that  they  were  healed.

Brocard  confirms  the  account  of  its  steril  shores.  A  hideous  vapour,  he  says,  rises  from  the
lake,  so  that  the  smoke  and  darkness  by  which  it  was  invested  made  it  no  inapt  type  of  hell.
This  vapour  is  so  deleterious  that  the  barbarians  inhabiting  the  neighbourhood  took  care  to
fix  themselves  beyond  the  point  to  which  it  continues  to  be  injurious,  when  driven  before  the
wind.

a  Physical  History,  p.  lxxx.  b  In  vol.  xi.  pt.  2,  of  its  ■  Journal.'

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxvii

Other  old  writers  describe  the  water  as  an  abominable  infusion  of  nitre  and  sulphur,  so
offensive  and  nauseous  to  the  smell  and  taste,  that  the  salt  of  the  lake  was  never  applied  to
any  use.  Arculf a  notices  the  saline  deposit  on  the  borders  of  the  lake,  caused  by  the  absorp-
tion, by  heat,  of  the  water  thrown  high  up  the  shore  by  tempests,  or  that  is  left  when  the  lake
has  sunk  to  its  usual  level  after  the  periodical  overflow.

Anselm  contradicts  much  that  previous  writers  had  stated.  He  had  bathed  his  feet  in  the
lake,  and  had  seen  naked  Arabs  and  Greeks  bathing  their  whole  persons,  without  being  at  all
annoyed  by  the  fetor  or  the  pestilential  vapours,  of  which  so  much  had  been  said.  And  as  to
the  sterility  of  the  borders,  he  declares  there  was  no  part  of  the  Holy  Land  in  which  he  saw
better  pasturage;  the  absence  of  trees  he  seems  to  allow  by  his  silence.

Some  of  the  middle  age  writers  attribute  the  absence  of  boats  upon  the  lake  to  the  injurious
effects  of  the  vapour,  so  that  men  could  not  endure  it,  and  that  it  is  therefore,  in  effect,  not
navigable.  But  this  is  contradicted  by  the  account  already  copied  from  Josephus ;  and  Scheriff
ibn  Idris b  bears  witness  that  there  were  some  few  vessels  on  the  lake  in  his  time.  A  more
recent  contradiction  will  presently  be  adduced.

We  know  no  early  writer  who  pretends,  as  often  stated  in  later  times,  that  the  vapours  of
this  lake  are  so  fatal  to  birds,  that  they  cannot  pass  over  it  or  remain  on  its  borders.  Eugene
Roger,  who  saw  that  the  vapour,  of  which  so  much  had  been  said,  was  not  a  spontaneous  exha-
lation from  the  lake,  but  was  an  absorption  of  moisture  from  the  lake  by  the  heat  of  the  pro-
cumbent air,  alleges  that  it  was  so  sulphurous  that  insects  could  not  endure  it.  And  this  may
be  true  while  the  process  of  absorption  is  going  on  with  great  activity ;  for  we  have  evidence
that  great  numbers  of  locusts  have  been  seen  lying  dead  on  the  borders  of  the  lake.

The  same  writer  affirms  that  the  salt  of  the  Dead  Sea  was  in  use  for  culinary  purposes  in
Jerusalem  :  and  this  is  confirmed  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  who  saw  people  collecting  the  salt
towards  the  southern  extremity  of  the  lake ;  and  by  Madden,  who  met  people  who  were
bound  from  Jerusalem  to  the  western  border  of  the  lake,  to  collect  salt  there.

That  no  fish  will  live  in  the  lake,  and  that,  although  fish  abound  in  the  lake  of  Gennesareth
and  the  river  Jordan,  those  that  make  their  way  to  the  Asphaltic  Lake  soon  die,  is  confirmed
by  Jerome,  many  years  of  whose  valuable  life  were  spent  in  the  neighbourhood.  He  makes
this  remark  in  a  note  on  Ezek.  xlvii.  9,  10.  Indeed,  that  chapter  of  the  prophet,  by  describe
ing  what  the  lake  should  offer  when  its  waters  became  wholesome,  clearly  intimates  what  it
had  not  in  its  present  unwholesome  state.  In  this  obvious  view,  the  passage  is  so  interesting
that  we  will  transcribe  it  below."  That  fish  coming  from  the  wholesome  waters  of  the  lake
of  Tiberias  and  the  Jordan  should  perish  in  the  briny  and  bitter  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  is
natural.  That  the  lake  should  have  no  fish  of  its  own  is  not  of  itself  so  evident,  but  is  so
probable,  and  supported  by  such  a  concurrent  weight  of  testimony,  that  we  have  no  doubt  on
the  subject.  That  shells  have  been  found  on  the  shore  proves  nothing  as  to  shell- fish.  They
or  their  shells  might  be  brought  down  by  the  river  and  deposited  on  the  shore ;  besides,  that
shells  of  some  kind  or  other  are  found  in  almost  all  parts  of  the  land.

It  is  not  difficult  to  account  for  the  assertion  of  Josephus  that  traces  of  the  guilty  cities
of  the  plain  might  still  be  perceived.  It  is  clear  that  the  Jewish  historian  did  not  consider
that  the  cities  were  submerged  in  the  lake,  but  lay  upon  its  borders.  There  is  nothing  in  his
more  formal  account  of  the  lake,  or  in  his  historical  notice  of  the  destruction  of  Sodom  to

a  In  Adamnanus,  de  Locis  Terrae  Sanctce,  1.  ii  cap.  14.  b  Cited  hi  Reland,  Palaestina,  lib.  i.  cap.  38.

c  "These  waters  issue  out  towards  the  east  country,  and  go  down  into  the  desert,  and  go  into  the  sea;  which  being  brought
forth  into  the  sea,  the  waters  shall  be  healed.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  everything  that  liveth,  which  moveth,  whitherso-
ever the  rivers  shall  come,  shall  live  ;  and  there  shall  be  a  very  great  multitude  ofjish.  because  these  waters  shall  come  thither  ;
for  they  shall  be  healed  ;  and  everything  shall  live  whither  the  river  cometh.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  Jishers  sliall  stand
upon  it  from  Engedi  even  unto  En-eglaim;  they  shall  be  a  place  to  spread  forth  nets,  their  Jish  shall  be  according  to  their  hind,  even
as  the  Jish  if  the  great  sea  [Mediterranean],  exceeding  many.  But  the  miry  places  thereof,  and  the  marishes  thereof  shall  not  be
healed,  they  shall  be  given  to  salt.  And  by  the  river  upon  the  bank  thereof,  on  this  side  and  on  that  side,  shall  grow  all  trees  for
meat,  whose  leaf  shall  not  fade,  neither  shall  the  fruit  thereof  be  consumed." —Ezek.  xlvii.  8—12.  In  this  very  interesting  passage
we  see  it  clearly  intimated  that  no  fish  could  live  in  the  lake ;  that  no  useful  trees  grew  on  its  banks,  and  from  the  context  it  may
not  be  difficult  to  collect  that  there  mere  such  unprofitable  fruits  as  the  famous  *'  apples  of  Sodom,"  which  will  require  our  atten-
tion in  another  place.  We  also  observe  that  the  natural  salt  pans  to  the  S.E.  of  the  lake  were  so  useful  from  the  supply  of  salt
which  they  afforded  the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  that  they  were  on  that  account  exempted  from  the  curative  processes  meta-
phorically applied  to  the  lake  itself.

vol.  i.  2  a

clxxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

suggest  that  he  supposed  the  lake  was  at  that  time  first  formed.  He  rather  states  that  it
previously  existed,  hut  that  its  nature,  and  that  of  its  shores,  was  so  changed  as  to  be  no
longer  beautiful  and  rich,  as  of  old.  In  short,  he  manifestly  conceives  that  Sodom  and  the
other  cities  stood  upon  the  borders  of  the  lake,  in  like  manner  as  Tiberias,  Capernaum,  Cha-
razin,  Bethsaida,  and  other  towns,  stood  upon  the  lake  of  Gennesareth ;  and,  were  this  the
case,  it  is  certainly  not  impossible  that  in  such  a  climate,  and  in  a  quarter  so  unfrequented,
some  traces  of  the  doomed  cities  might  be  preserved,  especially  as  the  saline  incrustations  of
the  lake  might  tend  to  their  preservation.  But  it  is  more  likely  that  the  ruins  of  towns  of  far
later  origin  might  be  taken  for  those  of  Sodom,  Gomorrah,  Admah,  and  Zeboim.  It  is  pre-
cisely in  this  sense  that  Varthema a  understood  Josephus,  and  declares  himself  to  have  seen
the  same  ruins : — "  We  came  to  the  playne  or  valley  of  Sodoma  and  Gomorrha,  where  we
found  it  to  be  true  that  is  written  in  Holy  Scripture ;  for  there  yet  remayne  the  ruynes  of  the
destroyed  citie  as  witnesse  of  God's  wrath.  We  may  affyrme  that  there  are  three  cities,  and
eche  of  them  scituate  on  the  declyning  of  three  hylles  :  and  the  ruynes  do  appeare  about  the
heyght  of  three  or  foure  cubites.  There  is  yet  seen  neare,  I  wotte,  what  is  lyke  blood,  or
lyke  redde  waxe  myxt  with  earth."  Although  this  writer  is  not  the  most  credible  of  travellers,
it  is  very  likely  he  saw  such  ruins  as  he  mentions,  but  that  they  were  the  ruins  of  "  the  cities
of  the  plain  "  is  quite  another  question.  Since  then,  however,  travellers,  misunderstanding
the  position  taken  by  Josephus,  have  been  seeking  the  ruins  under  the  water ;  and,  as  the
water  is  very  clear,  while  the  bottom  doubtless  contains  rocks,  stones,  and  other  protuberant
masses,  it  would  be  strange  if,  with  tolerably  active  imaginations,  they  had  not  found  what
they  sought.  Indeed  they  have  thrown  new  light  on  the  architecture  of  the  patriarchal  ages,
as  they  have  not  only  seen  masses  of  stone  buildings,  but  rows  of  columns  "with  goodly
chapiters  adorned."  Others  have  only  heard  from  their  native  guides  that,  when  the  lake  is
very  low,  ruins  of  towns  are  seen  at  the  bottom.  It  is  possible  that  some  travellers  have
stated,  as  the  result  of  their  own  observation,  what  they  thus  heard  from  their  guides.  Mr.
Elliot,  on  receiving  this  information  from  his  guide,  the  sheikh  of  Bethlehem,  observes, —
"  While  holding  our  opinion  in  abeyance  on  this  point  we  must  remember  we  have  no  parallel
instance  from  which  to  deduce  a  positive  conclusion,  that  under  water  so  impregnated,  masonry
could  not  endure  for  four  thousand  years."  Yes,  "masonry ;"  but  a  moment's  thought  will
suggest  a  doubt  Avhether  the  buildings  of  the  patriarchal  age  in  Syria  were  anything  more
than  dried  mud  and  timber.  At  the  present  day  the  inhabitants  of  Syria  build  with  these
materials,  even  though  quarries  are  at  their  doors,  from  the  expense  of  working  them,  and
the  want  of  means  of  conveying  stone  even  to  a  short  distance.  It  does  not  seem  at  all  likely
that  the  people  of  the  country  were  in  the  patriarchal  age.  in  a  better  condition  in  this  respect
than  the  present  inhabitants.  Besides,  Job,  who  lived  in  that  age,  and  on  the  borders  of  the
same  country,  describes  men  as  then  building  "  houses  of  clay,"  not  of  stone ;  and  if  the
houses  of  the  very  ancient  inhabitants  were  of  clay,  and  such  as  the  present  inhabitants  build
(and  they  were  not  likely  to  have  been  better),  we  know  that  moisture  is  that  which  they  are
least  able  to  stand,  and  that  an  unusually  wet  season  does  immense  damage  to  them,  and
ruins  many  of  them  ;  and  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  any  mass  of  building  to  remain
three  days  in  water  without  falling  to  pieces,  and  being  resolved  into  a  muddy  sediment.
Indeed  the  liability  of  such  houses  as  existed  in  his  time  of  being  swept  away  and  destroyed
by  water  is  plainly  intimated  by  Job.b  But  Josephus  was  not  guilty  of  the  absurdity  of
supposing  that  the  ruins  of  Sodom  might  still  be  found  under  the  water.

All  the  old  travellers  were  uncommonly  perplexed  to  account  for  the  fact  that,  although
the  Dead  Sea  was  constantly  receiving  large  supplies  of  water  from  the  Jordan  and  other
rivers,  and  had  no  visible  outlet  by  which  they  might  be  again  discharged,  its  waters  were
generally  at  the  same  level.     At  last  it  was  concluded  that  the  redundant  waters  passed  off  to

a  ■*'  The  Navigations  and  Voyages  of  Lewes  Vertomanus  [Varthema,  sometimes  Barthema] ,  gentelman  of  the  citie  of  Rome,  lo
the  regions  of  Arabia,  Egypte,  Persia,  Syria,  Ethiopia,  and  East  India,  both  within  and  without  the  ryuer  of  Ganges,  &c,  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lorde,  1503.  Conteyning  many  notable  and  straunge  tilings,  both  hystoricall  and  naturall.  Translated  out  of
Latin  into  Englyshe,  by  Richard  Eden,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lorde,  1576.

b  Job  iv.  19,  xxii.  16.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxix

the  Mediterranean  or  the  Elanitic  Gulf  by  some  subterraneous  communication.  As  the
Mediterranean  was  nearest,  the  communication  was  most  generally  supposed  to  be  with  that
sea,  especially  after  a  story  gained  currency,  that  a  wooden  bowl,  which  a  pilgrim  had  let  fall
into  the  Asphaltic  Lake,  had  been  picked  up  on  the  shores  of  Sicily.  Others,  justly  question-
ing this  ground,  were  driven  to  the  alternative  of  supposing  that  a  quantity  of  water  equal  to
that  which  the  lake  received,  was  absorbed  by  the  burning  sands  on  its  borders.  But  this
question  has  now  long  been  set  at  rest.  It  is  known  that  in  the  case  of  this  and  many  other
inland  lakes  which  have  no  visible  outlet,  the  air  imbibes  from  the  surface  as  much  water  as
the  rivers  give  to  it,  thus  keeping  it  at  the  same  level,  except  at  the  season  when  the  rivers,  from
rains  and  melted  snows,  pour  in  more  than  the  usual  ^supply,  for  then  the  lake  rises  above  its
usual  level.  We  know  not  that  it  has  been  seen  in  this  state,  but  the  fact  is  demonstrated  by
the  drift-wood  and  other*  matters  which  lie  at  what  may  be  called  the  high-water  mark,  which
mark  is  in  some  places  more  than  a  mile  from  the  ordinary  edge  of  the  water.  Dr.  Halley
showed  that  the  absorption  of  water  from  the  surface  of  the  Mediterranean  was  equal  to  6914
tuns  daily  for  every  square  mile.  Now  the  absorption  is  the  most  active  where  the  heat  of  the
air  is  most  intense ;  and  as  there  is,  perhaps,  hardly  any  place  without  the  tropics  where  the
heat  is  greater  than  in  the  basin  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  a  still  more
active  evaporation  than  this  must  be  allowed,  and  will  be  found  fully  adequate  to  consume  all
the  water  which  the  lake  receives,  even  if  as  much  as  Dr.  Shaw  has  calculated.  In  a  basin
so  confined,  and  in  which  the  air  becomes  so  intensely  heated,  and  where,  moreover,  the
water  is  of  such  peculiar  qualities,  the  process  of  evaporation,  or  the  incumbent  vapour,  may
be  expected  to  be  oftener  visible  than  under  other  circumstances.  Hence  the  accounts  of  the
mists,  the  vapours,  the  smoke,  the  darkness  covering  the  lake,  and  which  the  older  travellers
supposed  to  be  spontaneous  emissions  from  it,  and  which,  we  believe,  Morison  was  the  first  to
perceive  to  be  no  other  than  the  vapour  drawn  up,  as  from  other  waters,  by  the  heat  of  the
sun.  But  although  he  thus  explains  the  accounts  of  other  travellers,  he  acknowledges  that  in
his  repeated  visits  to  the  northern  borders  of  the  lake  these  appearances  were  never  visible  to
him,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  air  seemed  at  all  times  as  serene  and  pure  as  in  the  plain  of
Jericho.  More  recent  travellers  have  confirmed  this  as  the  general  appearance  of  the  lake.
But  that  there  were  occasional  appearances  which,  observed  in  that  place,  and  ill  understood,
offered  a  foundation  for  the  old  accounts,  may  be  collected  from  Irby  and  Mangles,  who  state
that  on  their  journey  from  Kerek  to  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea,  they  came  to  a
pass  which  commanded  an  extensive  prospect  over  the  lake,  when  they  could  observe  the
effect  of  the  evaporation  arising  from  it  in  broad  transparent  columns  of  vapour,  not  unlike
water-spouts  in  appearance,  but  very  much  larger.

Having  dwelt  on  these  various  particulars,  which  enter  into  a  description  of  the  Asphaltic
Lake,  we  now  beg  to  introduce  our  readers  to  Nau,  the  Jesuit,  whose  book  we  have  had
frequent  occasions  to  quote  and  to  mention  with  high  praise.  Looking  at  his  account  of  the
Dead  Sea,  we  have  no  hesitation  to  declare,  that  it  is  the  best  and  most  satisfactory  single
account  that  any  traveller  has,  even  to  this  day,  furnished,  although  it  be  true  that  there  are
particular  points  which  may  have  been  better  described  by  other  travellers.  Even  the  leading
facts,  concerning  the  southern  termination  of  the  lake,  which,  150  years  after,  Captains  Irby
and  Mangles  might  fairly  claim  to  have  discovered,  were  known  to  this  intelligent  tra-
veller, and  are  duly  registered  in  his  book.  We  shall,  therefore,  conclude  this  survey  of  the
information  given  by  the  old  travellers  with  the  substance  of  his  description,  after  which  we
shall  sum  up  such  really  additional  information  as  more  recent  authorities  have  furnished.

The  water  is  beautifully  clear  and  transparent,  though  of  most  abominable  taste.  Only
violent  winds  blowing  from  particular  quarters  are  able  to  ruffle  the  surface  of  the  lake,  which
is  in  general  perfectly  smooth  and  still,  partly  from  its  confined  situation,  and  partly,  perhaps,
from  the  density  of  the  water.  Our  author  thinks  that  it  is  to  this  general  stillness  rather  than
to  the  absence  of  fish  [which  he  admits],  or  to  its  deleterious  exhalations  [which  he  does  not
admit],  that  the  lake  owes  the  name  of  the  Dead  Sea.

2  a  2

clxxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

Of  the  dense  and  horrible  vapours  covering  the  lake,  as  described  by  most  previous  writers,
he  could  see  nothing  in  any  of  his  journeys ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  surface  always  appeared
to  be  as  fair  and  as  clear  from  vapours  as  any  other  water.  The  difference  in  the  accounts  of
former  travellers  as  to  the  appearance  of  the  borders,  he  reconciles  by  observing  that,  in
general,  the  shores  of  the  lake  have  a  burnt  and  cindery  appearance.  Nevertheless,  where
this  burnt  land  has  been  refreshed  by  the  rains  of  winter  and  of  spring,  a  rather  profuse
herbage  appears,  including  an  unusual  proportion  of  thorny  plants  and  hurtful  herbs.

Many  other  particulars  we  omit,  to  avoid  repeating  what  has  been  already  stated,  and  pro-
ceed to  his  peculiar  and  interesting  information  respecting  the  southern  portion  of  the  lake.

Nau  had  the  good  fortune,  when  on  a  journey  to  Damascus,  to  form  the  acquaintance  of
Daniel  the  abbot  (as  he  calls  him)  of  the  Greek  monastery  of  Santa  Saba,  which  is  situated
about  midway  between  Bethlehem  and  the  northern  extremity  of  the  lake.  It  soon  transpired
that  this  person  had  several  times  made  the  complete  tour  of  the  lake,  under  the  protection  of
an  Arab  escort.  Nau,  eager  to  avail  himself  of  this  opportunity  of  collecting  information,
showed  the  monk  a  map  in  which  the  Dead  Sea  was  represented  in  the  usual  manner;  on
which  Daniel  informed  him  that  the  representation  of  the  southern  extremity  of  the  lake  was
entirely  wrong.  That,  in  fact,  a  second  lake  was  there  formed,  of  a  round  figure,  approaching
to  an  oval,  and  connected  with  the  principal  lake  by  a  narrowed  channel.  That  at  this  point
the  bottom  of  the  lake  was  raised  in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  the  water  shallow  and  easily
fordable  to  the  other  side — not  indeed  being  higher  than  the  middle  of  one's  leg.  This  smaller
and  terminating  lake  was  surrounded  by  plains  bounded  by  mountains  of  salt.  A  considerable
streama  nearly  from  the  south-east  entered  this  smaller  and  terminating  lake.  Nau  further
collected  that  the  plains  beyond  were  occupied  by  numerous  Arabs  of  different  tribes,  and  that
in  the  country  east  of  the  Dead  Sea  there  were  fine  and  fertile  plains,  in  which  were  some
villages,  in  some  of  which  might  be  found  churches  and  a  population,  in  a  considerable  pro-
portion Christian.  But  the  churches  had  no  priests,  and  the  people,  wanting  instruction,
scarcely  retained  any  form  of  Christianity.  Many  of  them  were  unbaptized ;  and  such  of
them  as  from  time  to  time  desired  that  rite,  came  all  the  way  to  the  monastery  of  Santa  Saba
to  receive  it.  It  seems  to  have  been  with  the  view  of  ministering  in  some  degree  to  the  wants
of  those  destitute  churches,  that  the  good  priest  undertook  the  frequent  journeys  which  furnished
him  with  this  information.

These  facts  have  received,  within  the  present  century,  ample  confirmation  from  the  accounts
of  Seetzen,  Burckhardt,  and  Irby  and  Mangles.  Indeed  the  exact  agreement  of  this  statement
respecting  the  southern  termination  of  the  lake,  with  that  which  the  last-named  travellers  have
given,  is  very  remarkable.  It  does,  indeed,  strikingly  illustrate  the  difference  in  the  intel-
lectual condition  of  the  two  periods,  that  the  information  communicated  by  the  travellers  we
have  just  named  seemed  all  new  to  the  public,  and  not  only  attracted  immediate  attention,  so
as  to  produce  the  corresponding  modifications  in  all  the  descriptions  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  in
all  the  maps  of  it  subsequently  put  forth,b  but  stimulated  other  travellers  to  journey  in  the
same  direction ;  whereas  the  information  put  forth  by  Nau,  although  on  a  subject  in  which
considerable  interest  was  felt,  was  perfectly  abortive.  It  cannot  be  traced  in  any  subsequent
description  or  map;  nor  does  any  later  traveller  allude  in  any  way  to  this  statement,  and  far
less  was  any  one  induced  thereby  to  travel  in  the  direction  indicated.  The  reason  is  clear.
Now  every  new  fact  is  conveyed  to  the  public  by  a  multitude  of  different  channels,  till  it
becomes  familiar  by  repetition  ;  whereas,  in  former  times,  such  a  fact  might  lie  hid  for  years
or  for  ages  in  the  unread  work  by  which  it  was  first  produced.

Such  is  the  account  of  the  Dead  Sea  which  we  collect  from  old  and  neglected  sources,  with
the  exception  of  a  few  elucidatory  points  from  more  recent  authorities.  It  will  be  found  to  contain
nearly  all  that  is  yet  known  of  the  lake.     This  will  appear  from  the  notice  we  proceed  to  take

a  Evidently  the  river  El  Ahsa,  probably  the  scriptural  Zared.

b  When  it  is  recollected  that  the  work  of  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles  has  never  been  published,  and  is  difficult  to  procure,  the
manner  in  which  their  information  has  become  common  property  to  the  public,  the  more  strikingly  illustrates  the  difference  to
which  these  observations  are  directed.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxxi

of  the  additional  information  which  may  be  collected  from  later  travellers.     This  would  be

more  evident  if  we  confined  ourselves  strictly  to  that  which  is  new  ;  but  we  judge  it  advisable

to  introduce  statements  which,  although  not  properly  new,  involve  views  or  circumstances

which  confirm  or  elucidate  the  facts  previously  known.

The  nature  of  the  water  of  the  lake  has  been  distinctly  ascertained  by  modern  research.     It

is  far  more  saline  than  the  waters  of  the  ocean ;  and,  although  so  limpid,  its  specific  gravity  is

1*21 10.     A  quantity  of  it  brought  to  this  country  was  subjected  to  chemical  analysis  by  Dr.

Marcet,   and  was    found  to  contain  one-fourth  of  its  weight  of  salts.     A  slightly  different

result  was  lately  obtained  by  Dr.  W.  Gregory  from  a  quantity  of  the  water  brought  home  by

Mr.  Madden.     We  give  both  statements ;  and  the  difference  between  them  may  be  accounted

for  by  an  actual  difference  in  the  qualities  of  the  water  when  the  lake  is  low  and  when  high,

from  large  additions  of  fresh  water  poured  in  by  the  rivers.     A  hundred  parts  of  water

afforded, —

Gregory.

Chloride  of  soda,  with  a  trace    of

bromine  ....      9'58

Chloride  of  magnesium  .  .      5 "28

Chloride  of  calcium      .  .  .      3"05

Sulphate  of  lime  .  .  .      T34

24580

Marcet.

Muriate  of  lime

3920

Muriate  of  magnesia

10-246

Muriate  of  soda

10360

Sulphate  of  lime

0-054

1925

Those  as  already  noticed  are  the  same  salts,  which,  in  an  incomparably  smaller  quantity,  are
held  in  solution  in  the  waters  of  the  Jordan  also.

The  extraordinary  saltness  of  this  lake  is  obviously  owing  to  the  quantities  of  saline  matter
brought  in  by  the  rivers  from  the  saline  tracts  over  which  they  pass,  and  more  particularly  by
the  winter  torrents  which  receive  and  convey  into  the  lake  the  rains  which  have  washed  over
the  salt-hills  at  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  the  lake.a  It  is  easy  to  imagine  how  this  con-
stant supply  of  saline  matter  to  a  lake  of  narrow  dimensions  without  any  visible  outlet,  must
produce  an  accumulation  of  salt  which  cannot  pass  off  by  evaporation.

When  taken  up  in  a  glass  the  water  appears  perfectly  clear ;  but  when  viewed  en  masse.
under  a  cloudless  sky,  though  in  some  parts  it  reflects  imperfectly  the  azure  hue,  yet  in  others
it  is  quite  brown,  owing  probably  to  variations  in  its  depth.  The  taste  is  described  by  Mr.
Elliot  as  indescribably  nauseous,  salter  than  the  ocean,  and  singularly  bitter,  like  sea-water
mixed  with  Epsom  salts  and  quinine,  or,  as  Madden  describes,  like  a  solution  of  nitre
mixed  with  an  infusion  of  quassia.  It  acts  on  the  eyes  as  pungently  as  smoke,  and  pro-
duces on  the  skin  a  sensation  resembling  that  of  "  prickly  heat,"  leaving  behind  a  white  saline
deposit.

The  quantity  of  salts  which  this  water  holds  in  solution  accounts  for  its  remarkable  specific
gravity,  which  every  writer,  from  Josephus  downward,  has  noticed.  This  has  been  found,  by
experiment,  to  exceed  that  of  rain-water  by  more  than  sixteen  per  cent.  "  We  found  it  prac-
tically," says  Mr.  Elliot ;  "for  our  whole  party,  consisting  of  five  persons,  plunged  in  and
remained  some  time  in  the  water.  Although  the  assertion  be  not  true  that  a  flat  dense  mass  of
iron  will  be  sustained  on  the  surface,  yet  a  man  who  cannot  float  elsewhere,  finds  no  difficulty
here.  Having  proceeded  some  way  into  the  lake  till  his  shoulders  are  nearly  immersed,  his
feet  are  actually  borne  off  the  ground,  and  he  walks,  as  it  were,  on  water ;  or  else  his  legs  are
forcibly  raised,  and  he  is  compelled  either  to  float  or  swim.  To  sink  or  dive  would  require
some  effort.  The  specific  gravity  of  the  water  accounts  also  for  its  reputed  immobility  ;  it  is
less  easily  excited  than  any  other  known  lake,  and  sooner  resumes  its  wonted  stillness."  (3)

No  modern  traveller  has  seen  smoke  issuing  from  the  lake ;  but  at  certain  times  of  the
year  the  surface  is  covered  with  a  thick  mist.  In  summer  the  sun  has  such  power  that  this
dense  mass  of  vapours  is  dispersed  soon  after  its  rising.     The  assertion  of  Volney,  to  which

a  See  before,  p.  lxx.

clxxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

we  have,  perhaps,  given  too  much  weight  in  a  preceding  page,  that  smoke  is  often  observed
to  issue  from  the  lake,  probably  rests  upon  information  derived  from  the  Arabs,  upon  which
no  one  acquainted  with  that  people  would  place  much  dependence.  That  vapours  exhale
from  the  lake,  which,  although  differing,  perhaps,  in  substance,  resemble  in  appearance  those
of  all  other  lakes,  is  quite  true ;  and  that  Arabs  inhabiting  a  desert,  the  atmosphere  of  which
is  of  the  purest  description,  should  call  an  aqueous  vapour  smoke,  is  not  strange.

The  old  story,  that  no  birds  were  found  upon  the  shores  of  the  lake,  and  that  none  could
rest  upon  or  pass  over  its  surface  without  paying  the  penalty  of  death,  is  not  affirmed  by  any
of  those  old  travellers  whose  statements  in  other  matters  we  have  been  accustomed  to  treat
with  respect,  but  it  has  only  been  completely  gainsaid  and  disproved  by  travellers  of  recent
date.  Mariti  saw  a  great  number  of  birds  of  different  kinds,  particularly  nightingales,  along
the  shore.  Fisk,  and,  in  a  later  year,  Hardy,  saw  many  birds  flying  about  the  lake,  and  even
observed  some  skimming  the  water  with  as  much  apparent  ease  as  in  any  other  place.
Stephens  beheld  a  flock  of  gulls  floating  quietly  on  the  water,  and  when  disturbed  by  him,
they  flew  down  the  lake,  skimming  its  surface,  till  they  had  carried  themselves  out  of  sight.
Elliot  saw  more  wild  ducks  cross  the  sea  from  Moab  to  the  hills  of  Judah.  Professor  Robinson
observes, — "  Of  birds  we  saw  many.  Indeed,  at  the  early  dawn  the  trees  and  rocks  and  air
were  full  of  the  carols  of  the  lark,  the  cheerful  whistle  of  the  quail,  the  call  of  the  partridge,
and  the  warbling  of  innumerable  songsters,  while  birds  of  prey  were  screaming  and  soaring
in  front  of  the  cliffs  above."  Pigeons  also  were  observed  shooting  across  the  surface,  and
frogs  were  heard  croaking  merrily  from  the  neighbourhood  of  a  brackish  fountain  under  the
cliffs  of  the  western  shore.  These  last  observations  seem  to  have  been  made  chiefly  with
reference  to  about  the  middle  part  of  the  western  border  of  the  lake,  where  vegetation,  even
in  the  form  of  trees,  is  by  no  means  wanting. a  Dead  locusts  were  found  by  Irby  and  Mangles
on  the  south-eastern  borders  of  the  lake.  The  sight  of  such  a  multitude  of  carcases  of  crea-
tures that  might  have  perished  in  passing  over  these  waters,  might  seem  to  confirm  the  old
popular  notion,  but  the  travellers  recollected  that  such  a  spectacle  was  sufficiently  common
upon  other  shores,  as  Sicily  and  about  El  Arish.  This,  however,  proves  nothing  against
Roger's  assertion  that  locusts  could  not  cross  the  lake.  For  those  which  were  seen  on  the
shores  of  Sicily  and  about  El  Arish  had  obviously  fallen  into  the  water  from  fatigue  in  attempting
to  cross  the  Mediterranean — a  very  different  undertaking  from  that  of  crossing  the  Dead  Sea.
We  feel  sure  that  locusts  would  not  be  fatigued  to  cross  that  lake,  and  that  the  presence  of
their  carcases  in  large  numbers  on  the  shore  must  be  ascribed  to  some  other  cause  than  that
which  produces  a  similar  appearance  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  This  point  is,
therefore,  still  in  doubt.  The  same  travellers  saw  a  pair  of  Egyptian  ducks,  and  afterwards  a
flight  of  pigeons,  pass  over  the  lake.

It  is,  however,  true  that  several  travellers,  of  as  great  credit  as  those  from  whom  we  have
taken  the  preceding  statements,  declare  that  they  saw  no  birds  near  the  lake.  In  fact  this,
like  the  question  of  vegetation,  seems  to  be  one  of  seasons.  The  want  of  fish  in  the  lake
would  satisfactorily  account  for  the  absence  of  the  aquatic  species  at  any  time ;  and  the  land-
birds  we  would  hardly  expect  to  find  there  save  when  the  vegetative  powers  which  remain  in
the  stricken  soil  have  been  called  forth  by  the  periodical  rains ;  and,  in  fact,  those  travellers
who  have  not  observed  birds,  visited  the  lake  at  the  season  when  the  temporary  vegetation
(like  that  of  the  desert  already  described b)  has  disappeared  before  the  intense  and  concentrated
heat  of  the  advancing  season.  The  birds  seem  to  disappear  with  it.  Indeed  it  is  not  unlikely
that  the  borders  of  this  warm  basin  is  the  retreat  during  the  colder  part  of  the  year  of  nume-
rous birds,  which  in  summer  are  found  in  other  and  cooler,  as  well  as  then  more  productive
and  pleasant,  parts  of  the  land,

The  differences  in  the  accounts  of  travellers,  as  to  the  general  aspect  of  the  lake,  can,  we
think,  be  explained  without  much  difficulty.  Setting  aside  the  influence  of  a  prepared
imagination,  it  may  be  observed  that  there  are  actual  differences  at  the  same  place  at  different

a  See  before,  p.  cxi.  •>  See  before,  p.  cxli.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxxiii

seasons  of  the  year,  and  that  there  are  actual  differences  at  different  parts  of  the  lake.  The
first  point  has  been  lately  explained,  and  need  not  be  dwelt  on  here  ;  and,  with  respect  to  the
latter,  we  need  only  add  to  what  has  been  said  in  the  preceding  chapter a  that  the  borders
seem  to  increase  in  fertility  on  both  sides  the  farther  we  advance  to  the  south,  except  at  the
very  extremity  of  the  lake  southward,  which  seems  even  more  desolate  than  the  northern
extremity.  In  short,  there  seems  a  certain  limit  beyond  the  water's  edge,  within  which
nothing  but  such  few  plants  as  love  a  saline  soil  can  be  found ;  but  beyond  this  limit  an
increasing  vegetation  appears,  where  ordinary  circumstances  are  favourable.  So  when  the
breadth  between  the  water's  edge  and  the  enclosing  hills  does  not  overpass  this  limit,  all
appears  barren,  except  when  the  rigid  and  austere  soil  is  mollified  and  excited  by  abundant
rains ;  but  where  the  intervening  plain  is  broad,  so  as  to  afford  a  space  beyond  this  limit,  the
soil  becomes  more  or  less  cultivable,  and  as  we  advance  towards  the  roots  of  the  mountains,
becomes  spontaneously  productive  of  various  plants,  shrubs,  and  trees.  So  likewise,
when  the  feet  of  the  mountains  are  within  the  steril  boundary,  no  vegetation  appears  upon
them,  until  their  ascents  have  sloped  back  beyond  this  steril  limit.  The  general  borders  of
the  lake  are  so  much  within  this  limit  that  the  average  aspect  is  moie  desolate  than  is  usually
seen  on  the  borders  of  lakes.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  evaporations  from  the  lake  are  charged
with  saline  principles  unfriendly  to  general  vegetation.  Hence  vegetation  is  not  encouraged
by  the  moisture  thus  exhaled,  and  which  might  otherwise  compensate  for  the  extreme  drought
of  its  borders.  Indeed,  from  the  wholesome  moisture  supplied  by  evaporation,  the  borders  of
lakes,  even  in  places  where  rain  only  periodically  falls,  are  so  generally  clothed  with  trees  and
verdure,  that  water  and  vegetation  become  associated  in  the  mind,  so  that  the  disappointment
and  surprise  give  an  exaggerated  effect  to  the  impressions  which  the  comparative  sterility  of
this  remarkable  lake  produces  on  the  spectator.

This  theory — if  an  explanation  derived  from  the  careful  comparison  of  a  large  collection  of
facts  can  be  called  a  theory — appears  to  us  to  explain  many  difficulties  and  apparent  contra-
dictions ;  and  we  are  well  assured  that  its  correctness  will  abide  the  test  of  any  observations
which  future  travellers  may  make.

Subject  to  this  and  preceding  explanations,  we  will  trust  our  readers  with  two  differently
coloured  descriptions  of  the  lake,  as  viewed  from  the  northern  extremity.  Both,  while  they
give  us  general  impressions,  are  clear  and  sensible,  and  offer  some  further  facts  necessary  to
complete  an  account  which  we  have  been  anxious  to  render  as  full  and  satisfactory  as  existing
materials  allow.  The  first  is  that  of  the  Rev.  C.  B.  Elliot,  whose  visit  was  at  the  usual  season
of  the  pilgrimage,  at  Easter.

"  During  a  ride  of  two  hours  along,  or  at  some  little  distance  from,  the  banks  of  Jordan,
we  saw  not  a  single  man  or  animal,  and  reached  in  safety  its  embouchure,  where  it  discharges
its  muddy  waters  with  considerable  force  into  the  sea  of  Sodom.  The  soil  appeared  to  be
a  mixture  of  sand  and  clay,  the  former  being  superficial  and  apparently  a  deposition  from  the
water  during  its  annual  overflowings.  Very  minute  shells  lie  scattered  in  myriads  over  the
plain ;  but  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  lake  of  death,  even  these  symptoms  of  a  by-gone
life  are  no  longer  visible ;  their  place  is  occupied  by  little  masses  of  a  white  frothy  substance
exuding  from  the  earth,  resembling  in  shape  and  size  the  turbinated  cones  thrown  up  by
worms.  When  taken  in  the  hand,  these  almost  melted,  leaving  a  smell  of  brimstone ;  they
looked  like  a  sulphurous  efflorescence  in  combination  with  salt ;  but  the  taste  indicated  the
presence  of  something  more  than  these  ingredients.  No  signs  of  vegetation  are  to  be  seen
except  sea-weed  and  another  marine  production.

"  The  air,  even  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  was  heavy  and  oppressive,  though  the  sky
was  cloudless  and  the  heat  not  unpleasant.  We  saw  no  symptoms  of  the  smoke  said  to  be
the  effect  of  bituminous  explosions  underneath  the  lake  and  to  arise  constantly  from  its  sur-
face, but  a  mist  covered  it,  which  might  have  been  nothing  more  than  the  ordinary  effect  pro-
duced by  the  morning  sun.  Hemmed  in,  as  the  water  is  by  mountains  absolutely  barren,
themselves  of  a  gloomy  hue,  the  sand  and  clay  below  reflecting  no  brighter  rays,  it  is  not  sur-

a  Pages  ex.  and  cxi.

clxxxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

prising  that  every  object  should  wear  a  dreary  aspect,  and  the  very  eye  be  deceived  into  a
belief, — if  deception  it  be, — that  the  only  colour  it  discerns  partakes  of  a  sombre  livid  tint.
The  air  is  regarded  as  pestilential ;  no  human  dwellings  are  to  be  seen ;  and  probably  no  spot
in  the  world  is  so  calculated  as  this  to  convey  the  idea  of  an  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of
death.  Here  death  wields  a  leaden  sceptre.  The  eye  perceives  only  the  absence  of  life.
The  ear  is  cheered  by  no  sound, — even  the  waveless  sea  sleeps  in  mysterious  silence.  The
taste  and  smell  detect  only  that  mineral  which  is  too  intimately  associated  in  the  mind  with
unquenchable  fire  and  eternal  death ;  and  the  sense  of  feeling  becomes  more  sympathetically
affected,  as  though  every  nerve  were  on  the  verge  of  dissolution.  In  this  region  of  death  the
living  exception  is  ready  to  exclaim,  '  How  dreadful  is  this  place !'  "

The  other  description  is  from  the  recent  American  traveller,  the  Rev.  J.  D.  Paxton.

"  In  going  from  the  Jordan  to  the  Dead  Sea,  for  a  considerable  space  not  a  blade  of  grass  or
vegetation  was  to  be  seen.  It  was  so  soft  and  dusty,  that  the  horses  sank  to  their  fetlocks ;
and  in  some  places  it  was  rendered  uneven  by  the  irregular  mounds,  many  of  which  did  not
seem  to  know  what  vegetation  is.  Whether  this  peculiar  barrenness  was  owing  to  the  un-
favourable nature  of  the  soil  I  know  not ;  possibly  this  may  be  the  case.  I  did  not  see  any
other  indication  of  salt,  which  has  been  reported  as  found  on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  until
very  near  the  sea.  Between  this  barren  district  and  the  Dead  Sea,  there  was  an  evident
change  in  the  aspect  of  the  ground — we  found  some  dry  grass  and  small  bushes ;  and  as  we
came  nearer  the  shore,  the  bushes  increased  in  size  and  number,  and  some  spots  might  be
called  thickets.  We  saw  also  a  cane  brake  and  a  variety  of  other  growth.  To  my  agreeable
surprise,  I  found  the  shore  fine,  smooth,  gravelly,  and  deepening  very  slowly,  so  that  a  person
might  wade  in  for  some  distance.  There  was  along  the  shore  drift-wood,  most  of  it  small,
but  still  larger  than  I  had  seen  on  the  Jordan.  This  would  seem  to  indicate  that  somewhere
on  its  shores  there  is  more  timber  than  we  found  in  the  spot  we  visited.  The  water  was  not
only  very  salt  but  exceedingly  bitter,  as  much  so  as  most  travellers  have  stated.  The  great
density  of  the  water  was  amply  proved  by  its  power  to  bear  up  the  body.  There  is  some  truth
in  the  saying  that  it  requires  an  effort  to  keep  the  feet  and  legs  under,  so  as  to  use  them  to
advantage  in  swimming.  Some  writers  have,  however,  stated  the  matter  in  rather  too  strong
terms.

"  I  could  lie  on  my  back  in  the  water,  with  my  head,  hands,  and  feet  all  out  at  the  same
time,  and  remain  thus  as  long  as  I  pleased  without  making  any  motion  whatever ;  this  I  could
not  do  in  any  other  water  that  I  have  been  in.  Still  it  is  carrying  the  matter  too  far  and
beyond  the  truth,  when  it  is  said  to  be  so  heavy,  or  so  dead,  that  it  never  rises  in  waves,  but
always  lies  smooth  and  unruffled,  let  the  wind  blow  as  it  will.  The  drift-wood  thrown  out
is  evidence  to  the  contrary.  The  shore  exhibited  proof  that  but  a  day  or  two  before  the
waves  had  run  high ;  but  the  best  proof  of  all  was  the  ocular  and  sensible  one,  that  they
were  then  chasing  each  other  out  on  the  shore,  as  they  do  in  all  other  seas ;  true  they  did
not  run  high,  but  then  there  was  not  much  wind  to  make  them.  The  water  was  so  clear  that
the  bottom  could  be  seen  with  great  distinctness.  In  wading  in,  there  was  at  some  places
more  softness  at  the  bottom  than  I  was  led  to  expect  from  the  firm  character  of  the  shore.
There  were,  however,  some  spots  on  the  shore  where  the  soil  gave  way  under  our  feet,  and
exhibited  a  kind  of  quicksand,  as  I  demonstrated  by  getting  into  one  of  them  over  my  shoes.
Still  the  bank,  the  water,  and  the  bottom,  so  far  as  I  saw  and  tried  it,  had  much  less  of  the
terrible,  fearful,  and  unnatural,  than  I  had  expected.  Instead  of  that  dark,  gloomy,  and  turbid
spread  of  water,  that  from  my  childhood  I  had  imagined,  it  struck  me  as  a  very  pleasant  lake.
It  reminded  me  of  the  beautiful  lake  of  Nice.  As  to  the  deep  and  fearful  gloom  which  many
writers  describe  as  hanging  over  it,  I  must  think  that  it  is  mainly  found  in  their  imaginations.
It  is  not  wonderful  that  a  place,  which,  for  its  great  wickedness,  was  doomed  to  such  a  fearful
catastrophe  as  were  the  cities  which  stood  on  this  plain,  should  be  looked  upon  with  fear  and
horror.  It  is  a  wise  provision  of  our  nature  that  it  should  be  so.  It  operates,  and  no  doubt  it
is  designed  to  do  so,  as  a  check  to  that  fearful  wickedness  that  calls  down  such  a  doom.  It  is
not  an  uncommon  thing  for  people  to  think  that  there  is  something  fearful  and  gloomy  in  places

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxxv

where  they  know  awful  crimes  have  been  perpetrated ;  and  on  this  principle,  perhaps,  we  may
account  for  the  fact  that  so  many  travellers  have  dwelt  on  the  deep  gloom  which  hung  over  the
water,  and  the  fearful  desolation  that  reigned  over  the  whole  region.  Now  to  me  it  did  not
appear  thus  :  the  shores,  the  waters,  and  the  lake,  had  a  natural  and  even  a  pleasing  appear-
ance, the  more  so  as,  from  my  old  habits  of  thinking,  I  expected  something  of  the  fearful,  if
not  terrible.  The  district  was,  it  is  true,  rather  destitute  of  trees  and  vegetation,  but  not  more
so  than  many  districts  that  I  have  seen;  not  more  so  than  the  district  from  Mount  Olivet  to
the  plain  of  Jordan,  and  a  very  large  district  near  Damascus,  which  I  noticed  in  a  former
journey.  There  are  more  small  trees,  bushes,  canes,  and  other  vegetable  growth,  for  a  quarter
of  a  mile  along  the  shore,  than  there  are  on  some  districts  north-west  of  Damascus,  perhaps
ten  miles  square,  leaving  out  the  narrow  slips  of  land  irrigated  by  the  water  of  the  Bareda.
There  is  quite  a  cluster  of  small  trees  or  shrubs  at  a  point  on  the  edge  of  the  water,  where  it  is
soft  and  swampy.  The  question  whether  there  are  any  living  things  in  these  waters  is  one
that  I  am  not  able  to  decide  from  my  own  observation.     I  saw  none.

"  There  is  a  small  island  fifty  or  a  hundred  yards  from  the  shore,  rising  six  or  eight  feet
above  the  level  of  the  water,  and  appears  to  have  some  stones  at  the  upper  part  of  it.  We
thought  we  could  see  most  distinctly  another  island  far  to  the  south. a  As  similar  statements
have  often  been  made,  and  again  contradicted,  we  looked  at  it  the  more  carefully ;  and  our
conclusion  was,  notwithstanding  all  the  declarations  to  the  contrary,  it  must  be  an  island,
and  one  of  considerable  size,  unless  connected  with  the  other  shore  by  a  very  low  neck  of  land
which  the  great  distance  prevented  our  seeing  :  this  time  will  show.  It  is  a  singular  fact  that
a  piece  of  water,  which  for  ages  has  excited  more  intense  interest  than  any  other  in  the  world,
should  yet  be  so  little  known,  and  so  few  should  have  been  found  who  have  made  a  serious
attempt  to  explore  it.  There  has  not,  as  far  as  I  know,  been  one  boat  on  the  waters  of  the
Dead  Sea  for  ages,  if  from  the  days  of  Abraham ;  there  may  have  been  in  the  days  of  the
Jewish  nation,  but  I  have  not  seen  it  confirmed  by  any  writer.  Last  year  an  intelligent  Irish-
man took  a  boat  across  from  Acre  to  the  lake  of  Tiberias,  and  after  amusing  himself  with  it
on  that  lake,  he.  passed  down  the  Jordan  to  the  Dead  Sea,  and  spent  some  days  in  exploring  it.
How  far  he  went  to  the  south,  and  what  discoveries  he  made,  is  not  known.  He  had  the  mis-
fortune to  be  taken  sick,  owing  in  part,  it  was  supposed,  to  his  imprudence  and  useless  exposure.
With  much  difficulty  he  got  back  to  Jericho,  and  was  then  carried  to  Jerusalem,  where  he
died.  He  had  taken  but  few  notes,  which  were  unintelligible  to  all  but  himself.*1  When
inquired  of  concerning  his  expedition  on  the  Dead  Sea,  he  declined  answering  until  he  should
recover,  when  he  would  tell  them  all  about  it.  But  death  closed  up  the  communication  for
ever.  The  boat  was  taken  out  and  carried  to  Jericho,  as  I  have  since  learned.  Were  some  one,
acquainted  with  navigating  a  small  vessel,  and  capable  of  taking  soundings  and  making  a
proper  survey  of  the  lake,  to  spend  a  month  or  two  in  doing  it,  and  to  publish  a  full  account,
with  a  correct  map  of  the  sea  and  the  coast,  he  would  confer  a  very  great  favour  on  the  Christian
world.  It  would  be  so  easy  of  execution,  and  of  so  universal  interest  when  done,  that  I  wonder
that  none  of  those  men  who  long  for  public  fame  have  not  before  now  thought  of  it."

We  sincerely  join  in  the  regret  that  the  public  have  been  so  unhappily  excluded  from  reap-
ing the  benefit  of  the  observations  made  by  Mr.  Costigan  (for  that  was  the  name  of  "  the
intelligent  Irishman"  of  whom  Paxton  speaks)  during  his  romantic  expedition.  The  further
information  collected  by  Mr.  Stephens  is,  for  the  present,  at  least,  of  too  much  interest  and
value  to  be  omitted.

This  gentleman  reports  that  he  took  some  pains  to  trace  out  the  man  who  had  attended
Costigan  during  this  voyage,  and  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  him  at  Beirout.  "  He  was  a
little,  dried-up  Maltese  sailor  ;  had  rowed  round  the  lake  without  knowing  why,  except  that
he  was  paid  for  it ;  and  what  he  told  bore  the  stamp  of  truth,  for  he.  did  not  seem  to  think

a  The  first  is  a  real  island;  the  other  must  have  been  an  illusion.

b  "  Unfortunately  for  the  interests  of  science  he  had  always  been  in  the  habit  of  trusting  greatly  to  his  memory  ;  and,  after
his  death,  the  missionaries  in  Jerusalem  found  no  regular  diary  or  journal,  but  merely  brief  notes  written  on  the  margins  of
books,  so  irregular  and  confused,  that  they  could  make  nothing  of  them."— Stephens.

2b

clxxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

that  he  had  done  anything  extraordinary.  He  knew  as  little  about  it  as  any  man  could  know
who  had  been  over  the  same  water ;  and  yet,  after  all,  perhaps  he  knew  as  much  as  any  one
else  could  learn.  He  seems,  however,  to  have  observed  the  coast  and  the  soundings  with  the
eye  of  a  sailor,  and  I  got  him  to  make  me  a  map,a  on  which  1  marked  down  the  particulars  I
received  from  his  lips ;  and  by  which  it  appears  that  they  had  completed  the  whole  tour  of  the
lake."     The  following  is  the  substance  of  the  observations  thus  obtained  : —

The  tour  of  the  lake  took  eight  days,  the  voyagers  sleeping  on  shore  every  night,  except
once,  when,  afraid  of  some  suspicious-looking  Arabs  whom  they  saw  upon  the  mountains,
they  slept  on  board,  beyond  the  reach  of  gun-shot  from  the  land.  All  this  time  was  not,
however,  occupied  in  making  the  direct  tour  of  the  lake ;  for  during  their  course  they  crossed
and  re-crossed  it  several  times.  They  sounded  every  day,  frequently  with  a  line  of  175
brachia  (about  six  feet  each),  and  found  the  bottom  rocky,  and  of  very  unequal  depth,  some-
times ranging  thirty,  forty,  eighty,  twenty  brachia,  all  within  a  boat's  length  (!).  Sometimes
the  lead  brought  up  sand,  like  that  of  the  mountains  on  each  side.  They  failed  in  finding  the
bottom  but  once,  and  in  that  place  there  were  large  bubbles  all  around  for  thirty  paces,  rising
probably  from  a  spring.  In  one  place  they  found  on  the  bank  a  hot  sulphur  spring.  In
three  different  places  they  found  ruins,  and  could  clearly  distinguish  large  hewn  stones,  which
seemed  to  have  been  used  for  buildings.  That  which  in  the  distance  has  appeared  to  many
travellers  as  an  island  towards  the  southern  extremity  of  the  lake,  was  found  to  be  a  tongue  of
land,  as  had  long  before  been  shown  by  Captain  Mangles.  This  incidental  corroboration  of
the  old  man's  statement,  from  a  source  which  he  could  not  know,  and  with  which  Stephens
himself  was  unacquainted,  may  lead  us  to  regard  his  statement  as  in  general  trustworthy.

This  man  also  reported  that  the  boat,  when  empty,  floated  a  palm  higher  in  the  water  than
when  in  the  Mediterranean.  It  was  then  the  month  of  July,  and  the  weather  from  nine  to
five  was  dreadfully  hot.  Every  night  the  north-wind  blew,  and  the  waves  were  worse  than
in  the  Gulf  of  Lyons.  "  In  reference  to  their  peculiar  exposures,  and  the  circumstances
which  hurried  poor  Costigan  to  his  unhappy  fate,  he  said  that  they  had  suffered  exceedingly
from  the  heat.  The  first  five  days  Costigan  took  his  turn  at  the  oars;  but  on  the  sixth  day
their  water  was  exhausted,  and  Costigan  gave  out.  The  seventh  day  they  were  obliged  to
drink  the  water  of  the  sea,  and  on  the  eighth  they  were  near  the  head  of  the  lake,  and  he
himself  (the  Maltese)  exhausted,  and  unable  any  longer  to  pull  an  oar.  There  he  made  coffee
from  the  water  of  the  sea,  and  a  favourable  breeze  springing  up,  for  the  first  time  they
hoisted  their  sail,  and  in  a  few  hours  reached  the  head  of  the  lake."  The  rest  has  been  told
above  by  Paxton.

A  very  similar  attempt  to  this  has  more  recently  been  made  by  two  scientific  gentlemen,
Mr.  G.  Moore  and  Mr.  W.  G.  Beek.  Their  intention  was  to  make  a  trigonometrical  survey
of  the  Dead  Sea,  to  ascertain  its  depth,  and  to  procure  collections  of  all  that  could  be  of  use  to
science.  From  Jaffa  they  conveyed  a  boat,  with  stores,  etc.,  to  the  lake,  passing  through
Jerusalem  and  descending  on  Jericho,  a  work  of  great  labour,  considering  that  they  had  no
assistance  from  the  authorities,  but  rather  the  contrary.  After  surveying  a  good  portion  of
the  shores,  these  gentlemen  were  obliged  to  abandon  their  work,  the  guards  and  guides  de-
claring they  would  not  proceed.  The  width  of  the  sea  has  been  established  beyond  a  doubt ;
soundings  also  have  been  taken  showing  great  depth.  The  length  of  the  sea  was  found  to  be
much  less  than  has  generally  been  supposed.  These  are  all  the  facts,  or  rather  intimations,
which  these  gentlemen  have  as  yet  thought  proper  to  lay  before  the  public  ; b  but  Mr.  Moore
has,  we  believe,  since  completed  the  unfinished  undertaking,  under  the  operation  of  a  firman
from  the  Pasha  of  Egypt ;  and  we  may  hope  to  be  soon  made  acquainted  with  the  full  results
of  this  very  spirited  enterprise.  It  thus  appears  that  what  Mr.  Paxton  so  anxiously  wished
to  be  done  has  actually  been  effected,  although  the  public  has  not  yet  been  informed  of  the
result.

We  have  so  often  alluded  to  the  discoveries  of  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles  about  the  southern

a  Copied  in  the  original  American  edition,  but  injudiciously  omitted  in  the  English  reprint,  to  which  only  we  have  access,
to  In  the  '  Geographical  Journal,'  vol.  vii.  pt.  2.  1837.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS  clxxxvii

extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea  that  it  seems  undesirable  to  conclude  this  notice  without  stating
such  of  the  leading  facts  as  have  not  already  been  anticipated.

Their  first  journey  in  this  quarter,  being  from  Hebron  round  the  southern  extremity  of  the
lake  to  Kerek.  When,  on  this  journey,  they  first  obtained  a  view  of  the  southern  termination
of  the  lake,  with  the  back-water,  or  smaller  lake,  and  plain  at  the  end  of  it,  it  appeared
evident  to  them  that  the  sea  must  be  of  much  less  length  than  ancient  authors  had  reported.
But  we  may  observe  that  from  their  account  it  is  far  more  than  likely  that  this  plain  at  the
end  formed  an  integral  part  of  the  lake,  in  which  case  its  dimensions  would  correspond  very
closely  with  that  which  in  a  preceding  page  form  the  account  of  Josephus.  And  the  conclusion
that  this  plain  was  formerly  covered  with  the  waters  of  the  lake,  even  to  the  foot  of  the  hills,
southward,  which  separate  it  from  the  Wady  Arabah  seems  to  us  probable  for  another  reason.
For  if  the  plain  were  then  passable,  it  seems  difficult  to  make  out  why  the  Israelites,  when
wishing  to  pass  into  the  country  east  of  the  lake,  did  not  go  that  way,  which  would  have  been
the  nearest  and  the  most  open  they  could  take ;  but,  instead  of  that,  they  sought  permission  to
pass  through  the  valleys  of  Mount  Seir,  and  when  that  was  refused  them,  had  no  alternative
but  to  take  a  long  and  difficult  circuit,  to  get  into  the  eastern  country  by  rounding  the  southern
extremity  of  the  Seir  mountains,  near  the  head  of  the  eastern  arm  of  the  Red  Sea  a — a  most
unaccountable  journey  if  there  had  then  been  that  access  to  the  eastern  country  at  the  ex-
tremity of  the  Dead  Sea  which  is  now  open.

But  to  return  to  our  travellers.  They  spent  the  night  near  the  hills  skirting  this  plain,  and
finding  plenty  of  drift-wood  at  "  high-water  mark,"  they  attempted  to  kindle  a  fire  to  bake
bread,  but  were  unable  to  do  so  in  consequence  of  the  salt  with  which  the  wood  was  impreg-
nated. The  abundant  manifestations  of  salt  which  they  found  in  crossing  the  plain  have
already  been  noticed  in  this  work ; b  for  which  reason  we  limit  the  present  notice  to  their
other  observations.  It  appears  from  their  statement  that  when  the  sandy  flats  around  the
southern  bay,  or  smaller  lake  (which  they  call  "  the  back-water  ")  are  left  dry  by  the  effects
of  evaporation,  water  is  stdl  left  in  various  hollows,  or  depressions  of  the  surface,  from  which
it  gradually  disappears,  partly  by  evaporation  and  partly  by  draining,  leaving  a  thick  residuum
of  salt.  Those  that  still  retained  water,  or  were  still  wet,  had  a  strong  marshy  smell,  similar
to  that  which  is  perceivable  on  most  of  the  muddy  flats  in  salt-water  harbours.  This  it  is,
they  imagine,  which  gave  rise  to  the  unfavourable  reports  of  the  ancients,  of  the  disagreeable
smell  of  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea ;  for  they  affirm  that  the  water  of  the  main  body  of  the
lake  is  perfectly  free  from  any  smell  whatever.

On  their  return  from  their  expedition  from  Kerek  to  Wady  Mousa,  the  same  travellers
made  a  special  excursion  for  the  purpose  of  exploring  the  southern  termination  of  the  lake.

In  this  journey  they  observed  a  rather  profuse  vegetation,  so  comparatively  near  to  the
beach  as  might,  without  explanation,  seem  to  militate  against  the  explanation  we  lately  gave.
But  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  bed  being  here  very  shallow,  although  the  vegetation
approximates  to  the  high-water  mark,  the  waters  fall  further  back  in  this  quarter,  after  the
season  of  flood,  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  lake,  removing,  to  that  extent,  the  water  from
which  the  influences  unfavourable  to  vegetation  arise.  Thus,  during  its  absence,  the  trees
and  shrubs,  assisted  by  the  fresh  water  which  the  rivers  bring  down,c  are  able  to  gather
strength  to  withstand  the  deleterious  influences  to  which  they  are,  during  a  portion  of  the
year,  exposed.  But  although  the  waters  had  fallen  very  much  below  the  mark  of  high  water
at  the  time  of  our  travellers'  visit,  they  describe  the  foliage  as  having  a  salt  dew  hanging  upon
it,  which  gave  to  the  hand  the  same  greasy  sensation  and  appearance  which  it  acquires  when
dipped  in  the  sea  itself.

The  appearance  which  the  lake  assumes  at  its  southern  termination  will  be  much  better
understood  by  the  annexed  plan  than  by  a  written  description.     From  this  it  will  be  seen  that

a  See  the  History,  p.  316.  b  See  before,  pp.  lxix.  and  lxx.

c  To  a  similar  cause— the  dilution  of  the  waters  of  the  lake,  at  the  northern  extremity,  by  the  constant  supply  of  fresh  water
from  the  Jordan, — may  be  ascribed  the  vegetation  which  Paxton  saw  near  the  water's  edge,  not  far  from  where  that  river  enters
the  lake.

2b  2

clxxxviii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VI.

a  large  promontory  projects  from  the  eastern  shore,  and  turns  northward,  so  as  to  enclose
between  itself  and  the  eastern  coast  a  bay  about  four  miles  long,  by  two  broad,  while  between
it  and  the  western  shore  lies  a  gradually  narrowing  strait,  which  conducts  into  the  oval  basin,

about  five  miles  long  by  above  three  in  width,  in  which
iillllillliillltllllllllllllllill  the  Dead  Sea  terminates.     A  small   opposing  promontory

from  the  western  shore  narrows  the  strait  in  one  place  to
about  a  mile  of  width  ;  and  at  this  point  is  the  ford  which,
with  the  other  general  features  of  the  spot,  was  so  long  ago
indicated  by  Father  Daniel.  It  appears  that  the  ford  is
marked  by  stakes,  and  Captain  Mangles'  party  was  in-
formed that  it  was  unfordable  at  no  time  of  the  year.  In-
deed its  depth  could  be  but  inconsiderable  at  the  time
they  were  there,  as  there  were  asses  in  a  small  native
caravan  by  which  it  had  just  been  forded.

The  promontory  from  the  eastern  shore  has  a  steep  white
ridge,  running  like  a  spine  down  the  centre.  This  ridge
presents  steep  sloping  sides,  seamed  and  furrowed  into
deep  hollows  by  the  rains,  and  terminating  at  the  summit
in  sharp  triangular  points,  standing  up  like  rows  of  tents,
ranged  one  above  another.  The  whole  is  of  a  substance
apparently  partaking  of  the  mixture  of  soft  and  broken
chalk  and  slate,  and  is  wholly  unproductive  of  vegetation.
The  height  of  the  eminence  varies  from  ten  to  thirty  feet,
becoming  gradually  lower  towards  its  northern  extremity.
At  its  foot,  all  round,  is  a  considerable  margin  of  sand,
which  varies  in  length  and  breadth  according  to  the
season,  being  much  narrower  in  the  dry  season  than  in
the  times  of  flood,  when  we  have  reason  to  suppose  that,
in  rough  weather  at  least,  the  waves  almost  wash  the  base  of  the  cliff.

At  the  base  of  the  peninsula,  not  far  from  the  bottom  of  the  bay  formed  by  its  horn,  and
near  a  river  (called  Dara)  which  falls  into  that  bay,  the  traces  of  an  ancient  site  very  plainly
appear.  Stones  that  have  been  used  in  building,  though  for  the  most  part  unhewn,  are  strewed
over  a  great  surface  of  uneven  ground,  and  mixed  both  with  broken  bricks  and  pottery.  This
appearance  continues,  without  interruption,  quite  down  from  the  slope  of  the  peninsula  to  the
plain  below,  so  that  it  would  seem  to  have  been  a  place  of  considerable  extent.  One  column
was  noticed,  and  a  pretty  specimen  of  antique  variegated  glass  was  found.  This  our  travellers
think  may  have  been  the  site  of  the  ancient  Zoar,  in  which  Lot  found  refuge  when  the  cities  of
the  plain  were  destroyed,  and,  on  examining  the  matter  for  ourselves,  we  find  much  reason  for
subscribing  to  this  opinion. (3)  Close  by  these  is  now  a  hut-built  village,  occupied  by  Arabs.
From  the  heat  of  the  climate  the  people  go  half  naked  in  summer,  and  the  children  entirely
so  ;  and,  altogether,  their  abode  has  more  the  appearance  of  a  village  in  India  or  the  South
Seas  than  any  that  our  nautical  travellers  had  seen  in  the  East.

Although  there  seems  great  probability,  as  we  have  already  intimated,  that  this  peninsula
has,  in  the  distant  view,  been  sometimes  taken  for  an  island,  it  seems  that  other  apparent
masses,  noticed  in  other  parts,  and  confidently  affirmed  by  travellers  to  be  islands,  must  be
attributed  to  an  illusion ;  for  our  travellers  state, — "  This  evening,  about  sunset,  we  were
deceived  by  a  dark  shade  on  the  sea,  which  assumed  so  exactly  the  appearance  of  an  island
that  we  did  not  doubt  of  it,  even  after  looking  through  a  telescope.  It  is  not  the  only  time
that  such  a  phenomenon  has  presented  itself  to  us.  In  two  instances,  looking  up  the  sea  from
its  southern  extremity,  we  saw  it  apparently  closed  by  a  low  dark  line,  like  a  line  of  sand,  to
the  northward;  and,  on  another  occasion,  two  small  islands  appeared  to  present  themselves
between  a  long  sharp  promontory  and  the  western  shore.  We  were  unable  to  account  for
these  appearances,  but  felt  little  doubt  that  they  were  those  that  deceived  M.  Seetzen  into  the

[Southern  termination  of  the  Dead  Sea.]

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  clxxxix

supposition  that  he  had  discovered  an  island  of  some  extent,  which  we  have  had  an  opportunity
of  ascertaining,  beyond  all  doubt,  does  not  exist."a

We  have,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  stated  as  a  fact  to  which  we  attached  much  importance,
that  the  great  valley  which  extends  between  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Elanitic  Gulf  was  probably
a  continuation  of  the  ancient  valley  of  the  Jordan,  by  which  the  river  made  its  way  to  the  Red
Sea  before  its  waters  were  arrested  in  the  Asphaltic  Lake.  This  opinion  was  first  started  by
Burckhardt,  and  was  adopted  by  others  who  afterwards  visited  the  valley.  Burckhardt,  how-
ever, did  not  see  how  this  valley  connected  itself  with  the  Dead  Sea.  Irby  and  Mangles,  who
did  so,  observe  that  the  plain  at  the  end  of  it  "  opens  considerably  to  the  south,  and  is  bounded
at  the  distance  of  about  eight  miles  by  a  sandy  cliff,  from  sixty  to  eighty  feet  in  height,  and
which  runs  directly  across,  and  closes  the  valley  of  El  Ghor,  thus  forming  a  margin  for  the
uttermost  limits  of  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  southward,  when  its  waters  are  at  their  greatest  height.b
We  were  told  that  the  plain  at  the  top  of  this  range  of  cliffs  continues  all  the  way  to  Mecca
without  any  interruption  of  mountains."  This  fact,  confirmed  and  followed  up,  is  no  other
than  that  on  which  the  former  conclusion  has  been  lately  questioned,  and,  we  are  almost  sorry
to  admit,  overturned.  How  it  happened  that  the  statement  of  Mangles  was  not  considered  to
oppose  an  obstacle  to  this  conclusion,  we  do  not  know,  unless,  as  in  our  own  case,  from  an
unwillingness  to  dwell  upon  this  single  incident  as  irreconcileable  with  an  opinion  which  such
a  traveller  as  Burckhardt  thought  he  had  good  reasons  to  form  ;  and  also  perhaps  from  some
vague  notion  that  these  cliffs  might  prove  to  be  mere  sand-banks,  thrown  up,  in  the  course  of
ages,  at  high-water  mark.

Count  de  Bertou  examined  this  matter  more  closely.  As  all  the  passages  which  bear  on  the
question  have  been  produced  in  the  preceding  chapter,  we  shall  not  here  repeat  them.  These,
it  will  be  recollected,  show  that  the  confining  southern  hills  are  of  sandstone ;  that  there  is
indeed  the  broad  valley  of  a  river  or  torrent  passing  through  or  at  the  end  of  this  chain  of  hills,
but  this  slopes  sensibly  towards  the  Dead  Sea,  and  could  never  therefore  have  been  the  bed  of
a  river  flowing  in  the  opposite  direction  ;  that  all  the  torrents  and  streams  far  to  the  south  of
this  tend  towards  the  basin  of  the  Dead  Sea ;  and  that  the  point  where  the  waters  separate
occurs  below  Wady  Mousa,  or  rather  at  Wady  Talh,  about  midway  between  the  hills  which
border  on  the  basin  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  head  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf; — all  the  waters  north
of  this  limit  tend  to  the  former  basin,  and  all  south  of  the  same  limit  to  the  latter.

Professor  Robinson  confirms  this  statement  in  all  essential  points.  The  following  passage
deserves  attention,  as  explaining  what  is  rather  obscure  in  the  notices  of  the  Count : — "  Before
us,  as  we  advanced  southward,  appeared  a  line  of  cliffs,  fifty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in
height,  ["  fifty  or  sixty,"  Count  B.]  stretching  across  the  whole  broad  valley,  and  apparently
barring  all  further  progress.  They  proved  to  be  of  marl  ["  friable  sandstone,"  Count  B.~\;  and
run  off  from  this  point  [the  western  end]  S.S.E.  across  the  valley.  All  along  their  base  are
fountains  of  brackish  water,  oozing  out  and  forming  a  tract  of  marshy  land  towards  the  north.
Our  route  now  lay  along  the  base  of  these  cliffs,  and  we  came  in  two  hours  to  the  mouth  of
Wady  Jib,  [the  same  which  Count  de  B.  calls  Wady  Araba,  but  which  is  here  distinguished
as  a  Wady  in  Wady  Araba]  a  deep  valley  coming  down  from  the  south  through  the  cliffs ;  and
showing  the  latter  to  be  only  an  offset  between  the  lower  plain  which  we  had  just  crossed,  and
the  higher  level  of  the  same  great  valley  further  south.  The  name  El  Ghor  is  applied  to  the
valley  between  the  Dead  Sea  and  this  offset :  further  south  the  whole  of  the  broad  valley  takes

a  The  following  are  the  authorities  which  have  chiefly  been  consulted  in  drawing  up  the  above  account  of  the  Dead  Sea.  They
are  named  here  in  chronological  order  :  —

Josephus,  de  Bell.,  v.  5;  Antoninus  Martyr,  '  Itinerarium,'  9;  Adamnanus,  lib.  ii.p.  14,  15;  Amselm,  'Terras  Sanctae  Descrip-
tione  ;  Brocard,  part  i.  c.  7,  sect.  2 ;  Vitriaco,  89,  90,  in  edit.  1597  ;  1075-6,  in  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos  ;  Adrichomius,  52  ;  Quares-
mius,  lib.  vi.cap.  13,  par.  5;  Lightfoot,  Chorog.,  Cent.,  ch.  5  ;  Nau,  577 — 588;  Morison,  ch.  xxx. ;  Shaw,  ii.  157,  158  ;  Hassel-
quist,  130,  131,284;  Mariti,  ii.  ch.  25  ;  Irby  and  Mangles,  351— 356,  446— 459 ;  Hardy,  201— 204;  Monro,  i.  145—148;  Madden,
ii.  349— 357;  Kobinson.i.  63—71  ;  Arundale,  81—84;  Elliot,  ii.  479—486;  Lindsay,  ii.  64—66;  Stephens,  ii.  ch.  15;  Robinson
(Dr.),  in  Am.  Bib.  Kepos.,  No.  xxxiv;  Paxton,  159 — 163;  Geographical  Journal,  vol.  vii.  pt.  2,  p.  456.

b  Is  it  not  probable  that  Josephus  and  other  old  writers  measured  the  Dead  Sea  as  extending  to  these  cliffs,  as  it  seems  actually
to  do  at  high  water  ;  and  that  hence  arises  the  greater  length  which  they  give  to  it  ?

cxc  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

the  name  of  El  Araba,  quite  to  Akabah.  These  apparent  cliffs  I  take  to  be  the  Akrabbim  of
Scripture.  The  Wady  Jib  begins  far  to  the  south  of  Mount  Hor,  beyond  Wady  Gharandel,
and  flows  down  in  a  winding  course  through  the  midst  of  El  Araba,  draining  off" all  its  waters
northward  to  the  Dead  Sea.  Where  we  entered  Wady  Jib,  at  its  northern  end,  it  is  half  a
mile  broad,  with  precipitous  banks  of  chalky  earth  or  marl,  100  to  150  feet  high,  and  exhibit-
ing traces  of  an  immense  volume  of  water  flowing  northward.  It  may  be  recollected  that  the
waters  of  Wady  Jarafeh  in  the  western  desert,  which  drains  the  south-east  part  of  that  desert,
far  to  the  southward  of  Akabah,  also  flow  northward  into  El  Araba,  and  so,  of  course,  through
Wady  Jib.  Hence,  instead  of  the  Jordan  flowing  southward  to  the  Gulf  of  Akabah,  we  find
the  waters  of  the  Desert  further  south  than  Akabah  flowing  northward  into  the  Dead  Sea.
The  very  nature  of  the  country  shows,  without  measurement,  that  the  surface  of  the  Dead  Sea
must  be  lower  than  that  of  the  Red  Sea  or  the  Mediterranean."

This  is  still  stronger  than  the  statement  of  Count  de  Bertou ;  for  while  he  divides  the  waters
which  flow  into  the  Araba  between  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Elanitic  Gulf,  Dr.  Robinson  gives
them  all  to  the  Dead  Sea.  But  seeing  that  the  statement  of  the  former  is  the  result  of  an
actual  observation,  it  is  rather  to  be  received,  in  this  point,  than  that  of  Dr.  Robinson,  which
is  a  conclusion  in  the  absence  of  such  observation.

After  this  the  serious  and  difficult  question  recurs,  which  was  obviated  by  the  explanation
by  which  the  waters  of  the  Jordan  were  carried  to  the  Red  Sea — namely,  What  became  of  the
Jordan,  when,  as  is  generally  supposed,  it  merely  passed  through  and  watered  the  plain
which  the  Dead  Sea  now  covers  ? — 1 .  Were  its  waters  consumed,  like  those  of  the  Barrady  at
Damascus,  in  irrigating  the  fields  and  gardens,  and  in  supplying  water  to  the  towns  of  the
plain  ?  2.  May  there  not  have  been  a  lake  in  this  basin,  in  former  times,  to  receive  the  Jordan ;
and  then  may  not  the  "  plain"  or  "vale"  in  question  mean  merely  the  borders  of  that  lake ;
according  to  what  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  Josephus,  who  seems  to  speak  of  the  land  of
Sodom,  as  still  existing  as  land,  though  in  a  condition  sadly  altered  from  its  former  state  ?  It
would  not  be  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  lake  then  encroached  beyond  the  channel  and  ford
which  we  have  already  described,  and  where  there  are  appearances  which  may  be  construed  to
intimate  to  the  geographer  that  there  was  an  ancient  breach  of  the  waters  at  this  point,  whereby
the  whole  country  southward,  down  to  the  hills,  was  inundated,  as  it  still  seems  to  be  during  the
season  of  flood,  although  the  water  beyond  the  ford  only  remains  permanently  in  the  southern  lake
or  back-water.  This  would  give  a  tract  above  twenty  miles  long  by  ten  or  twelve  broad,  beside'
the  borders  of  the  lake,  as  the  land  which  was  ruined  at  the  overthrow  of  Sodom,  and  in  which
the  "  cities  of  the  plain"  were  situated.  In  confirmation  of  this  we  might  point  to  Gen.  x.  19,
in  which  the  five  cities,  by  being  opposed  to  Gaza,  seemed  to  be  brought  together  near  the
present  southern  extremity  of  the  lake.  To  this  may  also  be  added  that  Sodom,  at  least,  could
not  well  have  been  to  the  north  of  the  channel  formed  by  the  tongue  of  land ;  for  the  short
time  which  was  taken  by  the  family  of  Lot  in  escaping  to  Zoar  shows  it  could  not  have  been
far  from  that  city,  which  unquestionably  was  on  the  borders  of  the  present  southern  extremity
of  the  Asphaltic  Lake.  When  viewed  apart  from  our  preconceptions  on  the  subject,  there
will  be  found  no  passage  of  Scripture  which  distinctly  intimates  that  "  the  plain  of  Siddim  "
was  submerged.  It  is  described  as  having  become  a  region  of  salt  and  burning,  and  bitterness,
and  desolation — but  not  of  water.  3.  If  neither  of  the  above  hypotheses  be  considered  tena-
ble, there  seems  no  alternative  but  to  consider  that  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  was  attended  by  a
far  greater  and  more  extensive  derangement  of  the  earth's  surface — by  the  depression  of  high
levels  and  the  elevation  of  low  ones  through  large  tracts  of  country,  than  has  hitherto  been
imagined,  or  than  the  Scripture  would  lead  us  to  expect.  We  refrain  at  present  from  attempt-
ing to  make  up  our  minds  to  any  of  these  alternatives,  expecting  that  some  further  and
clearer  light  may  speeddy  be  obtained  from  the  researches  which  are  now  in  progress,  or
which  we  may  hope  soon  to  be  undertaken.

We  will  now  proceed  to  notice  the  streams  which  fall  into  the  Mediterranean.     As  they

R  Pages  e xi— cxiii.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.

CXCl

have  all  been  named,  and  some  of  them  slightly  noticed  in  the  survey  of  the  coast  given  in
the  last  Chapter,  we  shall  now  confine  our  attention  to  those  which  cross  "the  plain  of  the  sea"
southward  from  Sidon;  and  among  these  we  shall  neglect  the  small  brooks  and  torrents,  and
limit  our  attention  to  those  which  are  of  some  relative  importance,  or  with  which  any  circum-
stance of  interest  is  connected.

The  river  Kasmia,  which  is  now  generally  supposed  to  be  the  same  as  the  ancient  Leontes,
is  the  first  which,  within  this  limit,  requires  notice,  and  is  also  by  far  the  most  important,  after
the  Orontes,  of  all  the  Syrian  rivers  which  advance  to  "the  great  sea."  It  has  already  been
noticed  in  a  general  way  (cliii).  This  river  is  formed  by  the  junction  of  several  streams,  all
of  which  rise  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Baalbec.  After  this  junction  it  retains  for  more  than  half
its  course  the  name  of  the  stream  which  contributes  the  most  largely  to  its  formation,  the  Nahr
Liettani,  after  which  it  takes  that  of  Nahr  Kasmia,  the  origin  of  which  Sir  W.  Drummond
would  refer  to  the  verb  kasam,  which  signifies  to  divide,  as  in  fact  the  territory  of  the  Tyrians
was  separated  by  this  river  from  that  of  their  Sidonian  neighbours  on  the  north.  Pursuing  its
way  southward  between  the  two  Lebanons,  it  receives  the  waters  which  fall  from  both :  and,
after  a  course  of  above  eighty  miles,  enters  the  sea  about  four  miles  to  the  north  of  Tyre.  About
the  middle  of  its  course,  this  river  was  crossed  by  Maundrell  on  a  stone  bridge  of  five  arches.
He  calls  it  here  "a  large  river"  (in  April).  The  bridge  was  some  years  since  repaired,  and
a  khan,  for  the  accommodation  of  travellers,  built  near  it  by  the  Emir  Beshir.  Some  thirteen
miles  lower  down,  the  river  was  crossed  by  Buckingham  on  his  journey  from  Damascus  to
Sidon  (also  in  April)  by  a  bridge  of  two  arches.  The  stream  was  here  about  100  feet  wide
and  the  water  deep  and  rapid  in  its  course.  On  its  approach  to  the  sea,  the  banks  of  this
river  are  very  picturesque.  It  comes  out  into  the  plain  from  an  extensive  valley  among  the
mountains,  as  a  large  and  deep  river,  and  continues  its  course  to  the  sea  in  various  windings
and  meanders.  On  the  usual  road  between  Sidon  and  Tyre  there  was  formerly  a  stone  bridge
of  four  arches  over  the  stream.  This  was  in  ruins  at  the  time  of  Maundrell ;  and  its  place  is
now  supplied  by  a  bridge  of  one  arch,  below  which  the  stream  encloses  a  small  island.

Some  of  the  older  writers  very  erroneously  identify  this  river  with  the  ancient  Eleutherus,
an  error  which  we  believe  Maundrell  was  the  first  to  point  out.  It  does  not  appear  that  this
river  is  on  any  occasion  mentioned  in  Scripture.  It  was  on  the  shore  between  the  mouth  of
this  river  and  Tyre  that  the  Phoenicians  were  accustomed  to  collect  the  shell-fish  called  the
murex,  from  which  they  obtained  the  dye,  so  famous  under  the  name  of  the  Tyrian  purple.a

The  Nahr  Kardanus  is  unquestionably  the  river  Belus  of  the  ancients,  from  which  it  would
appear  that  it  was  consecrated  to  Baal  by  the  ancient  Phoenicians.  It  is  not  mentioned  in
Scripture,  but  is  noticed  by  Josephus  under  the  name  of  Beleus.  It  is  a  slender  stream,
the  source  of  which  does  not  appear  to  be  known,  although  it  cannot  be  very  distant.  Quite
near  its  mouth  this  river  is  shallow  enough  in  summer  to  be  forded  on  horseback.  Its  sands
have  a  fine  appearance,  and  are  famous  in  ancient  history  and  fable,  which  attributes  the  first
discovery  of  glass  to  the  effects  produced  by  a  culinary  fire  kindled  upon  them.  Although  it  was
ultimately  found  that  other  sands  possessed  the  same  property,  yet  it  appeared  that  the  sand  of
this  river  might  be  vitrified  with  more  ease,  and  that  the  glass  was  of  finer  quality  than  any
other.  The  Phoenicians  took  advantage  of  this  discovery,  and  the  Sidonian  glass  was  in  ancient
times  very  famous.  Vessels  visiting  this  coast  used  to  take  this  sand  as  ballast.  Down  to  a
comparatively  recent  date,  vessels  from  Italy  continued  to  remove  it  for  the  glass-houses  of
Italy  and  Genoa;  and  Mariti  affirms  that  the  magnificent  glasses,  for  the  manufacture  of  which
that  people  were  so  long  celebrated,  were  made  from  the  sands  of  this  river.  It  seems,  how-
ever, that  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  qualities  were  possessed  by  the  sands  of  all  the  rivers
of  this  coast,  from  Tyre  to  Joppa.b

"That  ancient  river,  the  river  Kishon,"  occurs  farther  to  the  south,  traversing  the  same

a  Drummond's  '  Origines,'  iii.  117;  Burckhardt,  4,  8,  9,  15,  237  ;  D'Arvieux,  ii.  5  ;  Maundrell,  48,  120;  Buckingham,  'Arab
Tribes,"  407;  Irby  and  Mangles,  199.

b  Pliny,  Hist. Nat.,  xxxvi.  26;  Strabo,  Geog.,  lib.  xvi.  p.  1077;  Josephus,  De  Bell.  lib.  ii.  c.  10,  sect.  10;  Keland,  p.  289;
Maundrell,  56;  Shaw,  ii.  32;  Mariti,  ii.  110,  111;  Clarke,  iv.  125,  126;  Buckingham,  'Palestine,'  ch.  v.  and  vii.  ;  Monro,
ii .  55.

cxcii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

plain,  and  flowing  into  the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  same  hay  of  Acre.  It  is  a  much  more
considerable  stream  than  the  Belus,  and  is  historically  celebrated  in  Scripture  for  the  over-
throw of  Sisera's  host  by  its  overflowing  stream.  It  is  usual  to  trace  the  source  of  this  river
to  Mount  Tabor,  but  Dr.  Shaw  affirms  that,  in  travelling  on  the  south-eastern  brow  of  Mount
Carmel,  he  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  sources  of  the  river  Kishon,  three  or  four  of
which  lie  within  less  than  a  furlong  of  each  other,  and  are  called  Ras  el  Kishon,  or  the  head
of  the  Kishon.  These  alone,  without  the  lesser  contributions  nearer  the  sea,  discharge  water
enough  to  form  a  river  half  as  large  as  the  Isis.  During  the  rainy  season  all  the  water  which
falls  on  the  eastern  side  of  Mount  Carmel,  or  upon  the  rising  grounds  to  the  southward,
empties  itself  into  it  in  a  number  of  torrents,  at  which  times  it  overflows  its  banks,  acquires  a
wonderful  rapidity,  and  carries  all  before  it.  It  was,  doubtless,  at  such  a  season  that  the  host
of  Sisera  was  swept  away  in  attempting  to  ford  it.  But  such  inundations  are  extemporaneous
only,  without  any  duration ; a  for  the  course  of  the  Kishon,  which,  according  to  this  account,
is  only  about  seven  miles  in  length,  runs  very  briskly,  until  within  half  a  league  of  the  sea.
But  when  not  augmented  by  rains,  it  never  falls  into  the  sea  in  a  full  stream,  but  insensibly
percolates  through  a  bank  of  sand,  which  the  north  winds  have  thrown  up  at  its  mouth.  In
this  state  Shaw  himself  found  it  in  the  month  of  April,  1722,  when  he  passed  it.

Notwithstanding  Shaw's  contradiction,  the  statement  that  the  Kishon  rises  in  Mount  Tabor
has  been  repeated  by  later  writers  as  confidently  as  ever.  Buckingham's  statement,  being
made  with  reference  to  the  view  from  Mount  Tabor  itself,  deserves  some  attention.  He  says
that  near  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  on  the  south-west,  are  "  the  springs  of  Ain  el  Sherrar,
which  send  a  perceptible  stream  through  the  centre  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  and  form  the
brook  Kishon  of  antiquity."  Farther  on,  on  reaching  the  hills  which  divide  the  plain  of
Esdraelon  from  that  of  Acre,  the  same  traveller  saw  the  pass  through  which  the  stream  makes
its  way  from  the  one  plain  to  the  other.  From  the  attention  we  have  had  occasion  to  pay  to
similar  rivers,  it  does  not  seem  to  us  difficult  to  reconcile  these  seemingly  adverse  statements.
It  will  very  probably  be  found,  on  further  inquiry,  that  the  remoter  sources  of  the  river  are
really  in  Mount  Tabor ;  but  that  the  supplies  derived  from  this  source  dry  up  in  summer
when  not  augmented  by  rains  or  contributary  torrents ;  whereas  the  copious  supply  from  the
nearer  springs  at  Ras  el  Kishon,  with  other  springs  lower  down,  keep  it  up  from  that  point
as  a  perennial  stream,  even  during  the  drought  of  summer.  Thus,  during  one  part  of  the  year,
the  source  of  the  full  river  will  appear  to  be  in  Mount  Tabor,  while,  during  another  part,  the
Ras  el  Kishon  will  be  the  source  of  the  diminished  stream.

The  banks  of  the  river  are  very  sandy,  as  are  also  the  shores  of  the  bay  into  which  it  flows.
Hence  the  interception  of  its  waters,  when  low,  by  the  sand  thrown  up  at  its  mouth,  and
instead  of  passing  to  the  sea,  forms  a  small  lake  near  Caipha.  Of  course  it  overcomes  this
obstruction  in  the  season  of  rain.  At  such  times  the  increase  in  the  quantity  and  force  of  its
waters  is  so  disproportionately  great  that  many  serious  accidents  have  occurred  in  the  attempt
to  cross  it.  For  one  instance,  Mariti  reports  that  the  English  dragoman  and  his  horse  were
drowned  in  such  an  attempt,  in  the  month  of  February,  1161.  In  April,  Monro  found  the
river  deep  and  about  thirty  yards  wide  :  he  crossed  it  in  a  boat.b

Of  the  brooks  which  flow  from  the  hills  of  Samaria,  and  pass  to  the  sea  across  the  plains
which  lie  between  Carmel  and  Joppa,  the  two  named  Zerka  and  Kanah  are  those  only  that
require  particular  notice.

The  Zerka,  which  must  not  be  confounded  with  a  far  more  important  river  of  the  same
name  beyond  Jordan,  seems  to  take  its  name  from  a  village  so  called  upon  its  banks :   it

a  We  have  ourselves  observed  of  such  rivers  in  different  countries,  that  the  duration  of  the  inundation  is  proportioned  to  the
length  of  their  course.

b  The  reader  may  be  cautioned  not  to  apply  the  rule  of  this  and  similar  livers  to  the  Jordan.  By  so  doing,  the  statements  we
have  given  might  be  made  to  seem  contradictory.  The  fact  is  that  the  Jordan,  and  other  such  rivers,  receive  a  great  increase  of
waters  after  the  rainy  season  is  over,  from  the  melting  of  the  snows  of  the  mountains  near  its  source.  But  such  rivers  as  the  Kishon
are  increased  by  rains  only,  and  their  inundations  are  therefore  over  before  those  of  the  rivers,  which  are  increased  by  the  melting
of  distant  snows.     The  increased  heat  of  late  spring  or  early  summer  is  necessary  to  produce  these  latter  inundations.

The  authorities  for  the  above  notice  of  the  Kishon  are— Shaw,  ii.  32;  Maundrell,  56 ;  Mariti,  112;  Buckingham,  i.  168,  177;
Monro,  55.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  cxciii

falls  into  the  sea  about  three  miles  north  of  the  ruins  of  Caesarea.  It  is  of  course  an  in-
considerable brook,  save  in  winter;  and  is  chiefly  remarkable  for  its  supposed  identity
with  the  Crocodile  River  of  Pliny.  From  its  proximity  to  Csesarea,  there  is  good  reason
to  conclude  that  this  is  the  river  that  he  intended  to  denote  by  the  name.  The  Arabs  in  the
neighbourhood  positively  affirm  to  travellers  that  crocodiles  exist  in  this  stream,  but  admit
that  they  are  of  small  size.  As  they  do  not  appear  to  be  found  in  any  other  river  of  Palestine,
those  travellers  who  have  been  induced  by  the  correspondence  between  Pliny  and  the  modern
inhabitants  to  pay  some  attention  to  the  subject,  have  been  led  to  conclude  that  some  large
species  of  lizards  have  been  taken  for  small  crocodiles;  while  others,  going  faither  in  their
belief,  think  that  there  are  real  crocodiles,  of  degenerated  growth,  descended  either  from  such
as  an  Egyptian  colony  in  this  neighbourhood  imported  as  sacred  animals,  or  from  such  as  might
have  been  brought  here,  as  to  Rome,  to  be  used  in  the  zoological  combats  which  were  cele-
brated at  Caesarea  in  the  time  of  the  Herods  and  of  the  Roman  procurators.  But  the  proper
seat  of  these  crocodiles,  according  to  most  accounts,  was  a  lake,  with  which  this  river  commu-
nicated, and  to  which  the  Arabs  give  the  name  of  Moiet-el-Temsah,  or  the  Crocodile  Lake,
which  is  exactly  the  name  (Crocodilorum  Lacus)  given  to  it  by  the  ancients.  Buckingham  and
others  remark,  that  they  could  not  find  this  lake  in  the  site  assigned  to  it  by  D'Anville;  but
this  does  not  prove  that  it  does  not  (or  at  least  did  not)  exist  in  a  situation  somewhat  different
from  that  which  he  assigns  to  it :  for  its  name  has  descended  to  us  from  ancient  times,  and
there  are  not  wanting  travellers  who  affirm  that  they  have  seen  it.  And  in  such  cases,  the
affirmation  of  those  who  tell  us  that  they  have  seen,  is  of  more  weight  than  the  negation  of  those
who  tell  us  that  they  have  not  seen.  Among  those  who  describe  the  lake  as  having  seen  it,  are
Brocard,  Breidanbach,  Roger,  and  Surius,  who  were  all  something  more  than  mere  passing
travellers.  Roger  describes  it  as  a  lake  of  soft  water,  about  a  league  in  circuit,  deep,  and
abounding  in  fish  ;  and  as  being  formed  by  springs  arising  within  itself.  Both  he  and  Surius
relate  an  anecdote  which  seems  to  have  made  much  noise  in  their  time — that  in  the  year  1628,
a  crocodile  issued  from  among  the  reeds  of  the  lake  of  such  size  and  strength  that  it  was  able
to  seize  and  carry  off  in  its  jaws  an  ass,  dragging  also  a  large  stone  to  which  the  animal  had
been  tied  by  the  peasant  to  whom  it  belonged.  Nau  also  affirms  that  calves  have  sometimes
been  carried  off  by  the  crocodiles  of  the  river.  One  may  suspect  that  the  sins  of  other
creatures  have,  in  these  cases,  been  imputed  to  the  crocodiles ;  but  with  respect  to  the  lake
itself,  the  verity  of  the  old  geographers  and  travellers  have  been  confirmed  by  the  Rev.  V.
Monro,  who  observed  it,  and  describes  it  as  the  Crocodile  Lake  of  D'Anville,  and  the  Moiet-
el-Temsah  of  the  Arabs.  It  is  a  small  low-lying  lake,  overgrown  with  reeds,  and  abounding
in  fish.  It  is  supplied  by  a  stream  running  from  the  east.  The  latter  was  crossed  by  the
traveller,  half  a  mile  beyond,  near  to  where  it  issued  from  a  small  mere,  by  an  artificial
passage  through  a  ridge  of  rock  that  still  bears  traces  of  a  bridge  or  arch  which  once  spanned
the  channel.3-

About  twelve  miles  to  the  south  of  Csesarea,  is  the  Nahr-el-Kasab,  a  brook,  of  which  we  find
nothing  memorable  save  the  probability  of  its  being  the  "  river  Kanah"  of  Josh.  xvi.  8.
and  xvii.  9.

About  ten  miles  to  the  south  of  this,  and  nearly  the  same  distance  to  the  north  of  Joppa,  is
another  small  river,  shallow,  and  easily  forded,  near  its  mouth,  even  in  January.  It  is  called
Nahr-el-Arsouf,  and  is  chiefly  noted  for  a  celebrated  castle  of  the  same  name  which  stood  near
its  mouth,  in  the  time  of  the  Crusades.b

A  little  before  we  reach  Joppa,  we  cross  the  Nahr-Abi-Petros,  over  which  there  is  a  bridge,
and  on  whose  border  the  ancient  city  Lod,  otherwise  called  Lydda  and  Diospolis,  stood.

About  twelve  miles  to  the  south  of  Joppa,  the  traveller  reaches  the  Nahr-el-Rubin,  which
he  usually  crosses  close  to  the  remains  of  a  Roman  bridge,  one  great  arch  of  which  and  part  of
another  still  remain,  overgrown  with  bushes  and  weeds.     The  river  above  the  bridge  was

a  Brocard,  in  prefat.  Locor.  T.  Sanctse ;  Breidanbach  (not  paged);  Roger,  77;  Surius,  353;  Maiiti,  ii.  221;  Buckingham,  i.
215;  Hardy,  123;  Monro,  ii.  70,  81 .
•>  Buckingham,  ii.  226  ;  Mariti.ii.  221.

VOL.   I.  2  C

cxciv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

nearly  dry  when  crossed  by  Irby  and  Mangles  in  October,  and  filled  with  wild  flowers  and
rushes.  Below  it  these  travellers  noticed  a  handsome  winding  sheet  of  water,  the  banks  of
which  were  likewise  covered  with  various  water- flowers,  and  many  black  water-fowl  were
swimming  on  its  surface.  The  water  is  bad,  but  not  salt.  It  takes  its  present  name  from
that  of  a  celebrated  sheikh  whose  tomb  stands  on  its  northern  bank.

Ten  miles  to  the  south  of  this,  and  about  a  mile  and  a  half  south  of  Ashdod,  we  cross  a
rivulet  which  appears  to  be  the  Scriptural  brook  Sorek.  This  identification  results  from  the
considerations  and  bearings  which  enable  us  to  determine  with  tolerable  accuracy  the  situation
of  Eleutheropolis,  which  Eusebius  tells  us  was  on  the  river  Sorek  :  and  the  present  rivulet  is
the  only  one  that  corresponds  with  these  indications.  The  stream  was  crossed  by  Dr.
Richardson  (in  April)  on  a  broad  stone  bridge,  and  it  then  offered  the  appearance  of  the  bed
of  a  river  with  stagnant  water  in  several  places.

Between  Askelon  and  Gaza  are  two  small  streams,  concerning  the  history  or  names  of
which  we  have  no  information.

Between  two  and  three  miles  to  the  south  of  Gaza,  is  a  rivulet  called  Wady  Gaza,  which
seems  to  answer  better  than  any  other  to  the  brook  Bezor  of  Scripture.3-  Early  in  April,
Dr.  Richardson  found  it  a  dry  bed,  about  thirty  yards  wide.  Below  where  he  crossed  there
was  stagnant  water  in  several  places ;  and  the  route  lay  through  a  fine  alluvial  plain,  which
when  there  was  water,  seemed  to  be  surrounded  by  the  river.

Now,  pursuant  to  the  plan  we  proposed  to  ourselves,  we  proceed  to  notice  the  streams  which
tend  towards  the  great  valley  of  the  Jordan,  beginning  with  those  which  flow  down  the
western  slopes — that  is,  from  the  proper  Land  of  Canaan.  These  are  few,  and  of  small  note
— the  rather  that  the  streams  which  contribute  to  the  original  formation  of  the  Jordan,  north  of
the  Lake  Houle,  have  already  been  noticed.  In  fact,  although  between  that  lake  and  the  end  of
the  Dead  Sea  there  are  numerous  brooks,  each  with  its  own  name,  there  is  hardly  one  among
them  of  even  sufficient  Scriptural  or  historical  interest  to  claim  the  notice  to  which  it  would
not,  from  its  physical  importance  be,  entitled.  The  brook  Kedron  may  be  an  exception  ;  and
to  that  our  attention  must  be  confined.

This  stream  is  a  mere  winter  torrent,  above  six  months  in  the  year  dry,  and  deriving  its
sole  importance  from  the  frequent  allusions  to  it  in  the  Sacred  History,  which  necessarily
resulted  from  its  flowing  through  the  deepest  and  most  extensive  of  the  natural  valleys  by
which  Jerusalem  is  confined.  The  ravine  in  which  this  stream  is  collected  takes  its  origin
above  a  mile  to  the  north-east  of  the  city.  This  ravine  deepens  as  it  proceeds,  and  forms  an
angle  opposite  the  temple.  It  then  takes  a  south-east  direction,  and,  passing  between  the
village  of  Siloam  and  the  city,  runs  off  in  the  direction  of  the  Dead  Sea.  It  is,  as  we  have
said,  dry  in  summer,  but  even  then  its  wide  and  stony  bed  bears  witness  that  in  winter,  after
heavy  rains,  it  becomes  a  large  and  powerful  torrent.  The  Kedron  continues  its  way  to  the
Asphaltic  Lake  through  a  singularly  wild  ravine,  the  course  of  which  few  travellers  have
traced.  Of  these  are  Madden  and  Stephens,  who  both  passed  through  it,  the  one  in  going  to
and  the  other  in  coming  from  the  Dead  Sea.  It  is  in  this  ravine  that  the  celebrated  monastery
of  Santa  Saba  is  situated,  of  which  we  have  already  taken  notice.  Speaking  of  his  approach
to  this  monastery  through  this  ravine,  Mr.  Madden  says,  "  After  traversing  for  the  last  hour  a
wild  ravine  formed  by  two  rugged  perpendicular  mountains,  the.  sides  of  which  contained
innumerable  caverns,  which  once  formed  a  sort  of  troglodyte  city  in  which  the  early  Christians
resided,  the  tradition  of  this  convent  is,  that  80,000  of  them  were  massacred  in  this  valley  by
the  Saracens.  The  sight  of  the  convent  in  this  desolate  place  was  like  a  glimpse  of  paradise."
Leaving  it  next  day,  he  gives  no  informing  particulars  of  his  farther  route,  save  that  he
"  marched  through  the  bed  of  the  Kedron,  along  the  horrible  ravine  which  he  entered  the
day  before."  At  length  he  says,  he  got  into  the  plain,  his  course  over  which  led  him  to  the
top  of  the  cliffs  which  bound  the  lake  on  the  north-west.     But  he  takes  no  further  notice  of

a  See  2  Sam.  and  p.  460  of  the  j>reseut  History.

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  cxcv

the  bed  of  the  Kedron,  which,  it  appears,  approaches  the  lake  in  that  quarter,  where  the
mountains  are  very  high  and  precipitous.

We  will  not  quit  the  brook  Kedron  without  some  notice  of  the  other  waters  of  Jerusalem
which  its  bed  receives.  And  first  of  the  "Fountain"  and  the  "Pool  of  Siloam,"  whose
surplus  waters  flow  in  a  petty  streamlet  to  that  bed.  Concerning  these  there  has  been  some
confusion  through  the  indiscriminate  application  of  names  by  different  travellers,  and  the
most  lucid  account  we  have  met  with  is  that  with  which  the  public  has  lately  been  furnished
by  Mr.  Wilde.a

"  The  Fountain  of  Siloam,  sometimes  called  the  Upper  Pool  of  Siloam,  is  situated  in  an
indentation  formed  in  the  side  of  the  hill,  beneath  the  south-eastern  angle  of  the  city  wall,  and
nearly  opposite  the  place  where  the  Tyropcean  Valley  separates  the  eastern  sides  of  Mounts
Zion  and  Moriah.  It  is  entered  by  an  arched  vault  by  which  a  flight  of  steps  leads  down  to
a  low-vaulted  passage  cut  in  the  solid  rock,  and  which  leads  in  a  north-west  direction  beneath
the  site  of  the  ancient  temple.     The  often  repeated,  and,  I  might  say,  the  hacknied  quotation,

"  Siloa's brook  that  flow'd
.  Fast  by  the  Oracle  of  God,"

has  never,  I  think,  been  properly  understood,  because  both  this  fountain  and  that  called  the
pool  of  the  same  name,  are  placed  at  a  distance  from  the  site  of  the  temple.  The  following
fact  may  illustrate  and  explain  this  quotation : —

During  the  rebellion  that  I  have  already  alluded  to,b  the  Arabs  of  the  opposite  village
(Siloam)  gained  access  to  the  city  by  means  of  the  conduit  of  this  pool,  which  again  rises  to
the  surface  within  the  mosque  of  Omar.  Dr.  Richardson  conjectured  that  this  subterraneous
passage  proceeded  under  the  mountain,  but  heretofore  no  proof  could  be  given  of  its  doing  so,
nor  was  it  known  to  travellers0  that  it  communicated  with  the  interior  of  the  city.  The
passage  is  evidently  the  work  of  art.  The  water  in  it  is  generally  about  two  feet  deep,  and  a
man  may  go  through  it  in  a  stooping  position."  Mr.  Wilde  further  supposes  that  this  may
have  been  used  by  the  ancient  inhabitants  as  a  sallyport,  or  secret  outlet  from  the  temple ;
for  he  states  that  it  cannot  have  been  made  to  conduct  the  water  from  the  fountain  into  the
city,  inasmuch  as  it  is  lower  than  that  point,  and  the  stream  flows  down  from  it.  If  this  be
the  case,  it  seems  to  us  infinitely  more  likely  that  it  was  originally  designed  to  cai'ry  off  the
surplus  water  which  was  brought  from  the  fountain  of  Etham  into  the  temple.  Those  who
wish  to  pursue  the  inquiry  will  find  much  to  confirm  this  conjecture.  Mr.  Wilde  informs  us
that  the  fountain  of  Siloam  is  "  a  mineral  spring,  of  a  brackish  taste,  and  somewhat  of  the
smell  of  Harrowgate  water,  but  in  a  very  slight  degree.d  It  is  said  to  possess  considerable
medicinal  properties,  and  is  much  frequented  by  pilgrims.  The  remains  of  a  church  surround
the  vault  at  the  top,  and  by  the  Latin  fathers  (and  all  Roman  Catholic  travellers)  it  is  called
the  Fountain  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  from  the  supposition  that  she  washed  the  linen  of  our  Lord  e
in  its  sacred  waters.

"  Continuing  our  course  around  the  probable  line  of  the  ancient  walls,  along  the  gentle  slope
of  Zion,  we  pass  by  the  king's  gardens,  and  arrive  at  the  lower  pool  of  Siloam  placed  in
another  indentation  of  the  wall,  at  the  southern  extremity  of  Zion.  It  is  a  deep  square  cistern,
lined  with  masonry,  adorned  with  columns  at  the  sides,  and  having  a  flight  of  steps  leading  to

a  *  Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  Madeira,  Teneriffe,  and  along  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,'  &c.  By  W.  It.  Wilde,  M.R  I.  A.
Dublin,  1840.

b  This  was  an  outbreak  in  Jerusalem,  in  which  the  Arabs  inhabiting  the  village  of  Siloam  were  the  ringleaders.

c  Perhaps  not  to  modern  travellers;  but  Mr.  W.  might  read  Quaresmius,  lib.  iv.  pereg.  vii.  cap.  28  ('  De  fonte  B.  Marice
Virginis').  In  the  two  preceding  chapters,  respecting  the  lower  pool  {Le  Origine  et  Terminatiune  Funtis  alloc),  some  valuable
matter,  new  because  old,  might  also  be  found.

d  "I  brought  home  ajar  of  this  water,  and  am  informed  by  Professor  Kane,  who  has  analysed  it,  that  it  is  a  strongly  saline
and  sulphureous  spring,  whose  specific  gravity  is  10035;  that  it  contains  much  common  salt,  some  carbonate  and  sulphate  of
lime,  a  trace  of  muriate  of  magnesia,  together  With  a  quantity  of  surphuretted  hydrogen  gas." — This  seems  rather  a  loose  way  of
stating  the  results  of  an  analysis.

e  "  And  her  own,"  Nau  reports,  but  with  his  usual  good  sense  adds  to  his  report  of  the  tradition,  "  C'est  ce  tju'on  en  dit,  mais
je  ne  scay  pas,  d'ou  on  l'a  appris."  In  his  time  the  fountain  was  highly  reverenced  (as  it  still  is)  by  the  Moslems,  and  Christians
were  obliged  to  pay  for  permission  to  descend,  and  Jews  were  altogether  excluded.

2  c  2

CXCV1

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VI.

the  bottom  in  which  there  were  about  two  feet  of  water.     It  communicates  by  a  subterraneous
passage  with  the  fountain  just  described,  from  which  it  is  distant  about  six  hundred  yards.

[Pool  of  Siloam.]

The  water  enters  the  pool  by  a  low-arched  passage,  into  which  the  pilgrims,  numbers  of  whom
are  generally  to  be  found  around  it,  put  their  heads  as  part  of  the  ceremony,  and  wash  their
clothes  in  the  purifying  stream  that  issues  from  it.

"  A  very  remarkable  circumstance  is  related  of  this  pool  and  fountain  :  — It  is  reported  that
the  water  in  them  is  subject  to  a  daily  tide;  and  by  some  writers  it  is  stated  to  ebb  and  flow
under  lunar  influence.  I  must  confess  that  in  my  first  visits  to  the  place,  I  was  much
astonished,  for  not  only  did  I  see  the  mark  to  which  the  recently-fallen  water  had  risen,  but  I
also  perceived  that  its  height  was  greater  at  different  times  of  the  same  day.  Many  ingenious
hypotheses,  and  many  learned  arguments  have  been  adduced  to  account  for  this  extraordinary
phenomenon — the  wonder  and  admiration  of  the  pilgrim  and  traveller.  I  think,  however,
that  it  may  thus  be  accounted  for.  The  stream  or  outlet  from  the  lower  pool  is  conducted  by
artificial  channels  through  the  gardens  and  parterres  that  lie  immediately  beneath  it  in  the
valley ;  and  it  is  the  chief  source  of  their  fertility ;  for  as  they  are  mostly  formed  of  earth
which  has  been  carried  from  other  places,  they  possess  no  original  or  natural  soil  capable  of
supporting  vegetation.  Now,  immediately  on  the  water-course  leaving  the  pool,  it  is  divided
into  numbers  of  little  aqueducts  for  the  purpose  of  irrigating  these  different  plots:  but  as  there
is  but  little  water  in  the  pool  during  the  dry  season,  the  Arabs  dam  up  the  several  streams,  in
order  to  collect  a  sufficient  quantity  in  small  ponds  adjoining  each  garden ;  and  this  they  must
all  do  at  the  same  time,  or  there  would  be  an  unfair  division  of  the  fertilising  fluid.  These
dams  are  generally  made  in  the  evening,  and  the  water  is  drawn  off  in  the  morning,  or  some-
times two  or  three  times  a-day ;  and  thus  the  reflux  of  the  water  that  they  hold  gives  the
appearance  of  an  ebb  and  flow.

"  The  surplus  water  is  finally  collected  into  a  small  stream  that  joins  the  brook  Gihon,
near  its  junction  with  the  Kedron,  but  both  these  latter  streams  were  dry  during  our
visit."

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  cxcvii

This  lower  pool  of  Siloam  has  been  generally  regarded  as  that  in  which,  by  our  Saviour's
direction,  the  man  born  blind  went  and  washed,  and  returned  with  the  blessing  of  sight.
(John  ix.  7.)  It  has  also  been  identified  with  the  Ain  Rogel,  or  Fuller's  Fountain  (literally
Foot  Fountain),  mentioned  in  Josh.  xv.  7  ;  xviii.  16,  and  2  Sam.  xvii.  17  ;  and  this  with  more
likelihood  than  the  reference  which  some  others  make  to  the  upper  fountain.  But  the  point
is  uncertain,  and  not  of  much  importance.  Nau  points  to  a  fountain  below  the  village  of
Siloam,  on  the  other  side  of  the  valley,  which  he  thinks  agrees  more  than  either  of  them  with
the  Scriptural  intimations  which  refer  to  Ain  Rogel.  It  was  from  the  fountain  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  pool  of  Siloama  that  the  Jews  were  wont  to  draw  water  in  a  golden  vessel,
at  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  and  bear  it  with  great  ceremony  to  the  temple,  where  it  was  poured
out  as  a  libation  at  the  altar .b

The  stream  of  Gihon,  mentioned  as  falling  into  the  Kedron  at  the  angle  where  the  eastern
and  southern  valleys  meet,  is  connected  with  one,  or  rather  two,  of  the  numerous  reservoirs
prepared  by  the  early  sovereigns  of  Judah  for  supplying  Jerusalem  with  water.  The  reservoirs
now  in  question  are  in  the  western  valley,  called  the  Valley  of  Gihon,  whence  they  are  named
the  Upper  and  Lower  Pools  of  Gihon.  The  "  Upper,"  being  the  northernmost,  is  nearly  opposite
the  gate  of  Bethlehem,  and  the  road  to  Jaffa  passes  close  by  it.  It  is  a  large  basin,  not  as
Pococke  describes,  "  cut  down  about  ten  feet  into  the  rock,"  but  by  running  a  strong  wall
across  the  ravine,  walling  the  sides  and  covering  them  with  a  water-proof  cement.  As
travellers  note  that  it  is  always  dry  or  almost  dry,  except  in  or  after  the  season  of  rain,  it
seems  designed  to  receive  the  waters  which  come  down  from  the  neighbouring  hills.  From
this  pool  to  the  city  there  is  a  canal,  which  is  uncovered  part  of  the  way,  and  which  is  said  to
go  to  the  pool  which  is  inside  the  Bethlehem  gate,  in  the  street  near  the  Holy  Sepulchre.
This  canal  was  obviously  intended  to  conduct  a  portion  of  the  surplus  waters  from  the  outer
pool  to  that  within  the  city ;  for  the.  design  of  all  the  pools  appears  to  have  been  to  collect  the
rain-water  for  the  common  uses  of  the  city,  and  even  for  drink  in  case  of  need.

About  a  milec  below  this,  in  the  valley,  below  Mount  Zion,  is  another  much,  larger  reser-
voir, designed  apparently  not  only  to  collect  the  intermediate  waters  of  the  valley,  but  to  share
the  surplus  water  of  the  upper  pool.  It  is  made  like  the  other  by  building  a  wall  across  the
valley.  The  basin  is  about  250  paces  long  by  100  broad;  and  the  bottom  is  very  narrow,  as
the  sides  shelve  downward  like  steps.  The  basin  is  supplied  by  no  natural  springs,  and  is
now  dry  except  after  rains.  The  surplus  water  from  this  pool,  as  well  as  that  collected  below
it,  passes  off  by  the  southern  valley  and  falls  into  the  Kedron.  Tradition  ascribes  the  credit
of  these  pools  to  Solomon,  as  it  does  all  similar  works  in  the  land.  But  it  seems  better  to
regard  this  lower  pool  at  least  as  the  Avork  of  Hezekiah,  who  is  said  to  have  "  stopped  the
upper  water-course  of  Gihon,  and  brought  it  straight  down  to  the  west  side  of  the  city  of
David;"  which  seems  correctly  to  describe  the  situation  of  the  lower  pool,  and  the  mode  of
its  formation.  The  upper  pool,  and  the  communication  between  it  and  the  city  may  have
previously  existed ;  and  it  appears  to  have  been  in  or  near  the  spot  that  Solomon  was  anointed
king  by  order  of  his  father,  while  Adonijah  was  holding  his  royal  feast  at  Ain  Rogel,  in  the
opposite  valley.e  The  pool  is  not  named,  and  indeed  perhaps  did  not  then  exist.  And  the
name  Gihon,  which  alone  is  given,  may  have  denoted  a  natural  spring,  or  a  well,  for  that  it
was  a  water,  seems  to  be  shown  by  the  fact  of  the  intended  opposition  to  Adonijah,  who  was
at  the  well  of  Rogel.

There  are  few  towns,  and  scarcely  any  metropolitan  town,  in  which  the  natural  supply  of
water  is  so  inadequate  as  in  Jerusalem ;  hence  the  elaborate  contrivances  to  collect  and
preserve  the  precious  fluid,  or  to  bring  it  to  the  town.     And  as  we  shall  find  no  more  suitable

a  This  is  shown  by  Lightfoot  from  the  Jewish  writers.     See  Chorog.  Cent.  chap.  xxv.

b  The  Jewish  writers  suppose  the  passage,  "  With  joy  ye  shall  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation  "  (Isa.  xii.  3),  to  refer  to
this  custom.  And  with  more  likelihood,  seeing  the  time  is  distinctly  indicated,  it  is  supposed  that  Christ  was  actually  witnessing
this  ceremony,  when  "  On  the  last  day,  that  great  day  o/the  feast  [of  tabernacles],  Jesus  stood  and  cried,  saying,  '  If  any  man  thirst,
let  him  come  to  me  and  drink,'  "  &c.

d  Course  distance ;  the  direct  distance  is  little  more  than  half  this.  e  1  Kings  i.  33.

cxcviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

place  than  the  present,  we  here  take  such  notice  of  the  works  undertaken  with  this  view,  as  its
historical  importance  seems  to  require.

Of  the  reservoirs  within  the  town,  the  only  one  which  need  engage  our  attention  is  that
which  is  identified  as  the  Scriptural  pool  of  Bethesda,  as  a  description  of  which  we  cannot  do
better  than  transcribe  the  account  recently  given  by  Mr.  Wilde  : —

"  The  place  called  Bethesda  is  an  immense  deep  oblong  excavation  or  cistern,  somewhat
similar  to  the  pools  of  Solomon  near  Bethlehem.  It  is  situated  to  the  south  of  St  Stephen's
or  the  sheep-gate,  immediately  beneath  the  wall  of  Omar's  mosque,  and  beside  the  antique
cyclopean  masonry  that  I  noticed  before  in  this  locality.  It  is  about  two  hundred  and  fifty
feet  long  and  thirty  feet  deep  ;  but  now  dry,  and  partly  filled  with  dirt,  rubbish,  and  brambles.
The  walls  that  form  its  sides  are  so  curiously  constructed  that  they  demand  attention.  They
are  of  immense  thickness,  and  formed  of  several  upright  layers  of  masonry.  The  first,  or
that  most  distant  from  the  inner  side  of  the  pool,  is  formed  of  large  and  perfectly  square
masses  of  stone  laid  in  courses,  but  separated  from  each  other  by  a  band  of  intervening
smaller  stones  in  the  shape  of  long  bricks,  placed  with  their  ends  out,  and  projecting  from  six
to  eight  inches  beyond  the  plane  of  the  larger  ones ;  so  that  they  thus  formed  a  kind  of  reti-
culated work.  The  square  space  left  in  the  centre  of  each  band  of  projecting  stones  is  again
filled  up  by  others  still  smaller ;  and  the  central  stone  of  this  part  is  fitted  into  a  square  groove
or  notch  cut  about  three  or  four  inches  deep  in  the  original  large  blocks  with  the  greatest
nicety,  and  the  whole  joined  together  by  strong  cement.  Over  this  is  placed  a  firm  coating
of  mortar,  a  couple  of  inches  thick,  and  studded  on  its  surface  with  small  flat  flints,  and  bits  of
marble ;  and  last  of  all,  it  was  completely  covered  with  a  layer  of  strong  cement  of  a  whitish
colour.  The  walls  have  been  much  dilapidated  in  several  places,  and  I  had  an  opportunity  of
examining  them  carefully.  This  work  is  best  seen  on  the  southern  side  of  the  excavation,
where  it  lies  beneath  some  ruined  houses.  In  the  western  end  the  remains  of  three  arches  are
still  in  existence  ;  but  the  third  is  at  present  nearly  choked  up  with  the  debris  of  old  and  ruined
houses.  These  arches  appear  to  have  been  formed  as  an  entrance  for  the  water,  which  was
probably  conveyed  to  them  from  the  Bethlehem  aqueduct."

The  site  of  the  famous  "  Pools  of  Solomon,"  on  the  road  to  Bethlehem  has  been  noticed  in
p.  cxxiv.,  and  on  account  of  their  connection  by  aqueducts  with  Jerusalem,  the  pools  them-
selves cannot  be  more  suitably  noticed  than  in  this  place.

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  narrow  and  fertile  valley  in  which  they  are  found  is  supposed
to  be  the  site  of  one  of  the  undertakings  of  Solomon,  of  which  he  speaks  in  Eccles.  ii.  5.  6.,a
and  to  be  that  in  particular,  to  which  there  are  allusions  in  the  Canticles.  It  is  also,  with
reason,  conceived  to  be  the  place  noticed  by  Josephus,  who,  when  writing  of  Solomon,  states  : —
"  There  was  about  fifty  furlongs  distant  from  Jerusalem,  a  certain  place  called  Etham,  very
pleasant  in  fine  gardens,  and  abounding  in  rivulets  of  water ;  thither  he  was  wont  to  go  forth
in  the  morning,  sitting  on  high  in  his  chariot."b

The  description  of  these  pools  which  Mr.  Wilde  has  furnished  is  so  distinct  and  fresh,  that
we  shall  here  introduce  it :  —

"  At  the  extremity  of  the  valley,  we  arrived  at  the  three  enormous  tanks,  sunk  in  the  side
of  a  sloping  ground,  and  which,  from  time  immemorial,  have  been  considered  to  be  the  work-
manship of  Solomon ;  and  certainly  they  are  well  worthy  the  man  to  whom  tradition  has
assigned  their  construction.  These  reservoirs  are  each  upon  a  distinct  level,  one  above  the
other,  and  are  capable  of  holding  an  immense  body  of  water.  They  are  so  constructed,  both
by  conduits  leading  directly  from  one  to  another,  and  by  what  may  be  termed  anastomasing
branches,  that  when  the  water  in  the  upper  one  has  reached  to  a  certain  height,  the  surplus
flows  off  into  the  one  below  it,  and  so  on  into  the  third.     These  passages  were  obstructed  and

a  "  I  made  me  gardens  aud  orchards,  and  I  planted  trees  in  them  of  all  kinds  of  fruits ;  I  made  me  pools  of  water,  to  water  there-
with the  wood  thatbringeth  forth  trees."
*>  Antiq.  viii.  7-

Chap.  VI.]

LAKES  AND  RIVERS.

CXC1X

the  whole  of  the  cisterns  were  out  of  repair,  when  we  visited  them,  so  that  there  was  hardly
any  water  in  the  lowest,  while  the  upper  one  was  nearly  full  of  good  pure  water.     Small

[Pools  of  Solomon.]

aqueducts  lead  from  each  of  these  cisterns  to  a  main  one  that  conducts  the  water  to  Jerusalem.
They  are  all  lined  with  a  thick  layer  of  hard  whitish  cement,  and  a  flight  of  steps  leads  to  the
bottom  of  each,  similar  to  some  of  those  in  the  holy  city.  Where  the  lowest  cistern  joins  the
valley  of  Etham,  it  is  formed  by  an  embankment  of  earth,  and  has  a  sluice  to  draw  off  the
water  occasionally.  A  short  distance  from  the  upper  pool,  I  descended  into  a  narrow  stone
chamber,  through  which  the  water  passes  from  the  neighbouring  spring  on  its  course  to  the
cisterns.  This  likewise  has  a  traditionary  tale  to  tell.  It  is  said  to  be  the  sealed  fountain  to
which  allusion  is  made  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  chapter  of  the  Canticles.  From  an  examina-
tion of  this  place,  it  appeared  to  me  that  several  springs  empty  themselves  into  these
reservoirs,  which  are  partly  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  and  partly  built  with  masonry.

"  Nigh  to  the  upper  pool  there  is  a  large  square  castle,  apparently  of  an  order  of  architecture
belonging  to  the  Christian  era  ;  and,  in  all  probability,  so  placed  to  guard  these  water-works
during  the  period  of  the  Holy  War,  for  we  know  to  what  extremities  some  of  the  early
Crusaders  were  reduced  from  the  different  wells  being  poisoned  by  the  enemy  upon  their
approach  to  Jerusalem.

"  These  fountains  having  been  already  described  by  Maundrell,  Pococke,  and  others,  I
shall  not  dwell  longer  upon  them,  except  to  mention  two  circumstances,  that  it  appears
extraordinary  have  not  been  adverted  to  by  former  travellers ;  the  first  is,  their  great  similarity
to  the  fountains  assigned  to  Solomon  at  Ras-el-Ain,  near  Tyre  ;a    and  the  fact  of  both  being

a  ..  we  visited  the  cisterns  of  Solomon,  at  Ras-el-Ain,  which,  tradition  says,  he  erected  in  return  for  the  assistance  afforded  by
King  Hiram  in  building  the  temple.  There  are  two  sets  of  these  cisterns  ;  the  first  we  came  to  were  small,  and  in  ruins,  and  one
evidently  of  a  later  date  than  the  second.  Their  decayed  state  allowed  us  to  examine  the  mode  in  which  they  were  constructed,
in  order  to  raise  the  body  of  water  to  the  required  level.  This  water  now  finds  its  way  direct  to  the  sea,  turning  a  mill  in  its
course.  No  doubt  can  exist,  I  think,  but  that  both  these  and  the  larger  ones  are  natural  springs,  which,  by  being  enclosed  in
those  water-proof  walls,  raised  the  water  to  the  height  necessary  for  conducting  it  to  the  city.  To  suppose  them,  as  has  been
asserted,  supplied  by  a  river  having  a  higher  source  in  the  adjacent  mountains  is  unreasonable  ;  for  had  such  been  the  case,  why
not  conduct  it  from  the  highest  point  at  once,  instead  of  bringing  it  into  a  valley,  in  which  both  of  these  cisterns  are  situated  ?
The  larger  cisterns  are  about  half  a  mile  farther  on  to  the  south  ;  the  ground  which  intervenes  betw  een  them  and  the  lesser  ones
is  highly  fertile,  and  was  covered  with  green  corn  and  large  groves  of  mulberry-trees — silk  still  forming  a  considerable  article  of

cc  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

natural  springs,  that  were  pent  up  so  as  to  raise  the  water  they  contained  to  the  level  of  its
final  destination.  The  second  is,  that  these  springs  were  originally  collected  into  one  stream,
which  must  then  have  formed  a  considerable  rivulet,  and  running  through  this  valley,  finally
discharged  its  waters  into  the  Asphaltine  Lake.

"  It  was  beside  these  water-works  that  Ibrahim  Pascha  suffered  a  defeat  by  the  Arabs  some
years  ago,  when  he  made  a  sudden  sortie  from  Jerusalem  and  attacked  the  rebels  there,  but
their  numbers  more  than  doubled  his.  A  garrison  of  five  cavalry  soldiers  were  stationed  in
the  old  castle.

"  On  our  return  to  the  city,  we  followed  the  track  of  the  aqueduct  as  far  as  Bethlehem,  and
afterwards  crossed  it  in  several  places  on  the  road.  It  is  very  small,  but  the  water  runs  in  it
with  considerable  rapidity,  as  we  could  perceive  by  the  open  places  left  in  it  here  and  there.
From  the  very  tortuous  course  that  this  conduit  takes  in  following  the  different  sinuosities  of
the  ground,  being  sometimes  above  and  sometimes  beneath  the  surface,  it  is  difficult  to
persuade  one's  self  that  it  does  not  run  up  hill,  as  many  have  supposed.  Finally,  it  crosses
over  the  valley  of  Rephaim,  on  a  series  of  arches  to  the  north  of  the  lower  pool  of  Gihon,  and
winding  round  the  southern  horn  of  Z  on,  is  lost  to  view  in  the  ruins  of  the  city.  It  very
probably  supplied  the  pool  of  Bethesda,  after  having  traversed  a  course  of  certainly  not  less
than  from  thirteen  to  fifteen  miles."

We  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  rivers  which  fall  into  the  basin  of  the  Jordan  from  the
country  east  of  that  river,  beginning  in  the  north.

The  first  of  these  is  the  river  Jarmuch,  a  name  which  the  Greeks  softened  into  Hieromax,
and  which  is  now  called  by  the  Arabs  Sheirat-el-Mandhour,  from  a  celebrated  chief  named
Mandhour,  who  is  said  once  to  have  governed  the  whole  of  the  tract  of  country  through  which
the  stream  runs,  from  its  source  at  Mezareib  to  its  outlet  into  the  Jordan,  near  the  southern
extremity  of  the  lake  of  Tiberias.  At  the  place — the  supposed  site  of  Ashtaroth  Carnaim — to
which  the  source  of  the  river  is  thus  ascribed,  the  stream  issues  from  a  lake  about  a  mile  in
circumference.  This  lake  has  a  small  grass  covered  islet  in  the  centre,  and  an  abundance  of
fish  in  its  waters,  equal  in  size  and  not  inferior  in  beauty  to  the  gold-and-silver  fishes  which  we
keep  in  glass  globes.  The  water  is  sweet  and  transparent,  and  the  lake  never  dries.  The
stream  which  issues  from  hence  flows  in  a  westerly  direction,  with  few  windings,  till  it
empties  itself,  at  the  point  already  indicated,  into  the  Jordan,  which  is  considered  to  be  fifteen
hours  distant  from  the  lake  in  a  W.S.W.  direction.  On  another  occasion,  Mr.  Buckingham,
to  whom  we  owe  our  information,  heard  the  source  of  the  river  described  as  being  three  days'
journey  from  its  mouth,  in  the  direction  of  Bozra,  at  a  place  called  Shellal ;   but  whether

commerce  here.  These  fountains  are  three  in  number,  and  one  about  thirty  feet  high ;  they  are  situated  in  a  small  valley,  about
a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  sea;  and  though  they  are  much  broken  and  neglected,  yet  they  retain  sufficient  magnificence  to
attest  their  antiquity  and  former  beauty.  The  largest  is  an  octagon,  and  is  about  a  hundred  yards  nearer  to  the  sea  than  the
others,  to  which  it  is  joined  by  some  very  beautiful  arches.  A  row  of  steps  leads  to  the  top,  which  is  surrounded  by  a  walk  eight
feet  broad.  Either  it  was  originally  arched  over,  or  the  lining  is  much  worn  away,  as  the  top  projects  like  a  cornice.  The  aper-
ture is  twenty-two  yards  across,  and  on  fathoming  it,  I  found  the  depth  not  more  than  eleven  yards  in  the  centre,  and  about  two
at  the  edges;  but  its  depth  has  probably  been  diminished  by  rubbish,  &c,  which  from  time  to  time  it  must  have  received.  In-
deed, one  only  wonders  how  these  cisterns  have  at  all  stood  amidst  the  many  desolations  that  have  visited  this  unhappy  country.
They  are  always  full,  and  an  immense  body  of  water  flows  from  them,  which  also  turns  several  mills  in  its  course,  as  shown  iu
the  map.

"  I  measured  the  thickness  of  the  wall  of  the  smallest  fountain,  and  found  it  to  be  twenty-three  feet.  It  was  formed  in  this  way
— two  walls  of  hewn  stones,  each  from  five  to  six  feet  long,  enclosed  a  space  which  was  filled  up  with  a  cement,  consisting  of  lime,
broken  stones,  and  gravel.  On  the  inner  wall  was  a  lining  of  mortar,  studded  with  small  stones,  similar  to  that  on  the  fountains
of  Solomon,  near  Bethlehem,  and  to  that  on  the  pool  of  Bethesda,  at  Jerusalem.

"  The  water  has  been  drawn  from  the  aqueduct  to  supply  the  mills,  and  Ibrahim  Basha  was  then  erecting  a  Tabouch  manufac-
tory nigh  to  the  cisterns.  Besides  the  large  quantity  of  water  constantly  passing  off  in  the  regular  stream,  it  flows  over  the  side  of
the  cistern  in  one  place,  and  forms  a  handsome  cascade.  Stalactites,  like  those  on  the  arches  in  the  plain,  are  seen  here  in
immense  masses,  and  some  Doric  capitals  have  been  lately  dug  up  at  this  place  ;  and  an  aqueduct  runs  from  it  in  a  southward
direction,  which  was  used  probably  for  the  purposes  of  irrigation.  The  main  aqueduct  is  continued  northward  to  the  rock,  or
citadel,  and  is  supported  by  arches  at  one  place  only.  On  the  morning  of  our  visit,  some  Arab  women  were  baking  their  bread,
made  by  pouring  batter  upon  the  heated  pan,  a  practice  much  referred  to  in  the  Book  of  Samuel.  The  existence  of  these  fountains
prior  to  the  time  of  Alexander  has  been  called  in  question  by  a  learned  writer ;  but  no  stronger  proof  is  needed  of  their  haviug
been  constructed  previous  to  the  building  of  Insular  Tyre  than  that  which  is  furnished  by  the  aqueduct  running  direct  to  the  rock,
and  afterwards  turning  back  towards  the  island,  to  which  it  could  have  been  brought  in  half  the  distance,  and  with  much  less
obstruction,  from  the  irregularities  of  the  ground.  Beyond  these  fountains  is  an  extensive  plain,  bounded  by  the  lower  range  of
Lebanon."

Chap.  VI.]  LAKES  AND  RIVERS.  cci

implying  thereby  a  cataract  or  rapids,  as  that  word  does  on  the  Nile,  he  could  not  clearly
understand.  The  fact  is  that  the  various  streams  which  contribute  to  form  the  river  Jarmuch
sweep  a  wide  tract  of  country  to  the  east  and  north-east  of  its  estuary  ;  and  as  many  of  these
have  a  far  more  remote  source  than  that  which  comes  from  the  lake  at  Mezareib,  it  is  difficult
to  understand  why  this  should  preferably  be  considered  the  source  of  the  river,  unless  that  it
is  the  most  remarkable  and  the  best  known.  It  is  likely,  however,  although  we  have  no
assurance  of  it,  that  these  remoter  streams  are  dry  in  the  summer,  and  that  the  only  perennial
stream  is  that  which  issues  from  the  lake,  in  which  case  its  claim  to  be  regarded  as  the
source  of  the  river  may  be  admitted.  But  nothing  is  in  general  more  difficult  than  to  assign
their  true  sources  to  rivers  obscurely  known  :  and  as  it  is  a  matter  of  little  interest,  except  to
scientific  inquirers,  it  is  only  under  peculiar  circumstances  that  we  have  allowed  it  to  engage
our  attention.

The  body  of  water  which  the  river  Jarmuch  contributes  to  the  Jordan  is  very  considerable.
Indeed,  at  the  point  (a  little  above  the  estuary)  where  it  was  crossed  by  Mr.  Buckingham,
early  in  February,  he  found  it  not  fordable  without  difficulty,  as  the  stream  was  there  broader,
deeper  and  more  rapid,  than  the  Jordan  at  the  time  (a  fortnight  before)  and  place  of  his
crossing  that  river,  above  Jericho.'"1

The  river  Jabbok  now  bears  the  name  of  Zerka.     Its  waters  first  collect  in  the  south  of
Jebel  Haouran.     In  crossing  westward,  across  the  dry  plain,  to  enter  the  Belka,  it  more  than
once  takes  its  course  under  ground,  and  is  quite  dry  in  the  summer ;  but  after  it  has  passed
the  plain,  the   contributions  it  receives  make  it  a  perennial  stream,  although  in  summer  much
attenuated.     At  the  point  where  it  enters  the  hilly  region  is  the  Kalaut-ez-Zerka,  or  castle  of
Zerka,  which  is  one  of  the  stations  of  the  Syrian  pilgrims'  caravan.     At  this  place  "  it  is  but
a  sorry  rivulet  embedded  among  reeds,  but  its  waters  are  clear  and  well  tasted. "b     At  a  point
about  midway  between  this  place  and  the  mouth  of  the  river,  where  it  was  crossed  by  Buck-
ingham, its  course  lies  between  tall  and  abrupt  cliffs,  about  500  feet  high,  which  look  as  if
separated  by  some  convulsion  of  nature  to  give  it  passage.     It  is  in  fact  a  deep  ravine  in  a
plain,  the  dark  sides  of  which  are  in  general  destitute  of  verdure,  while  the  plain  at  the  top,
on  both  sides,  is  covered  with  a  light  red  soil,  and  bears  marks  of  high  fertility.     At  the
bottom  of  the  ravine  we  find  a  small  river  flowing  from  the  eastward,  and  which  appears  here
to  have  just  made  a  sharp  bend  from  the  northward,  and  from  this  point  to  go  nearly  west  to
discharge  itself  into  the  Jordan.     "  The  banks  of  the  stream  were  so  thickly  wooded  with
oleander  and  plane-trees,  wild-olives,  and  wild-almonds  in  blossom,  pink  and  white  sickleyman-
flowers,  and  others,  the  names  of  which  were  unknown  to  us,  with  tall  and  waving  reeds,  at
least  fifteen  feet  in  height,  that  we  could  not  perceive  the  waters  through  them  from  above,
though  the  presence  of  these  luxuriant  borders  marked  the  windings  of  its  course,  and  the
murmur  of  its  flow  was  echoed  through  its  long  deep  channel,  so  as  to  be  heard  distinctly
from  afar.     On  this  [the  northern]  side  of  the  stream,  at  the  spot  where  we  forded  it,  is  a
piece  of  wall,  solidly  built  upon  the  inclined  slope,  constructed  in  an  uniform  manner,  though
of  small   stones,  and  apparently  finished  at  the  end  which  was  toward  the  river,  so  that  it
never  could  have  been  carried  across,  as  we  at  first  supposed,  either  for  a  bridge  or  to  close
the  pass.     This  was  called  by  the  Arabs,  Shuqhl  beni-Israel,  or  the  work  of  the  sons  of
Israel;  but  they  knew  of  no  other  traditions  regarding  it.     The  river  where  we  crossed  it,  at
this  point,  was  not  more  than  ten  yards  wide,  but  it  was  deeper  than  the  Jordan  and  nearly  as
rapid,  so  that  we  had  some  difficulty  in  fording  it.     As  it  ran  in  a  rocky  bed,  its  waters
were  clear,  and  we  found  their  taste  agreeable."0

We  know  not  that  the  river  has  been  crossed  lower  down  than  this  by  any  traveller  besides
Burckhardt,  from  whose  brief  indication  it  appears  still  to  flow  in  a  deep  valley,  through
banks  overgrown  with  the  solarium  furiosum.  As  might  be  expected  in  the  beginning  of
July,  he  found  it  "  a  small  river;"  but  must,  even  on  his  own  showing,  be  under  some  mis-

a  Buckingham's  ■  Arab  Tribes,'  163  ;  '  Palestine,'  ii.  29/,  305.  b  Robinson,  ii.  171 .    This  was  in  November.

c  Buckingham's  'Palestine,'  ii.  109;  see  also  Lindsay,  ii.  123.

vol.  i.  2d

ccii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

take  in  saying  that  it  "  empties  itself  into  the  Jordan  about  an  hour  and  a  half  from  the  spot
where  it  issues  from  the  mountain. "a

The  Arnon,  which,  after  the  Jordan,  is  more  frequently  than  any  other  river  of  the  land
named  in  the  historical  and  prophetical  Scriptures,  now  bears  the  name  of  Wady  Modjeb,
was  pre-eminently  the  river  of  Moab,  on  which  Aroer,  one  of  the  principal  cities  of  that  nation,
was  situated.  It  enters  the  Dead  Sea,  and  is  principally  formed  by  the  confluence  of  three
streams  (Wady  Wale,  Bahr  Ledjoum,  and  Seyle  Sayde),  all  of  which  have  their  origin  in
the  remoter  hills,  beyond  that  lake,  which  overlook  the  eastern  wilderness.  Burckhardt
crossed  it  in  July,  about  twenty  miles  from  its  mouth.  It  has  been  more  rarely  visited  than
the  other  streams ;  and  the  account  rendered  by  Burckhardt  is  still  the  only  good  one  we  pos-
sess.    It  seems  to  exhibit  many  of  the  same  characteristics  as  the  Jabbok.

"  The  view  which  the  Modjeb  presents  is  very  striking.  From  the  bottom,  where  the  river
runs  through  a  narrow  strip  of  verdant  level,  about  forty  yards  across,  the  steep  and  barren
banks  rise  to  a  great  height,  covered  with  immense  blocks  of  stone  which  have  rolled  down
from  the  upper  strata,  so  that  when  viewed  from  above,  the  valley  looks  like  a  deep  chasm,
formed  by  some  tremendous  convulsion  of  the  earth,  into  which  there  seems  no  possibility  of
descending  to  the  bottom.  The  distance  from  the  edge  of  one  precipice  to  that  of  the  opposite
one  is  about  two  miles  in  a  straight  line.  We  descended  the  northern  bank  of  the  Wady  by  a
footpath  which  winds  among  the  broken  masses  of  rock,  dismounting  on  account  of  the  steep-
ness of  road There  are  three  fords  across  the  Modjeb,  of  which  we  took  that  the  most

frequented.  I  had  never  felt  such  suffocating  heat  as  I  experienced  in  this  valley,  from  the
concentrated  rays  of  the  sun  and  their  reflection  from  the  rocks.  We  were  thirty-five  minutes
in  reaching  the  bottom.  The  river,  which  flows  in  a  rocky  bed,  was  almost  dried  up  (in
July)  ;  but  its  bed  bears  evident  marks  of  its  impetuosity  during  the  rainy  season ;  the  shat-
tered fragments  of  large  pieces  of  rock  which  had  been  broken  from  the  banks  nearest  the
river,  and  carried  along  by  the  torrent  being  deposited  at  a  considerable  height  above  the
present  channel  of  the  stream.     A  few  defle  and  willow-trees  grow  on  its  banks."b

Of  the  smaller  lakes,  or  rather  pools,  to  be  found  in  the  country,  some  have  been  incident-
ally noticed,  and  the  rest  are  of  too  little  consequence  to  require  notice  in  this  work.  Mr.
Monro  indeed  mentions  that  on  approaching  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  near  the  hill  on  which
stands  the  castle  of  Sanhoor,0  he  saw  "  a  lake  about  six  miles  long  by  three  in  width,  which
had  been  formed  within  a  short  time,  from  some  unknown  cause.  The  tract  of  land  over
which  it  had  spread  was  arable,  and  in  many  places  the  tops  of  the  corn  were  visible  above
the  water.  The  muleteers,  though  in  the  habit  of  travelling  upon  that  route,  had  never  seen
it  before,  and  one  of  them  could  not  be  persuaded  that  it  was  water,  until  he  had  approached
close  to  the  brink,  but  believed  it  to  be  the  illusion  of  the  mirage,  which  having  seen  in  the
desert,  he  supposed  might  exist  there  also."  Lest  the  lake  thus  described  should  find  a  place
in  maps,  we  may  mention  that  it  has  been  noticed  by  no  subsequent  traveller  who  has  pursued
the  same  route  ;  and  that  the  appearance  witnessed  was  probably  no  other  than  a  temporary
inundation,  caused  by  recent  heavy  rains,  which  the  heat  of  the  ensuing  summer  soon  eva-
porated. Large  tracts  in  and  bordering  on  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  as  well  as  on  the  plain  of
the  coast  are  thus  laid  under  water  in  the  wet  season.

a  Burckhardt,  347.  b  Burckhardt,  372-3.  c  See  before,  p.  cxvii.

Chap.  VI  ]

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

ccm

SUPPLEMENTARY     NOTES.

O  The  Name  of  the  Jordan,  p.  clviii. —
Various  have  been  the  etymologies  assigned
to  the  name  of  this  river.  It  happened  that
a  party  of  the  tribe  of  Dan  established  them-
selves near  one  of  the  apparent  sources  of  the
Jordan,  and  gave  the  name  of  Dan  to  the  con-
quered town  of  Laish.  Hence  the  etymologists
have  rarely  been  able  to  get  rid  of  the  notion
that  the  last  member  of  the  name  Jordan
must  be  in  some  way  referred  to  the  tribe  of
Dan.  The  explanation  which  ascribes  the
name  to  the  union  of  two  streams,  respectively
called  Jor  and  Dan,  to  form  the  river  and  the
name  of  Jordan,  is  so  pretty  that  it  deserves
to  be  correct.  This  explanation,  as  applied,
assumes  that  of  these  two  streams  the  Dan
was  that  which  arose  near  the  city  of  that  name ;
but  the  only  fact  bearing  on  this  point  which
we  have  been  able  to  find  (adduced  in  the
text)  would  rather  ascribe  the  name  of  Jor  to
this  stream,  and  of  Dan  to  the  other.  But  as
the  tribe  of  Dan  certainly  occupied  the  terri-
tory in  which  both  streams  rise,  this  fact  would
not  disprove  the  etymology,  as  the  name  might
be  derived  from  the  tribe  if  not  from  the  town.
Besides,  the  two  sources  thus  denominated
are  so  near  each  other,  as  to  make  the  distinc-
tion of  little  importance,  since  both  must  have
been  near  the  city  of  Dan.

Another  etymology,  however,  derives  the
name  from  the  words  "W./or,  and  \"\,  dan,
that  is,  the  river  Dan,  the  former  being  an
Egyptian  word  adopted  by  the  Hebrews  to
denote  a  river  or  brook,  and  especially  the
Nile  and  its  branches.  Of  those  who  adopt
this  interpretation,  some  have  the  1~T  as  a  proper
name,  supposing  it  derived  from  the  tribe  of
Dan  ;  while  others  regard  it  as  an  appellative,
and  finding  that  Dan  may  mean  pleasure,
translate  the  name,  River  of  pleasure.  But
the  word  may  also  mean  deep,  profound;  and
hence  others  will  have  the  name  to  signify  the
deep  river,  a  distinction  sufficiently  applicable
to  it,  by  a  comparative  reference  to  the  other
rivers  of  the  country.

But  another  class  of  interpreters,  observing
that  the  river  is  called  Jordan  long  before  the
tribe  of  Dan,  or  even  the  founder  of  that  tribe
existed,  and  feeling  an  objection  to  the  suppo-
sition that  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  this  name
is  proleptically  assigned  to  the  river,  think  it
the  better  course  to  derive  the  name  from  the
word  "JT,  jarad,  "  to  flow  down,"  that  is,
"  swiftly,"  and  suppose  the  river  to  have  been

thus  named  with  reference  to  the  rapidity  of
its  course.

Our  own  opinion  is,  that  the  second  member
of  the  name  dan,  does  not  at  all  refer  to  the
tribe  of  that  name  ;  for,  of  all  things,  rivers
most  usually  retain  the  names  they  originally
received,  and  it  was  not  likely  that  the
Hebrews,  so  late  as  the  time  of  the  judges,
gave  a  new  name  to  a  principal  river  which
must  have  had  a  well-known  and  recognised
name  for  ages.  We  therefore  believe  that
Jordan  was  its  actual  name  in  the  time  of
Abraham.  But  although  inclining  to  the  in-
terpretation which  derives  the  name  from  the
verb  ~J"V,  we  do  not  feel  quite  decided  against
those  other  interpretations  which  equally  ex-
clude the  reference  to  the  word  dan  as  a  proper
name.  Indeed,  it  might  be  strongly  argued  in
favour  of  the  Jor  being  understood  in  the
sense  of  river,  that  the  phrase  "  the  river
Jordan"  never  occurs  in  the  Bible — it  is  always
"  the  Jordan."  But  it  may  be  added  that  the
corresponding  word  J>JL  occurs  in  Syriac  in  the
sense  of  a  sea,  a  water.  Thus  in  excluding  all
reference  to  the  tribe  of  Dan,  we  are  far  from
being  at  any  loss  for  an  etymology  of  the  word
Jordan.

(2)  The  Stade,  p.  clxi. — We  shall  be  unable
in  this  place  to  develop  our  views  on  this
subject  to  the  extent  we  once  intended.  The
remarks  we  may  offer  may  be  well  introduced
by  the  following,  from  the  Introduction  to
Major  Rennel's  '  Comparative  Geography  of
Western  Asia.'

"  Of  these  (stades)  there  were  both  Greek  and
Roman.  It  was  originally  a  Grecian  measure  ;
but  afterwards  applied  by  the  Romans  to  the
sub-division  of  their  mile,  which  consisted  of
eight  stades.  Hence  a  degree  consisted  of
600  Roman  stades  only ;  although  Strabo,
following  the  Greeks,  reckoned  700,  and  the
mean  of  the  different  authorities  among  the
Greeks  718  ;  in  the  Euxine,  taken  around  its
whole  circuit,  about  708.  These  are  the
Grecian  itinerary  stades,  and  had  no  reference
to  the  Olympic,  which  never  appears  to  have
been  used  for  itinerary  purposes.

"  When  Polybius,  Strabo,  or  Pliny  are  speak-
ing after  the  Greeks,  or  treating  of  Grecian
matters,  antecedent  to  their  times,  they  always
used  the  Grecian  itinerary  stade  ;  but  in  what
concerns  Roman  matters  alone,  the  Roman
stade.     Strabo,  when   following  the  route   of

2  d  2

CCIV

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VI.

Alexander,  gives  of  course  the  identical  number
of  stades,  as  well  as  the  quality,  which  he  found
in  the  annals  of  the  times  ;  and,  moreover,  gives
the  distance  according  to  the  number  of  stades
actually  marched  over  ;  so  that,  after  all,  it  was
necessary,  in  order  to  obtain  the  direct  distance,
to  deduct  the  proportion  of  winding  of  the  road.

"  Pliny  gives  those  distances  almost  univer-
sally in  Roman  miles,  in  order,  it  may  be  sup-
posed, to  render  the  account  more  intelligible
to  his  countrymen.  It  will  be  found  that  he
turned  the  sums  of  Grecian  stades  into  m  p.
by  dividing  by  eight,  which  has  the  effect  of
increasing  the  distance,  since  it  required  nine
and  a  half  Grecian  stades  to  make  a  Roman
mile.  However,  this  will  be  found  to  be  true,
by  those  who  compare  the  distances  in  m  p.
in  Pliny,  with  the  stades  in  Strabo."

Now  this  process  is,  we  believe,  that  which
has  been  applied  with  exaggerated  effect  to
the  measurements  of  Josephus ;  so  that  his
dimensions  and  distances,  as  reported  to  the
English  reader,  are  much  larger  than  he  in-
tended them  to  be.  Such  mere  Roman  writers
as  Pliny,  found  it  convenient  to  consider  the
Grecian  stade  equivalent  to  the  eighth  part  of
their  mile,  or  their  furlong,  although  nine  and
a  half  stades  would  be  strictly  required  for
that  mile ;  and  our  own  writers,  imitating  in
this  the  Romans,  have  translated  the  stade
into  furlong  with  still  worse  effect,  seeing  that
our  mile  is  so  much  longer  than  the  Roman
(which  had  seventy-five  miles  to  the  degree,
whereas  ours  has  sixty-nine  and  a  half)  that
about  ten  and  a  quarter  stades  would  be
required  to  fill  it  out.  The  disproportion
between  the  stade  and  the  English  "  furlong,"
into  which  it  is  so  usually  rendered,  will  appear
still  greater  when  it  is  reflected  that  distances
were  usually  stated  by  the  ancients  according
to  the  road,  although  an  English  reader  is  apt
to  think  of  direct  distances.  The  difference
thus  resulting  is  such,  that  it  is  considered  the
Roman  mile  of  seventy-five  to  a  degree  becomes
eighty-four  to  the  degree,  when  allowance  is
made  for  the  windings  of  the  roads,  to  use  the
measurement  in  geographical  construction.

Now  we  consider,  that,  when  all  these  cir-
cumstances are  taken  into  account,  and  applied
to  interpret  the  measures  of  Josephus,  it  will  be
found  in  most  instances  remarkably  accurate,
instead  of  being  too  large,  as  is  usually  con-
sidered. We  have  no  doubt  that,  writing  in
Greek,  and  of  affairs  in  which  the  Romans  were
only  ultimately  and  partially  concerned,  his
stade  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  Greek  writers,
and,  as  above,  of  Polybius,  Strabo,  and  Pliny,
when  speaking  after  the  Greeks,  or  of  Grecian
affairs,  and  that,  consequently,  instead  of
rendering  his  stade  into  furlong,  of  which  we

have  eight  to  our  mile,  we  should  consider  that
there  were  at  least  ten  of  his  stades  to  our  mile.
The  propriety  of  thus  reducing  his  measure-
ments into  British  miles  is  shown  by  the  fre-
quently very  exact  correspondence  between
them,  as  thus  understood,  and  those  which
some  modern  travellers  have  furnished.  We
are  content  to  have  pointed  out  a  subject  of
inquiry  which  to  some  of  our  readers  may  be
interesting.

In  the  ninth  volume  of  the  *  Geographical
Journal'  there  is  a  paper  '  On  the  Stade,  as  a
Linear  Measure,'  by  Colonel  Leake.  It  con-
tains a  large  mass  of  valuable  information  on
the  subject ;  but  we  have  not  ourselves  re-
sorted to  it,  as  the  conclusion  of  Major  Rennel
and  other  great  geographers  is  more  satis-
factory to  us  than  that  which  would  bring  the
stade  to  a  uniform  standard.

(3)  Water  of  the  Dead  Sea,  p.  clxxxi. —
We  cannot  forbear  subjoining  in  a  note  the
lively  account  which  Mr.  Stephens  gives  of
his  experience  on  this  point : —

"  From  my  own  experience  1  can  almost
corroborate  the  most  extravagant  accounts  of
the  ancients.  I  know,  in  reference  to  my  own
specific  gravity,  that  in  the  Atlantic  and
Mediterranean  I  cannot  float  without  some
little  movement  of  the  hands,  and  even  then
my  body  is  almost  totally  submerged ;  but
here,  when  I  threw  myself  upon  my  back,  my
body  was  half  out  of  the  water.  It  was  an  ex-
ertion even  for  my  lank  Arabs  to  keep  them-
selves under.  When  I  struck  out  in  swim-
ming it  was  extremely  awkward,  for  my  legs
were  continually  rising  to  the  surface,  and
even  above  the  water.  I  could  have  lain  and
read  there  with  perfect  ease.  In  fact  I  could
have  slept ;  and  it  would  have  been  a  much
easier  bed  than  the  bushes  at  Jericho.  It  was
ludicrous  to  see  one  of  the  horses :  as  soon  as
his  body  touched  the  water,  he  was  afloat,  and
turned  over  on  his  side  :  he  struggled  with  all
his  force  to  preserve  his  equilibrium  ;  but  the
moment  he  ceased  moving,  he  turned  over  on
his  side  again,  and  almost  on  his  back,  kicking
his  feet  out  of  water  and  snorting  with  terror.
The  worst  of  my  bath  was,  after  it  was  over,
my  skin  was  covered  with  a  thick  glutinous
substance,  which  it  required  another  ablution
to  get  rid  of;  and  after  I  had  wiped  myself
dry,  my  body  burnt  and  smarted  as  if  it  had
been  turned  round  before  a  roasting  fire.  My
face  and  ears  were  incrusted  with  salt ;  my
hairs  stood  out,  '  each  particular  hair  on  end,'
and  my  eyes  were  irritated  and  inflamed,  so
that  I  felt  the  effects  of  it  for  several  days.  In
spite  of  all  this,  however,  revived  and  refreshed
by  my  bath,  I  mounted  my  horse  a  new  man."

CHAPTER    VII.

HISTORY    OF   THE    MONTHS

[Terrace  Cultivation.]

It  has  been  a  matter  of  anxious  consideration  in  what  form  we  might  best  and  most  compen-
diously exhibit  a  vast  body  of  information,  which  we  have  collected  from  a  great  variety  of
sources,  respecting  the  climate,  the  seasons,  the  products,  and  the  agricultural  operations  of
Palestine.  In  the  form  of  a  History  of  the  Months,  it  has  appeared  to  us  that  the  largest
quantity  of  information  on  all  these  subjects  might  be  brought  into  the  smallest  space ;  while
in  that  form,  such  information  can  perhaps  be  made  more  interesting  to  the  general  reader
than  in  any  other.

Something  of  this  kind  has  been  very  ably  executed  by  J.  G.  Buhle  and  G.  F.  Walch,  both
in  the  year  1785,  as  competing  prize  essays,  proposed  by  the  learned  Michaelis  as  professor
at  the  university  of  Gottingen,  in  November,  1784.  The  prize  was  awarded  to  Buhle;  but
the  merits  of  the.  two  essays  were  so  nearly  equal,  that  Walch  only  lost  it  through  some  inat-
tention to  one  of  the  rules  which  had  been  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  the  competitors ;  and
its  value  was  so  highly  estimated  by  Michaelis,  that  it  was  published  under  his  auspices  and
with  a  highly  commendatory  preface  from  his  pen.a     The  essay  by  Buhle  is  well  known  in

a  G.  F.  Walchii  Calendarium  PaUestina;  CEconomicum,  cum  praf.     J.  D.  Michaelis,  Golting.  1785.

ccvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

this  country.  It  was  originally  translated  by  Charles  Taylor,  and  inserted  among  the  '  Frag-
ments '  appended  to  his  edition  of  Calmet,  under  the  title  of  '  An  Economical  Calendar  of
Palestine,'  and,  in  various  forms  of  abridgment,  it  has  since  formed  the  basis  of  the  various
'  Calendars  '  which  have  been  offered  to  the  English  public.  The  other,  by  Walch,  has  not
been  translated,  and  is  now  but  little  known.  In  the  present  chapter  we  shall  incorporate
with  our  own  ample  materials  whatever  seems  really  valuable  in  the  collections  formed  by
both  Buhle  and  Walch.  Much  information  which  existed  in  their  time  was  overlooked  by
both  these  learned  writers  ;  and  a  large  quantity  of  valuable  matter  has  accrued  since  they
wrote.  All  this  has  been  open  to  us,  and  has  been  carefully  digested  in  the  present  chapter,
which  we  have  anxiously  endeavoured  to  render  a  valuable  analysis  of  all  existing  information
on  the  subjects  on  which  it  treats.  To  increase,  as  we  think,  its  interest,  and  the  instruction
we  wish  it  to  convey,  we  have  used  the  Bible  itself  as  a  source  of  information,  and  have  intro-
duced descriptions  of  the  agricultural  operations  which  belong  to  the  several  months.  It  has
been  judged  expedient  to  adduce  the  authority  for  every  detail  which  is  offered,  even  at  the
risk  of  giving  to  the  page  a  more  repulsive  aspect  than  it  might  otherwise  bear.

Before  entering  upon  this,  it  will,  however,  seem  necessary  to  furnish  the  reader  with  such
a  general  statement  respecting  the  climate  of  Palestine,  as  may  render  more  clear  and  satis-
factory the  observations  which  will  be  recorded  under  the  several  months.  The  reader  must
also  be  thus  prepared  to  allow  for  the  very  remarkable  differences  of  climate  in  Syria,  and
particularly  in  Palestine ;  as,  without  a  clear  understanding  on  this  point,  every  separate  state-
ment may  give  rise  to  serious  misconceptions.  For  these  purposes  the  general  statement  fur-
nished by  Volney  is  the  best  that  can  be  supplied,  and  we  therefore  adopt  it,  with  some
abridgment,  addition,  and  correction,  for  such  a  preliminary  view  as  we  require.

"  It  is  an  opinion  pretty  generally  received  that  Syria  is  a  very  hot  country,  but  it  will  be
necessary  to  make  several  distinctions  ;  first,  on  account  of  the  difference  of  latitude,  which,
from  one  extremity  to  the  other,  is  not  less  than  six  degrees ;  secondly,  from  the  natural  divi-
sion of  the  country  into  low  and  flat,  and  high  and  mountainous,  which  division  occasions  a  still
more  sensible  difference ;  for  while  Reaumur's  thermometer  stands  at  twenty-five  and  twenty-
six  degrees  upon  the  coast,  it  hardly  rises  to  twenty  or  twenty-one  among  the  mountains.51  In
winter,  therefore,  the  whole  chain  of  mountains  is  covered  with  snow,  while  the  lower  country
is  generally  free  from  it,  or  at  least  it  lies  only  for  a  short  time.  We  must  first  then  establish
two  general  climates ;  the  one  very  hot,  which  is  that  of  the  coast,  and  the  interior  plains,
such  as  those  of  Baalbec,  Antioch,  Tripoli,  Acre,  Gaza,  Haouran,  &c. ;  the  other  temperate,
and  almost  like  our  own,  which  is  the  climate  of  the  mountains,  at  least  at  a  certain  height.
The  summer  of  1784  was  reckoned  among  the  Druses  one  of  the  hottest  they  remembered,
yet  I  never  found  the  heat  to  be  compared  to  that  I  had  felt  at  Saide  (Sidon)  or
Beirout.

"  In  this  climate  the  order  of  the  seasons  is  nearly  the  same  as  in  the  middle  provinces  of
France;  the  winter,  which  lasts  from  November  to  March  (exclusive),  is  sharp  and  rigorous.
Not  a  year  passes  without  snow,  and  the  earth  is  frequently  covered  several  feet  deep  with  it
for  months  together ;  the  spring  and  autumn  are  mild,  and  the  summer-heat  is  absolutely
insupportable.  In  the  plains,  on  the  contrary,  as  soon  as  the  sun  returns  to  the  equator,  the
transition  is  rapid  to  oppressive  heats,  which  continue  to  the  end  of  October.  But  then  the
winter  is  so  moderate,  that  the  orange,  date,  banana,  and  other  delicate  trees,  flourish  in  the
open  air ;  and  it  appears  equally  extraordinary  and  picturesque  to  an  European  at  Tripoli  to
behold  under  his  windows,  in  the  month  of  January,  orange-trees,  laden  with  flowers  and
fruit,  while  the  lofty  head  of  Lebanon  is  seen  covered  with  ice  and  snow.  It  must,  neverthe-
less, be  observed,  that  in  the  northern  parts,  and  to  the  east  of  the  mountains,  the  winter  is
more  rigorous,  without  the  summer  being  less  hot.  At  Antioch,  Aleppo,  and  Damascus,  and
in  the  Haouran,  there  are  several  weeks  of  frost  and  snow  every  winter,  which  arises  from  the

a  Along  the  coast  of  Syria  and  Tripoli,  in  particular,  the  lowest  degrees  to  which  the  thermometer  falls  in  winter  are  8  and  9,
(50  and  52  of  Farenheit's)  :  in  summer,  in  close  apartments,  it  rises  from  25-fc  to  26  (88  to  90).  As  for  the  barometer,  it  is  re-
markable that  at  the  latter  end  of  May  it  fixes  at  20  inches,  and  never  varies  till  October.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS.  ccvii

situation  of  the  country  still  more  than  the  difference  of  latitude ;  for,  in  fact,  all  the  plain  to
the  east  of  the  mountains  is  very  high  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  exposed  to  all  the  parching
blasts  of  the  north  and  north-east,  and  screened  from  the  humid  winds  of  the  south  and  south-
west. Besides,  Antioch  and  Aleppo  receive  from  the  mountains  of  Scanderoon,  which  are
within  sight,  an  air  which  the  snow  that  covers  them  so  long  must  necessarily  render  very
sharp.

"  Syria,  therefore,  unites  different  climates  under  the  same  sky,  and  collects,  within  a  narrow
compass,  pleasures  and  productions,  which  nature  has  elsewhere  dispersed  at  great  distances
of  time  and  places.  With  us,  for  instance,  seasons  are  separated  by  months  ;  there  we  may
say  they  are  only  separated  by  hours.  If  in  Saide  or  Tripoli  we  are  incommoded  by  the
heats  of  July, — in  six  hours  we  are  in  the  neighbouring  mountains,  in  the  temperature  of
March :  or,  on  the  other  hand,  if  chilled  by  the  frosts  of  December, — at  Besharri,  a  day's
journey  brings  its  back  to  the  coast  amid  the  flowers  of  May.a  The  Arabian  poets  have
therefore  said,  that  '  the  Sannin  b  bears  winter  on  his  head,  spring  on  his  shoulders,  and  autumn
in  his  bosom,  while  summer  lies  sleeping  at  his  feet.'  I  have  myself,"  says  our  author,  "  ex-
perienced this  figurative  observation  during  the  eight  months  I  resided  at  the  monastery  of
Mar-Hanna,  seven  leagues  from  Beirout.  At  the  end  of  February  I  left  at  Tripoli  a  variety
of  vegetables  which  were  in  perfection,  and  many  flowers  in  full  bloom.  On  my  arrival  at
Antoura,  I  found  the  plants  only  beginning  to  shoot,  and,  at  Mar-Hanna,  everything  was
covered  with  snow.  It  had  not  entirely  left  the  Sannin  till  the  end  of  April,  and  already,  in
the  valley  it  overlooks,  roses  had  begun  to  bud.  The  early  figs  were  past  at  Beirout,  when
they  were  first  gathered  with  us,  and  the  silk-worms  were  in  the  cod  before  our  mulberry-
trees  were  half  stripped.

"  With  these  numerous  advantages  of  climate  and  of  soil,  it  is  not  astonishing  that  Syria
should  always  have  been  esteemed  a  most  delicious  country,  and  that  the  Greeks  and  Romans
ranked  it  among  the  most  beautiful  of  their  provinces,  and  even  thought  it  not  inferior  to
Egypt.  In  modern  times,  also,  a  pacha,  who  was  acquainted  with  both  these  provinces,  being
asked  to  which  he  gave  the  preference,  replied,  '  Egypt,  without  doubt,  is  a  most  beautiful
farm,  but  Syria  is  a  charming  country-house.'

"  The  qualities  of  the  air  and  waters  must  not  be  overlooked.  These  elements  present  in
Syria  a  very  remarkable  phenomena.  On  the  mountains,  and  in  all  the  elevated  plain  which
stretches  to  the  eastward,  the  air  is  light,  pure,  and  dry  ;  while  on  the  coast,  and  especially
from  Scanderoon  to  Jaffa,  it  is  moist  and  heavy :  thus  Syria  is  divided  lengthwise  into  two
different  districts,  separated  by  the  chain  of  mountains  which  also  cause  their  diversity ;  for
these  preventing,  by  their  height,  the  free  passage  of  the  westerly  winds,  force  the  vapours
which  they  bring  from  the  sea  to  collect  in  the  valleys;  and  as  air  is  light  only  in  proportion
to  its  purity,  these  are  unable  to  rise  above  the  summits  of  this  rampart.  The  consequence
is,  that  the  air  of  the  desert  and  the  mountains,  though  sufficiently  wholesome  for  such  as  are
in  no  danger  of  pulmonary  complaints,  is  hurtful  to  those  who  are,  and  it  is  necessary  to  send
such  from  Aleppo  to  Latakia  or  to  Saide.  This  good  property  of  the  air  on  the  coast  is,
however,  outweighed  by  more  serious  bad  ones ;  and  it  may  in  general  be  pronounced  un-
healthy, as  it  causes  intermittent  and  putrid  fevers,  and  such  defluxions  of  the  eyes  as  are
common  in  Egypt.  The  evening  dews,  and  sleeping  on  the  terraces,  are  found  much  less
hurtful  in  the  mountains  and  interior  parts  of  the  country,  as  the  distance  from  the  sea  is
greater.

"The  waters  of  this  country  have  also  a  remarkable  difference.  In  the  mountains,  that  of
the  springs  is  light,  and  of  a  very  good  quality;  but  in  the  plain,  both  to  the  east  and  west,
if  it  has  no  natural  or  artificial  communication  with  the  springs,  we  find  nothing  but  brackish
water,  which  becomes  still  more  so  the  nearer  we  approach  the  desert,  where  there  is  not  a
drop  of  any  other.     This  inconvenience  has  rendered  rain  so  precious  to  the  inhabitants  of  the

a  This  is  the  practice  of  several  of  the  iuhabitints  of  this  district,  who  pass  the  winter  near  Tripoli,  while  their  houses  are
buried  under  the  snow.

b  The  highest  summit  of  Lebanon.

ccviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

frontiers,  that  they  have  in  all  ages  taken  care  to  collect  it  in  wells  and  caverns  carefully
closed ;  hence  among  all  ruins  cisterns  are  the  first  things  we  discover.

"  The  face  of  the  heavens  in  Syria,  particularly  on  the  coast  and  in  the  desert,  is,  in  general,
more  constant  and  regular  than  in  our  climates  :  rarely  is  the  sun  obscured  for  two  successive
days.  In  the  course  of  a  whole  summer  we  see  few  clouds  and  still  less  rain,  which  only
begins  about  the  end  of  October,  and  then  is  neither  long  nor  plentiful.  The  husbandmen
wish  for  it  to  sow  what  they  call  their  winter  crop,  that  is,  their  wheat  and  barley.  In
December  and  January  the  rain  becomes  more  frequent  and  heavier,  and  snow  often  falls  in
the  higher  country.  It  sometimes  rains  also  in  March  and  April,  and  the  husbandman  avails
himself  of  it  to  sow  his  summer  crop  of  sesamum,  dourra,  tobacco,  cotton,  beans,  and  water-
melons. The  remainder  of  the  year  is  nearly  uniform,  and  drought  is  more  frequently  com-
plained of  than  too  much  wet.

"  The  winds  in  Syria,  as  in  Egypt,  are  in  some  degree  periodical  and  governed  by  the
seasons.  About  the  autumnal  equinox  the  north-west  wind  begins  to  blow  more  frequently
and  stronger.  It  renders  the  air  dry,  clear,  and  sharp ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that,  on  the
sea-coast,  it  causes  the  head-ache,  like  the  north-east  wind  in  Egypt ;  and  this  more  in  the
northern  than  in  the  southern  parts,  but  never  in  the  mountains.  -

"  We  may  further  remark  that  it  usually  blows  three  days  successively,  like  the  south  and
south-east  at  the  other  equinox.  It  continues  to  prevail  till  November,  that  is,  about  fifty
days,  and  its  variations  are  generally  toward  the  east.  These  winds  are  followed  by  the
north-west,  the  west,  and  south-west,  which  prevail  from  November  to  February.  The  two
latter  are,  to  use  the  words  of  the  Arabs,  the  fathers  of  the  rains.  In  March  arise  the  per-
nicious winds  from  the  southern  quarter,  with  the  same  circumstances  as  in  Egypt ;  but  they
become  feebler  as  we  advance  toward  the  north,  and  are  much  more  supportable  in  the  moun-
tains than  in  the  flat  country.  Their  duration  at  each  return  is  usually  of  twenty-four  hours,
or  three  days.  The  easterly  winds  which  follow,  continue  till  June,  when  a  north  wind  suc-
ceeds, with  which  vessels  may  go  and  return  along  all  the  coast.  At  the  same  season,  too,
the  wind  varies  through  all  the  points  every  day,  passing  with  the  sun  from  the  east  to  the
west,  to  return  by  the  north,  and  recommence  the  same  circuit.  At  this  time,  also,  a  local
wind,  called  the  land-breeze,  prevails  along  the  coast ;  during  the  night  it  springs  up  after
sun-set,  lasts  till  sun-rising,  and  reaches  only  two  or  three  leagues  out  at  sea.

"  The  causes  of  all  these  phenomena  are  problems  well  deserving  the  attention  of  natural
philosophers.  No  country  is  better  adapted  to  observations  of  this  kind  than  Syria.  It  seems
as  if  Nature  had  there  prepared  whatever  is  necessary  to  the  study  of  her  operations.  We,  in
our  foggy  climates,  in  the  depth  of  vast  continents,  are  unable  to  pursue  the  great  changes
which  happen  in  the  atmosphere ;  the  confined  horizon  which  bounds  our  view  circumscribes
also  our  ideas.  The  field  of  our  observation  is  very  limited ;  and  a  thousand  circumstances
combine  to  vary  the  effects  of  natural  causes.  There,  on  the  contrary,  an  immense  scene
opens  before  us,  and  the  great  agents  of  Nature  are  collected  in  a  space  which  renders  it  easy  to
watch  their  various  operations.  To  the  west  is  the  vast  liquid  plain  of  the  Mediterranean;  to
the  east  the  plain  of  the  desert,  no  less  vast,  but  absolutely  dry ;  in  the  midst  of  these  two
level  surfaces  rise  the  mountains,  whose  summits  are  so  many  observatories,  from  whence  the
sight  may  discern  full  thirty  leagues.  Four  observatories  might  command  the  whole  extent
of  Syria,  and  from  the  top  of  Casius,  Lebanon,  and  Tabor,  let  nothing  escape  them  within
that  boundless  horizon."

In  cloudy  weather,  especially  when  the  winds  are  tempestuous,  and  blow,  as  they  often  do
in  these  cases,  in  several  directions,  waterspouts  are  more  frequent  near  the  Capes  of  Latikea,
Greego,  and  Carmel,  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  Mediterranean.  They  are  the  most  frequent
at  the  equinoxes.a

With  respect  to  the  land-breezes,  as  they  are  called,  it  should  be  observed  that  along  the
coast  of  Syria  they  blow  from  the  land  during  the  night,  and  from  the  sea  during  the  day.
At  the  most,  the  wind,  as  from  the  land,  does  not  advance  more  than  two  or  three  leagues

a  Shaw,  ii.  134;  Volney, i.  315.

Chap.  VII]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JANUARY.  ccix

into  the  sea.  Its  strength  and  extent  is  proportioned  to  the  height  and  steepness  of  the
declivity  which  it  sweeps.  Hence  it  reaches  further  at  the  foot  of  Lebanon  and  the  northern
chain  of  eminences,  because  the  mountains  in  that  quarter  are  loftier,  steeper,  and  nearer  the
sea ;  and  there  are  often  violent  and  sudden  squalls  at  the  mouth  of  the  Kasmia,  where  the
deep  valley  of  the  Bekaah,a  collecting  the  air  in  its  narrow  channel,  propels  it  as  from  a
funnel.  These  winds  do  not  extend  so  far  as  the  coast  of  Palestine,  because  the  mountains
are  there  not  so  lofty,  and  between  them  and  the  sea  there  is  -a  plain  of  five  or  six  leagues ;
and  about  Gaza  and  the  coast  of  Egypt  they  are  never  known,  because  the  country  has  no
declivity  proper  to  cause  them.  In  short,  they  are  here,  as  everywhere,  stronger  in  summer
and  feebler  in  winter,  the  heat  and  refraction  by  which  they  are  produced  being  in  the  latter
season  less  considerable.

The  dews  of  Syria  are  lighter  when  the  sky  is  clouded  than  when  it  is  clear.  At  all  times
dew  is  less  abundant  upon  the  Lebanon  mountains  than  on  the  coast  and  in  Lower  Egypt.

There  is  nothing  particular  in  the  clouds  and  fogs  of  Palestine  to  afford  ground  for  a
general  statement,  unless  that  both  are  less  frequent  than  in  more  moist  and  cold  climates,
and,  except  in  Lebanon,  are  not  seen  during  the  warm  and  dry  summer  season.

Thunder  occurs  in  Syria,  as  well  as  in  the  Delta  of  Egypt.  In  the  Delta  and  in  the
plain  of  Palestine  b  it  is  extremely  rare  in  summer  and  more  frequent  in  winter ;  while  in  the
mountains,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  more  common  in  summer,  and  is  very  seldom  heard  in
winter.  In  both  these  countries  it  oftenest  occurs  in  the  rainy  season,  or  about  the  time  of
the  equinoxes,  especially  the  autumnal  one.  It  is  further  remarkable  that  the  thunder  never
comes  on  from  the  land  side,  but  always  from  the  sea.

The  storms  which  fall  on  the  Delta  and  Syria  constantly  come  from  the  Mediterranean.
These  storms  in  general  happen  either  in  the  evening  or  morning,  and  rarely  in  the  middle  of
the  day.  They  are  accompanied  with  violent  showers,  and  sometimes  with  hail,  which  in  an
hour's  time  render  the  country  full  of  little  lakes.

In  proceeding  now  to  our  History  of  the  Months,  it  must  be  regarded  as  an  inconve-
nience that  it  cannot  commence  with  the  initiatory  month  of  a  season — as  it  would  according
to  both  the  Hebrew  reckonings, — but  with  that  which  is  in  Syria,  as  in  our  own  climate,  the
second  month  of  winter,  namely —

JANUARY.

Weather. — Russell,  in  his  '  Natural  History  of  Aleppo,'  c  states  that  the  rigour  of  the
winter  is  supposed  by  the  natives  to  commence  about  the  20th  of  December,  and  lasts  forty
days,  naming  it  for  that  reason  Murbania.  It  therefore  includes  the  whole  of  January,  and
indeed,  ends  with  that  month  :  Russell  adds  that  their  computation  of  this  term  is  pretty  near
the  truth,  for  although  frost  as  well  as  snow  has  been  observed  both  earlier  and  later  than  the
limits  of  the  Murbania,  yet  in  most  years  the  true  wintry  weather  falls  within  them.  The
air  at  such  times  is  often  so  sharp  and  piercing  that  the  cold  appears  excessive  even  to
strangers  arrived  from  much  colder  climates.  The  winters  of  different  years  vary  considerably,
both  in  the  degree  of  cold  and  in  the  quantity  of  rain  and  snow  which  falls  in  the  months  of
December,  January,  and  February.  It  is  seldom  that  there  is  not  some  frosty  weather  in
winter ;  but  many  years  pass  entirely  without  snow.  The  snow  does  not  remain  long  in  the
streets  of  Aleppo.  In  only  three  winters  out  of  thirteen  was  it  observed  to  lie  more  than  one
day  :  and  in  only  three  out  of  thirteen  was  there  ice  of  sufficient  strength  to  bear  the  weight

a  See  before,  p.  cvii.

b  That  is,  the  plain  along  the  coast.  Volney  says  that  the  climate  of  the  southern  part  of  this  plain,  about  Gaza,  is  very  similar
to  that  of  the  Delta.

c  See  the  Introductory  Chapter,  "Authorities,"  p.  xxi.  By  a  series  of  minute  comparisons  unnecessary  to  detail,  we  have
satisfied  ourselves  that  statements  in  Russell's  excellent  work,  respecting  the  climate  and  seasons  of  the  Aleppo  district,  apply  very
closely  to  the  greater  part  of  Palestine  ;  that  is,  to  all  except  the  extensive  plain  of  the  coast,  the  plains  and  valleys  bordering
the  low  level  of  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes ;  and  of  course  the  territory  in  the  extreme  south  of  Palestine,  and  between  that  and
Egypt.  It  thus  follows  that  the  accounts  of  Dr.  Russell  may  he  taken  (with  some  limitations,  to  which  we  shall  attend)  as  those
of  a  traveller  speaking  of  the  higher  levels  of  Palestine.  It  is  a  great  satisfaction  to  be  thus  enabled  to  employ  such  valuable
information.  The  authority  of  Dr.  Russell  was  not  overlooked  by  Buhle  or  Walch  ;  but  they  lacked  the  important  additional
matter  which  Dr.  Patrick  Russell  subsequently  incorporated  in  a  new  edition  of  his  brother's  work.

vol.  i.  2  e

ccx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

of  a  man ;  and  then  only  in  shady  situations,  where  the  pool  was  not  much  exposed  to  the
sun.  When  it  is  clear  and  calm,  the  sun  has  so  much  power,  that  the  weather  is  always
warm,  sometimes  rather  hot  in  the  open  air.  Violent  storms  of  wind  are  rare  at  Aleppo.
It  sometimes  hlows  hard,  but  only  in  sudden  gusts  of  short  duration;  the  winter  and  spring
winds  blow  chiefly  from  between  the  N.W.  and  S.E.,  being  proportionally  colder  as  they  verge
towards  the  east.    The  winds  in  winter  are  in  general  moderate,  seldom  rising  to  a  brisk  gale.a

The  general  character  which  Dr.  Russell  gives  of  the  weather  at  Aleppo  in  the  month  of
January  is,  that  it  is  commonly  either  frosty  or  rainy.  The  snow  that  falls  there  falls  chiefly
in  this  month,  but  is  seldom  in  any  considerable  quantity,  and  does  not  remain  long  unmelted
in  the  streets.  The  middle  of  the  month  is  the  most  usual  time  of  snow ;  after  which  the
weather  often  continues  frosty  to  the  end.  Rain  generally  descends  in  the  night,  and  the
winds  blow  moderately,  mostly  from  the  northern  or  eastern  quarter.  The  highest  temperature
marked  by  the  thermometer  is  fifty-seven  degrees,  the  least  thirty-four  degrees.  At  three  in
the  afternoon  the  mercury  is  usually  found  three  or  four  degrees  higher  than  at  eight  or  nine
in  the  morning.  As  we  shall  continue  to  cite  the  registrations  of  this  thermometer,  it  is  proper
to  observe  that  it  was  kept  in  a  situation  some  degrees  warmer  in  winter  and  cooler  in  summer
than  the  external  air.

How  well  this  applies  to  Palestine  will  be  seen  from  the  following  particulars,  which
more  expressly  refer  to  that  region  : —

The  mountains  of  Lebanon  are  covered  all  the  winter  with  snow,  which,  when  the  winds
are  easterly  affects  the  whole  coast  from  Tripoli  to  Sidon,  with  a  more  piercing  cold  than  is
known  even  in  this  northern  climate.  But  the  other  maritime  and  inland  places,  whether  to
the  north  or  south  of  these  mountains,  enjoy  a  much  milder  temperature,  and  a  more  regular
change  in  the  seasons.13

Le  Bruyn,  travelling  along  the  maritime  coast,  in  this  month,  found  the  whole  country
around  Tripoli  covered  with  deep  snow  .c  On  the  same  coast,  more  to  the  south,  between
Tyre  and  Acre,  on  the  9th,  Buckingham  found  the  cold  great,  and  the  thermometer  at  45°  in
the  open  air,  before  sunrise.  Brown  takes  notice  of  snow  at  Jaffa  on  the  24th  of  this  month.'1
Major  Skinner,  who  states  that  he  traversed  the  country  in  a  season  unusually  severe,  speaks
much  of  snow  and  cold.  He  mentions  a  village  under  Mount  Carmel,  in  which  many  houses
had  been  destroyed  by  the  great  quantities  of  snow  which  had  fallen. e  He  spent  a  night  in
that  village,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  28th  found  the  court-yard  full  of  snow,  which  had
fallen  during  the  night.  Snow  was  then  resting  on  the  ridge  of  Mount  Carmel. f  Penetrating
to  the  interior  of  the  country,  the  same  traveller  reached  Nazareth  on  the  30th.  The  heights
around  the  town,  and  many  of  the  houses  in  it  were  covered  with  snow,  large  heaps  of  which
were  piled  up  in  the  court-yard  of  the  convent.  Many  of  the  smaller  houses  had  been  de-
stroyed by  it;  and,  the  next  day,  he  found  that  the  deep  snow  in  the  streets  rendered  it  im-
possible to  quit  the  city,  and  difficult  to  move  about  in  it.  A  thaw  had,  however,  commenced. s
The  snow  falls  thick,  and  lies  long  on  the  mountains  and  high  intervening  plains  and  valleys
of  Jebel  Haouran,  which  may  be  said  to  bound  eastward  the  country  beyond  Jordan.  Madoxh
found  it  so  at  the  end  of  this  month.  The  same  traveller,  on  the  13th,  found  Damascus
covered  with  snow  as  well  as  the  mountains  and  plain  around  it.1  From  its  peculiarly  low
level  and  enclosed  situation,  the  plain  of  Jericho,  and  indeed  the  whole  valley  of  the  Jordan
enjoys  a  remarkably  mild  winter  climate.  Maritik  adduces  and  confirms  the  statement  of
Josephus, 1  who  reports  that  the  winter  of  the  plain  of  Jericho  resembled  spring,  and  that  the
inhabitants  were  clothed  in  linen  garments,  at  the  same  time  that  it  snowed  in  other  parts  of
Judea.  Correspondingly,  Burckhardt m  takes  notice  that  snow  is  almost  unknown  on  the
borders  of  the  lake  of  Tiberias.  It  appears,  indeed,  generally,  that  when  the  sun  is  not  obscured
the  day  is  often  exceedingly  warm  when  the  night  has  been  frosty.  The  Scriptures  allude
to  this,  u  as  do  various  travellers.  La  Roque  was  much  incommoded  by  the  heat  of  the  sun
when  travelling  near  Tyre  on  the  29th  of  this  month.0

a  Russell,  i.  69—71.  b  Shaw,  ii.  134.  c  Tom.  iii.  p.  228.  <1  Page  361.  e  Vol.  i.  p.  111.

f  Pages  114,  115.  6  Pages  120,  121,  12G.  1>  Vol.ii.  165.  ■  Vol.  ii.  154.  k  Chap,  xxiii.

1  De  Bello,  v.  4.  m  Syria,  p.  320.  n  Gen.  xxxi.  40;  Jeremiah,  xxxvi.  30.  °  Voyage,  i.  18.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JANUARY.  ccxi

Buckingham  states  that  in  Palestine  the  heaviest  rains  are  generally  in  December,  and  that
in  January  the  country  is  verdant  throughout.11  In  the  time  of  his  travel,  however,  there  had
been  an  extraordinary  lack  of  winter  rain ;  there  had  been  a  continued  drought  from  October
to  January,  in  consequence  of  which  the  country  suffered  greatly.  However,  much  rain
ordinarily  falls  in  January.  On  the  coast,  at  Caipha,  under  Mount  Carmel,  Major  Skinner
takes  notice,  on  the  17th  that  there  had  been  incessant  rain  for  fourteen  days,  so  that  a  small
river  which  flows  through  the  town  just  named  had  burst  its  bounds,  and  swept  away  most  of
the  houses.  This  shows  that  such  rain  was  unusual,  although  all  the  torrents,  lakes,  and
rivers  are  much  swollen,  and  large  tracts  of  low-lying  country  are  inundated  by  the  rains  of
this  and  the  preceding  month.  At  the  same  plain,  the  rain  continued  to  the  18th,  when  "  the
sea  was  as  wild  as  possible;"  and  on  the  20th  the  same  traveller  was  driven  by  a  thunder-
storm to  seek  shelter  in  a  cave  of  Mount  Carmel.b  The  several  travellers  cited  below  c  furnish
a  series  of  observations  extending  over  different  parts  of  Palestine,  on  both  sides  the  Jordan,
in  which  notices  of  violent  rains  occur  dispersedly  from  one  end  of  the  month  to  the  other.
The  rains  are  heaviest  and  most  frequent  during  the  night  and  early  morning.  Buck-
ingham observes  that  the  S.W.  wind  generally  brought  violent  rain  ;  indeed  the  winds  attended
by  rain  are  generally  west,  or  have  a  westerly  inclination,"1  which  it  seems  was  a  popular  obser-
vation of  the  ancient  inhabitants,  as  noticed  by  Christ : — "  When  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out
of  the  west,  straightway  ye  say,  There  cometh  a  shower,  and  so  it  is."  e  One  of  the  travellers
we  have  cited,  Gumpenberg,  notices  that  from  the  5th  to  the  25th  of  January  the  weather
at  Jerusalem  was  alternately  cold  and  hot,  rainy  and  fine,  cloudy  and  windy.  And  Kortef
mentions  December,  January,  and  February,  as  the  months  in  Avhich  the  greatest  quantities  of
rain  fall  in  Palestine.

In  this  month  the  sky  is  often  dark  and  overcast  in  the  early  morning,  and  sometimes
throughout  the  day,  and  for  several  days  together.  Skinner,  then  on  the  coast,  near  Carmel,
notices  on  the  29th  that  they  had  the  first  clear  sky  which  had  been  over  them  for  many  days.s
Fogs  occur  in  the  morning,  which  clear  up  as  the  day  advances.  Madox  describes  Damascus
and  the  country  around  as  invested  by  a  dense  fog  at  high-day;  but  the  sky  was  cloudless,
and  the  brilliancy  of  the  sun  gave  to  it  a  white  and  woolly  appearance.11

Trees  and  Shrubs. — There  are  two  species  of  amygdalus  in  Palestine,  the  common  almond-
tree1  and  the  peach-tree  ,,k  and  both  are  this  month  in  blossom  in  every  part  of  Palestine,  on
both  sides  the  Jordan.1  It  was,  doubtless,  from  this  winter  blossoming  of  the  almond-tree,  not
less  than  from  the  snowy  whiteness  of  the  blossoms,  that  the  hoary  head  of  the  aged  man  is,
by  a  beautiful  metaphor,  said  in  Scripture  to  "  flourish  like  the  almond-tree."  m  Celsus11
conjectures  that  the  Hebrew  name  of  the  plant  shatceecl,  from  the  verb  shakad,  "  to  be  sleep-
less, to  watch ;"  hence,  "  to  hasten,"  bears  an  allusion  to  the  earliness  of  its  blossoms  and  fruit.
There  is,  indeed,  an  evident  allusion  to  this  etymology  in  Jer.  i.  11,  12.°  The  almond-tree
grows  extensively  in  Palestine,  and  may  be  regarded  as  one  of  its  most  characteristic  produc-
tions. As  such  it  appears  from  the  most  ancient  times.  Almonds  were  not  forgotten  among
the  products  of  the  land  (dainties  in  Egypt)  which  Jacob  sent  as  a  present  to  the  governor  of
that  country  ;P  the  rod  of  Aaron,  that  miraculously  blossomed  in  a  night,  was  of  almond  ;ci  and
the  bowls  of  the  golden  candlestick,  in  the  tabernacle,  were  "  made  like  unto  almonds,  with  a
knop  and  a  flower  in  one  branch."  r

a  ■  Palestine,'  i.  223.  b  Skinner,  i.  65,  72,  99.

«  Gumpenberg,  i.  448,449;  Buckingham,'  Palestine,'  i.  112,  141  ;  Skinner,  i.  115,  &c. ;  Madox,  ii.  166.

>l  Shaw,  ii.  127.  e  Luke,  xii.  54.  f  Supp.  p.  148.  B  Journey,  i.  105;  see  also  Buckingham's,  '  Palestine,'  i   112.

h  Vol.  i.  146.  i  Amygdalus  communis.  k  Amygdalus  persicara,  the  peach-tree.

1  lSenard  saw  it  in  blossom  on  the  9th  of  this  month,  at  Sidon,  on  the  19th  at  Acre,  and  on  the  23rd  at  Rama.  So  did  Baum-
garteu  on  the  18th  atBeiiout;  and  Gumpenberg  saw  the  peach-tree  {A.  persicara)  in  blossom  at  Jerusalem  on  the  25th,  and  in
Galilee  on  the  31st.  On  the  30th  Buckingham  saw  the  almond  in  bloom  in  the  bed  of  the  Jabbok  (Zerka)  beyond  Jordan.
Benard,  112,  113;  Baumgarten,  125;  Gumpenberg,  450,  451 ;  Buckingham,  i.  251.

m  Eccles.  xii.  5.  n  •  Hierobotanicon,  i.  227.

°  "  Jeremiah  what  seest  thou?  And  I  said,  a  rod  of  an  almond-tree.  Then  said  the  Lord  to  me.  Thou  hast  well  seen  :  for
I  will  hasten  my  word  to  perform  it."     Here,  by  an  untranslatable  parauomasia,  the  words  almond-tree  and  hasten  are  the  same.

P  Gen.  xliii.  11.  1  Num.  xvii.  8.  r  Exod.  xxv.  33.

2  e  2

CCX11

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

An  almond-tree,  covered  with  its  beautiful
blossoms,  varying  from  a  blush  colour  to  a
snowy  white,  is  one  of  the  most  elegant
objects  in  nature,  and  the  more  so  from
the  earliness  of  their  appearance,  when  few
other  trees  have  leaves  or  flowers.  In
England  it  generally  blossoms  in  March,
but  still  exhibits  its  tendency  to  bloom
earlier,  as  in  its  native  country ;  for  a
forward  season  often  brings  out  the  blooms
in  February;  but  they  are  generally  de-
stroyed by  an  ensuing  frost,  and  then  the
tree  bears  little  or  no  fruit.  The  peach-tree
(amyg.  persicara)  has  a  larger  leaf  than  the
common  almond,  which  is,  however,  of
higher  growth,  and  generally  blossoms  a
few  weeks  later.  Both  are  of  quick  growth
and  short  duration.  The  drupe  of  the
almond  has  a  leathery  covering,  not  pulpy
or  edible,  like  that  of  the  peach.  Its  pro-
[Aimond.   Amygdains  communis.]  ductive   value  lies  in  the  well-known  and

much-valued  sweet  kernel  of  the  stone,  or  nut.  These  kernels  yield  on  expression  one  half  their
weight  of  oil,  the  well-known  oil  of  almonds,  which  is  more  agreeable  than  the  common  ex-
pressed oils.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  oil  is  not  once  named  in  the  Scriptures.  Indeed  even
olive-oil  is  not  very  often  mentioned  by  name  ;  and  we  think  that  in  many  of  the  cases  in
which  "  oil,"  simply,  is  mentioned,  without  the  specification  of  its  quality,  it  is  wrong  to  sup-
pose that  olive-oil  is  always  intended ;  for  it  is  incredible  that  the  oil  of  almonds  could  be  un-
known to,  or  unvalued  by,  a  people
who  sought  after  and  employed  vegeta-
ble oils  so  largely  as  the  Hebrews.

Gumpenberg a  says    that  the    olive
tree  had  put  forth  its  leaves  at  Jerusa-
lem on  the  12th  of  this  month.

Russell  notices  that  neither  oranges
nor  lemons  will  stand  the  winters  of
Aleppo,b  nor  will  it  in  the  higher  and
colder  regions  of  Palestine.  But  the
orange-tree  as  well  as  the  citron  thrive
well  along  the  coast  of  Palestine,  and
produce  very  excellent  fruit  in  great
abundance.  Buckingham0  noticed  on
the  16th  of  this  month  that  the  orange-

trees  at  Ramla  continued  to  be  laden
with  their  golden  fruit.  Gumpenberg  d
also  states  that  on  the  1st  of  February
he  saw  an  orange-tree  full  of  fruit  and
blossoms,  close  to  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.
Oranges  and  citrons  are  also  produced
in  the  interior ;  D'Arvieux  e  and
Thevenot  saw  both  at  Shechem  (Nab-
lous).     We  find  no  notice  of  the  con-

Page  449.

Palestine/  i.  251.

d  Reisbach,  450.

[Orange-Tree.]

b  Vol.  i.  p.  70.
e  D'Arvieux,  ii.  79;  Thevenot,  i.  215.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JANUARY.  ccxiii

dition  of  the  citron-tree  in  this  month.  Probably  the  same  as  that  of  the  orange.  How-
ever, for  convenience,  we  may  in  this  place  mention  that  it  is  supposed,  with  very  good
reason,  that  the  fruit  mentioned  in  our  translation  of  the  Bible  under  the  name  of  "  apple,"
was  in  reality  "  the  citron."  The  word  occurs  in  six  places,  in  which  the  fruit  is  men-
tioned with  circumstances  which  agree  well  with  the  citron,  but  not  with  the  apple,  which
fruit  indeed  is  pour  and  bad  in  Palestine,  so  that  most  of  those  consumed  there  are  imported
from  Damascus.  The  niBD,  tapuach,  which  is  the  name  in  question,  occurs  as  describing
one  of  the  noblest  trees  of  the  wood,  the  fruit  of  which  was  very  sweet,  or  pleasant  :a
this  fruit  was  of  the  colour  of  gold,b  extremely  fragrant,0  and  therefore  proper  for  those
to  smell  who  were  ready  to  faint  :d  it  is  merely  named  in  another  place  ;e  and  Joel  counts
it  with  the  vine,  the  fig-tree,  the  palm,  and  pomegranate,  as  among  the  worthiest  trees  of
Palestine/  Some,  indeed,  would  apply  this  to  the  orange ;  but  that  valuable  fruit  has  not,
like  the  citron,  all  the  qualities  ascribed  to  the  tapuach  ;  and  it  has  even  been  doubted  whether
the  orange  or  the  lemon  were  known  anciently  in  that  part  of  the  world.  The  citron  certainly
was ;  for  Josephus  mentions  how  the  Jews,  at  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  pelted  king  Alexander
Janneus  with  citrons,  which  they  had  then  in  their  hands ;  for  (as  he  says)  the  law  required
that  at  that  feast  every  one  should  have  branches  of  the  palm-tree  and  citron-tree.s  This  not
only  evinces  that  the  citron-tree,  and  the  usage  intimated,  existed  in  and  before  the  time  of
Alexander  Janneus ;  but  that  Josephus,  as  well  as  the  Jewish  writers  generally,  understood
the  citron-tree  to  be  denoted  by  "  the  boughs  of  the  goodly  tree,"  in  Lev.  xxiii.  40 ;  and,  con-
sequently, that  it  existed  in  the  land  before  the  time  of  Moses.

It  may  also  be  added  that  the  citron  is  still  used  for  the  purposes  ascribed  to  the  tapuach  ;
for  its  refreshing  fragrance  is  so  highly  esteemed,  that  the  ladies  have  very  commonly  a  citron
lying  by  their  side,  or  held  in  their  hand,  that  they  may  smell  to  it.  Some  writers  suppose,
however,  that  the  word  in  question  has  the  same  extensive  sense  as  the  corresponding  Arabic
word  which,  while  (like  the  Latin  malum)  it  denotes  primarily  apples,  includes  also  citrons,
peaches,  apricots,  &c  ;  but  the  Scriptural  name  seems  to  be  applied  in  a  more  specific  manner.
One  of  the  Scriptural  passages  referred  to,  in  which  "  a  word  fitly  spoken  "  is  compared  to
"  apples  of  gold  in  baskets  (not  '  pictures ')  of  silver,"  is  thought  to  allude  to  the  manner  in
which  the  fruit  was  presented  at  the  court
of  Solomon ;  but  the  rabbinical  writers
would  rather  refer  it  to  the  fact  that  the
first-fruits  were  presented  in  silver  baskets
in  the  Temple.  The  citron  takes  its
specific  name  (citrus  medico)  from  having
been  introduced  into  Europe  from   Media.  Ancient-         [Fn»t  Baskets.]         Modem.

In  England  it  will  not  ripen  its  fruit  unless  the  season  be  unusually  warm,  and  the  trees
well  managed.  The  fruit  is  not  eaten  in  a  raw  state,  but  is  generally  preserved,  and
made  into  sweet-meats.  Wherever  the  citron  grows  we  might  expect  to  find  the  lemon,
which  is  but  a  variety  of  it.  The  lemon-tree  is  accordingly  found  in  Palestine,  although  from
the  comparative  infrequency  of  its  being  mentioned,  it  would  seem  to  be  more  rare  than  either
the  orange  or  the  citron.  It  was  noticed  by  Pococke:h  Egmont  and  Heyman^aw  it  in
Galilee,  at  Hottein  and  Safat.  Rauwolff k  saw  it,  together  with  the  citron  and  orange,  in  a
valley  near  Bethlehem.  Another  of  the  family,  the  lime-tree,  grows  in  the  country :  at  a  place
just  named,  Hottein  (called  by  him  Hatti,  and  by  Pococke,  Hutin),  Clarke1  and  his  company
received  hospitable  entertainment  from  a  party  of  Arabs  in,  and  under  the  shade  of,  a  planta-
tion of  lime  and  lemon-trees.

If  the  winter  has  been  mild,  some  of  the  winter  Jigs,  as  they  are  called,  still  remain  ripen-
ing on  the  Jig-trees,  although  stripped  of  their  leaves;  and  such  as  then  continue  are  gathered
as  delicious  morsels  in  the  early  spring.  The  figs  of  this  winter  crop  are  longer  in  shape  and
of  a  darker  colour  than  those  which  the  fig-tree  arfords  in  summer. m

a  Sol.  Song,  ii.  3.  b  Prov.  xxv.  11.  c  Sol.  Song,  vii.  8.  d  Ibid.  ii.  5.  c  Ibid.  viii.  5.

t  Joel,  i.  12.  S  Antiq.  xiii.  13.  o.  h  Vol.  ii.  p.  (!7.  i  Vol.  ii.  p.  40—48.

k  Pt.  II.  chap.  xxii.  p.  379.  1  Vol.  iv.  p.  203.  '"  Shaw,  ii.  15.

ccxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

Hasselquist  a  observes  that  in  this  southern  climate  the  trees  are  again  in  leaf  about  the
beginning  of  January,  before  those  of  the  preceding  year  are  entirely  fallen  off ;  and  that,  for
the  quicker  production  of  the  leaves,  most  trees,  except  sycamores  and  willows,  are  furnished
with  small  excrescences,  lightly  joined  together,  instead  of  buds,  which  nature  could  better
refuse  these  trees  than  those  of  more  northern  regions.  The  former  part  of  this  observation
is  confirmed  by  other  travellers.  Shaw,b  who  travelled  in  Syria  and  Phoenicia  in  December
and  January,  says  that  the  whole  country  looked,  at  that  season,  verdant  and  cheerful,  and  the
woods  particularly,  which  were  chiefly  planted  with  the  gall-bearing  oak.c  So  also  Bucking-
ham,11 at  the  end  of  the  month  (30th),  in  Gilead,  beyond  Jordan,  took  notice  of  a  stately  and
wide-spreading  oak,  which,  like  the  rest  of  the  oaks  he  had  seen,  was  not  an  evergreen  one,
but  had  its  leaves  withered,  and  its  boughs  almost  bare,  while  the  greater  part  of  the  other
trees  found  there  were  fresh  in  verdure.

The  Vine. — Gumpenberg  e  affirms  that  on  the  12th  of  this  month  he  saw  a  vine  in  leaf  in
the  garden  of  the  consul  at  Jerusalem.  This  observation  seems  to  require  confirmation.
Grapes  cannot  be  preserved  until  this  or  the  following  month  in  any  part  of  Palestine.f

Grain. — Buhle  and  Walch  both  complain  of  the  absence  of  any  single  fact  respecting
the  state  of  the  corn  operations  this  month  in  Palestine,  and  both  content  themselves
with  the  testimony  of  Russell,  which,  referring  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Aleppo,  is,  that  "  the
earliest  wheat  is  sown  in  October;  other  grains  continue  to  be  sown  till  the  end  of  January,
and  barley  even  so  late  as  the  end  of  February."  ?  This  they  strangely  agree  in  misunder-
standing to  mean  that  wheat  continued  to  be  sown  in  January,  whereas  Russell  expressly  says
other  grains  than  wheat;  and  among  "  other  grains"  he  not  only  includes  dourra,  the  name
which  the  natives  give  to  Indian  millet,  but  all  the  various  pulses  which  are  cultivated  in  the
country.  On  this  point  the  statement  of  Volney  is  the  most  clear  and  satisfactory.  "  The  seed-
time of  the  winter-crop,  called  Shetawia,  takes  place,  throughout  Syria,  only  at  the  time  of  the
autumnal  rains,  or  towards  the  end  of  October.  The  time  of  reaping  this  crop  varies  accord-
ing to  the  difference  of  situation.  In  Palestine  and  the  Haouran  they  reap  their  wheat  and
barley  from  the  end  of  April  through  the  whole  month  of  May.  But  as  we  advance  towards
the  north,  or  ascend  the  mountains,  the  harvest  does  not  begin  till  June  or  July.  The  seed-
time of  the  summer  crop,  or  Saifia,  begins  with  the  spring  rains,  that  is,  in  March  and  April,
and  their  harvests  in  the  months  of  September  and  October."  This  simple  explanation  as  to
the  different  seasons  of  sowing  and  harvest  clears  up  all  the  difficulties  and  seeming  discre-
pancies by  which  Buhle  and  Walch  are  quite  bewildered.  There  is,  consequently,  no  wheat
sown  in  January.  The  ploughing  and  sowing  which  Buckingham  saw  in  this  month  (15th)
in  the  plain  of  the  coast,  near  Jaffa,11  must  have  been  for  barley,  according  to  the  intimation
of  Russell.  Barley  is  much  cultivated,  chiefly  for  the  horses,  which  are  rarely  fed  with  other
corn  grain.  Oats  are  not  cultivated  in  Palestine ;  but,  although  rarely,  are  found  in  some
parts  of  Syria.  Rye  is  not  cultivated  in  Palestine  and  the  immediately  adjoining  countries;
but  Volney  says  it  is  grown  in  some  parts  of  Syria  for  the  use  of  horses.1

When  the  usual  rains  have  not  been  wanting,  the  lands  are,  in  parcels,  verdant  with  the
young  corn,  which  now  appears  above  ground.  Buckingham  visited  the  country  at  a  time
when  the  lands  west  of  the  Jordan  were  parched  and  barren  for  want  of  the  winter  rains;
but  in  Gilead,  where  the  soil  had  received  the  gentle  showers  of  the  mountains,  the  young
blades  of  corn  were  just  appearing  above  ground  at  the  end  (30th)  of  the  month.k  About  the
same  time  (2*7th)  in  another  year,  Madox l  notices  that  at  the  foot  of  the  Haouran  mountains
the  corn  was  springing  up,  and  the  turf  of  a  fine  green.

Besides  different  varieties  of  wheat  and  barley,  Russell  names  sesamum  and  Indian  millet m

a  Reise  nacli  Palestina,  p.  260.     Epist.  13  ad  Liimaeum.  b  Vol.  ii.  p.  146.

c  Oallce  Syriacce  are  noticed  by  Vegetius,  De  Re  Rustica,  ii.  62.  d  '  Palcstiue,'  vol.  ii.  p.  127-

c  Reise,  449-50.  i  Koite,  435.  6  Vol.  i.  p.  74.  h  <  Palestine,'  i.  223-4.

Russell,  i.  p.  74;  Rauwolff,  i.  68;  Korte,  143;  Volney,  i.  295.  ^  '  Palestine,'  ii.  117.

1  Vol.  ii.  p.  164.  ra  Holcus  sorghum,  called  by  the  natives  duurra.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JANUARY.  ccxv

as  being  cultivated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aleppo.  Palestine  has,  besides,  the  common
millet;3  maize b  thrives  in  the  light  soil  of  Baalbec  and  in  some  other  parts  of  the  country;
and  there  are  marshy  grounds  in  which  rice  c  is  cultivated  with  success.*1

Esculent  Vegetables.6 — Russell  gives  a  list  of  the  leguminous  vegetables  cultivated  about
Aleppo,  none  of  which  are  wanting  in  Palestine,  which  also  contains  a  few  not  included  in  his
list.  Those  named  by  Russell  are  : — Lentils/  chiches,s  beans,'1  chichling,1  small  vetch,k  small
green  kidney-bean.1  The  species  of  leguminosce,  not  contained  in  this  list,  which  grow  in
Palestine,  are  the  hairy-flowered  yellow  vetch,m  and  the  several  species  of  Lathyrus ;  as
L.  ambicus,  L.  sativus  (blue  chichling  vetch),  L.  amphicarpos  (earth-pea),  L.  biflorus,  and
L.  clijmenum  (various  flowered  lathyrus).  The  common  bean  is  in  blossom  this  month.
Benard  saw  it  in  bloom  at  Lydda,  near  Jaffa,  on  the  23rd,  and  observes  that,  earlier  in  the
month,  he  had  seen  it  in  bloom  at  Sidon  and  Acre.  The  cauliflower  n  ripens  towards  the  end
of  this  month.

Plants.0 — The  mandrake  is  this  month  in  flower,P  as  is  also  the  wormwood,*  probably  the
species  artemisia  j'udaica,  of  which,  under  the  name  of  absinthium  santonicum  judaicum,
Rauwolff  observes  that  it  grows  everywhere  in  Palestine.  He  describes  it  as  having  small
ash-coloured  leaves,  and  many  small  stalks,  full  of  small  yellowish  seeds ;  and  that  it  is  of
an  unpleasant  smell,  very  bitter,  with  a  saline  sharpness.  Both  the  leaves  and  seeds  of  this
plant  are  used  in  medicine  in  the  East,  and  are  reported  to  be  tonic,  stomachic,  and  anthel-
minthic.  This  is  generally  conceived  to  be  the  Laanah  of  Scripture,1'  translated  "  wormwood ;"
and  although  severer  effects  seem  to  be  ascribed  to  the  laanah  than  the  A.  judaica  is  capable
of  producing,  there  is  reason  to  conclude  that  it  may  be  identified  with  this  or  some  kindred
plant.

In  the  month  of  January  the  groves  and  meadows  of  Palestine  are  adorned  in  great  pro-
fusion with  the  blossoms  of  different  species  of  anemone,  ranunculus,  crocus,  tulip,  narcissus,
hyacinth,  lily,  and  violet.  Monconys,s  journeying  on  the  1st,  saw  on  the  coast,  between
Lebanon  and  the  sea,  a  green  meadow,  covered  with  anemones.*  Benard  u  noticed,  near  Acre,
on  the  18th,  and  about  Jaffa  on  the  23rd,  tulips,  white,  red,  and  blue,  with  an  infinite  number
of  other  beautiful  flowers.  Gumpenberg  v  saw  the  meadows  of  Galilee  covered  with  the  same
flowers  on  the  31st.  The  tulips  were  probably  varieties  of  the  common  garden  tulip,w  which
is  the  only  species  that  any  botanist  travelling  in  Palestine  has  named.  Tulips  figure  conspi-
cuously among  the  flowers  of  Palestine.  Shaw  x  adds  colchicas  to  the  list,  to  which  the
common  crocus  (saffron)  may  be  joined.  The  same  traveller  saw  an  elegant  species  of  the
blue  lily,  the  same,  he  says,  as  the  Lilium  Persicum  jlorens  of  Morison.  Besides  the  same
as  these,  Russell  names  the  narcissus,  the  hyacinth,  and  the  violet,  as  being  in  flower  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Aleppo ;  and  although  we  know  not  that  any  traveller  in  the  Holy  Land

a  Panicum  miliaceum.  b  Zea  maiz,  popularly,  Indian  corn.  c  Oriza  sativa.  d  Volney,  i.  295.

c  This  heading  is  to  be  understood  in  the  usual  and  popular  sense,  for  many  plants  noticed  under  other  heads  are  properly
esculent.

f  The  common  lentil  (Ervum  lens)  called  by  the  natives  Shaeir.

S  He  means  the  chick  pea  {Cicer  arietanum)  called  by  the  natives  Hummes.

h  The  common  garden  bean  (Vicia  Faba)  called  Foul.

'  Russell  gives  the  scientific  synonyme  Lathyrus,  but  omits  to  state  whether  Lathyrus  cicera  (the  dwarf  chichling  vetch)  or
Lathyrus  sativus  (the  common  blue  chichling  vetch).    The  native  uame  is  Jilban,

k  Vicia  (species  not  named,  probably  sativa),  native  name,  Kishna.

1  Phasevlus  max,  called  Maash.  m  Vicia  hybrida.

n  Brassica  cauliflura.  We  know  uot  what  other  species  of  brassica  Palestine  has,  save  brassica  oleracea,  the  common  sea
colewort  or  cabbage.

°  This  head  is  to  be  understood  in  a  common  popular  sense.  We  have  already  intimated  (and  it  is  evident)  that  the  form  we
have  chosen  as  the  best  on  the  whole,  renders  a  strictly  scientific  distribution  impossible.  I  n  short,  this  head  is  intended  to  include
all  plants  not  embraced  under  those  which  precede  it.  It  will  even  contain  some  which  might  have  been  contained  in  them.  Those
who  know  the  subject  will,  however,  see  the  reasons  for  our  distributions,  and  to  others  it  does  not  signify.

P  Shaw,  ii.  146.

1  Benard,  107.    Four  species  of  Artemisia  grow  in  Palestine,  namely  A.  nilotica,  A.  judaica,  A.fruticosa,  A.  cinerea.

r  Deut.  xxix.  8;  Pro.  v.  4;  Jer.  ix.  15;  xxiii.15;  Lam.  iii.  15, 19  ;  Amosv.7;  vi.  12.  "Vol.  ii.  113.

t  Principally  A.  coronaria,  the  narrow-leaved  or  poppy  anemone.  u  Voyage,  107,  112.

v  Tom.  i.  p.  450.  w  T.gesneria.  x  Vol.  ii.  p.  146.

ccxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

has  noticed  them  in  January,  they  exist  there,  and  are  probably  then  in  bloom,  as  they  are
noticed  in  the  very  beginning  of  February.  As  the  narcissus  is  in  flower  during  most  part  of
the  winter  near  Aleppo,  it  is,  doubtless,  the  same  in  Palestine.  A  beautiful  species,  called
modaf  by  the  natives,  is  cultivated  by  them  (near  Aleppo)  in  the  open  fields;  and  towards
the  end  of  winter,  certain  Arab  women  are  seen  in  the  streets,  carrying  baskets  of  the  flowers
for  sale,  and  chanting,  as  they  walk  along,  Ya  ma  hullu  zemanoo !  Haiku  kareem  !  "  How
delightful  its  season!  Its  maker  is  bountiful  !"a  The  common  polyanthus  narcissus b  is  that
which  abounds  most  in  Palestine."  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Aleppo  the  hyacinths  and  violets
"  become  plentiful  in  January."  In  Palestine  the  hyacinths  which  have  been  named  by  tra-
vellers are,  the  garden  hyacinth,0  which  is  indeed  a  native  of  tbe  Levant,  and  from  which
such  numerous  and  beautiful  varieties  have  been  obtained  by  the  Dutch  cultivators.  The  Holy
Land  has  also  the  curious  purple-grape  hyacinth d  in  its  cornfields,  and  the  blue-grape
hyacinth  e  in  its  vineyards  and  arable  lands.

FEBRUARY.

Weather. — Of  the  weather  in  this  month  at  Aleppo,  Dr.  Russell  states  that  it  is  more
variable  than  in  the  preceding  month.  It  sometimes  snows  a  little,  and  there  are  commonly
a  few  frosty  days;  but  it  is  more  usually  a  wet  month,  a  good  deal  of  rain  falling  in  the  first
fortnight.  The  sky,  in  fair  weather,  especially  in  the  afternoons,  is  often  laden  with  large
white  clouds,  at  which  times  it  is  moderately  warm  without  doors;  at  other  times  it  lowers
and  threatens,  without  raining.  The  winds  are  much  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  month,
till  towards  the  end,  when  it  sometimes  blows  hard  westerly.  The  thermometer  marks  the
greatest  heat  at  55°  and  the  least  at  40° ;  and  the  greatest  difference  in  any  one  day  is  eight
degrees.  The  morning  station  of  the  thermometer,  in  the  first  fortnight,  varies  from  42°  to
47° ;  the  difference  in  the  afternoon  is  1,  2,  or  3  degrees.  In  the  last  fortnight,  the  mercury,
except  in  frost,  rises  gradually  to  about  50° ;  and  the  difference  in  the  afternoon  is  commonly
4  or  5  degrees.f  In  another  place,?  the  same  writer  states,  that  the  spring  may  be  considered
to  commence  early  in  February.  The  same  winds,  which  are  peculiarly  cold  in  winter,  though
at  this  time  they  often  blow  more  strongly,  are  much  less  bleak;  and  though  the  sky  be  often
laden  with  black  hovering  clouds,  accompanied  with  a  good  deal  of  rain,  the  heavy  showers
are  of  short  duration,  and  in  the  variable  weather  there  is  a  large  proportion  of  sunshine.

At  the  beginning  of  this  month,  dazzling  snow  on  all  sides  met  the  view  of  Major  Skinner
in  departing  from  Nazareth.  He  saw  the  snow  firm  on  the  sides  of  Mount  Tabor.h  But
after  his  return  to  the  coast,  he  takes  no  further  notice  of  snow,  which  had  so  much  engaged
his  attention  before  he  departed  for  the  interior  of  the  country.  Snow  usually  falls  this  month
in  the  southern  parts  of  Palestine ;  and  Shaw i  reports  that  it  is  an  observation  at  and  near
Jerusalem  that,  provided  a  moderate  quantity  of  snow  falls  in  the  beginning  of  February,
whereby  the  fountains  are  made  to  overflow  a  little  afterwards,  there  is  the  prospect  of  a  plen-
tiful year;  and  that  the  inhabitants  on  such  occasions  make  similar  rejoicings  to  those  of  the
Egyptians  on  cutting  the  dikes  of  the  Nile.  Southward,  in  the  higher  region  of  the  Sinai  moun-
tains, Thevenotk  met  with  snow,  and  even  with  ice,  which  no  stick  could  break,  in  the  beginning
of  February ;  and  even  at  Suez,  his  inability  to  obtain  admittance  into  the  town  gave  him
occasion  to  experience  that  the  night  air  was  severely  cold.

As  might  be  expected,  the  cold  is  this  month  more  severe  in  the  high  country  beyond
Jordan,  on  the  east,  than  in  the  other  parts  of  Palestine.  As  late  as  the  22d,  Buckingham
found  the  snow  lying  on  the  high  range  of  hills  at  Gilead,  called  Jebel  es-Szalt,  which  became
thicker  the  higher  he  ascended.  On  the  summit  the  cold  was  excessive,  and  the  snow,  pre-
senting one  unbroken  mass,  was  hardened  into  solid  frost.  This  is  not  surprising,  if,  as  he
thinks,  by  a  comparative  estimate,  that  the  height  was  5000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.

a  '  Nat.  Hist,  of  Aleppo,'  ii.  239.  b  N.  Tazetta.  c  H.  Orientalis.  d  H.  comosus.

e  H.  botryaides,  a  species  which  formerly  received  attention  in  England,  but  is  now  almost  gone  out  of  culture,
f  '  Nat.  Hist,  of  Aleppo,'  ii.  282.  8  Ibid.  i.  64,  65.  h  '  Journey,'  i.  29,  30.  ■  Vol.  ii.  p.  137.

k  '  Voyage,'  i.  316,  320,  328.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— FEBRUARY.  ccxvii

The  same  day  he  reached  the  town  of  Szalt.  The  whole  of  the  town  was  filled  with  snow,  the
streets  being  in  some  places  almost  impassable ;  and  the  terraces  of  the  houses,  which,  from  the
steepness  of  the  hill  on  which  it  stood,  rose  one  above  another,  like  steps,  presented  a  number
of  square  and  snow-like  masses,  like  sheets  exposed  on  the  ground  to  dry.  The  inhabitants,
including  men,  women,  and  children,  were  clothed  in  sheep-skin  jackets,  with  the  skin,  look-
ing like  red  leather,  turned  outside,  and  the  wool  within ;  while  the  florid  complexions  and
light-brown  hair  of  the  people,  gave  to  the  whole  an  appearance  of  a  scene  in  the  north  of
Europe,  rather  than  one  in  the  southern  part  of  so  hot  a  region  as  Syria,  and  bordering  too
upon  the  parched  deserts  of  Arabia-Petraea.  Buckingham  was  detained  at  this  place  till  the
28th,  by  the  inclemency  of  the  weather.  On  the  night  of  the  25th,  the  frost  was  so  severe,
that  in  the  room  where  he  slept  the  water  in  vessels  for  drinking  was  coated  over  in  the  morn-
ing, although  all  the  external  air  had  been  excluded,  and  the  apartment  had  been  heated
through  the  night  by  the  breath  of  eleven  persons;  and  the  snow  outside  the  door  was
hardened  into  a  solid  mass  of  ice.  The  morning  was,  however,  clear  and  fine,  the  sun  beaming
out  in  full  splendour,  without  a  cloud.  But  it  was  alleged  that  it  could  not  be  ascertained  how
the  weather  would  settle  until  twenty-four  hours  of  clear  sky  had  passed  away.  Accordingly,
on  the  night  of  the  26th,  heavy  snow  and  intense  frost  again  set  in,  soon  after  sunset,  and  con-
tinued till  sunrise  on  the  27th  ;  in  the  course  of  the  forenoon  of  which  day  intelligence  arrived
that  great  destruction  had  been  committed  among  the  flocks  and  herds  of  the  surrounding
country ;  and  two  persons  were  reported  to  have  died  from  exposure  to  the  cold  at  a  short
distance  from  the  town.a

In  the  country  more  to  the  east,  about  the  mountains  which  bound  the  Haouran  plain,  the
weather  in  this  month  must  be  severe,  judging  from  the  series  of  daily  observations  which
Mr.  Madox  has  given.  He  was  detained  no  less  than  nine  days  (10th — 19th)  at  El  Hait,
on  the  lower  slope  of  the  Haouran  mountains,  by  snow  and  bad  weather.  From  an  analysis
of  the  observations  made  by  him  in  this  quarter,  and  extending  from  near  the  beginning
towards  the  end  of  this  month,  it  appears  that  there  are  often  heavy  falls  of  snow,  chiefly  by
night,  but  sometimes  by  day.  The  snow  sometimes  lies  several  feet  deep  on  the  ground  in
the  morning.  Sometimes,  on  the  same  night,  falls  of  snow,  alternate  with  showers  of  sleet
and  rain.  Frost  frequent,  and  sometimes  very  severe.  Cold,  sometimes  intense,  at  night,
when  the  north  wind  blows.  The  winds  often  blow  strongly  and  keenly  at  night ;  generally
abate  as  the  day  grows,  and  sometimes  rise  again  in  the  afternoon.  The  higher  mountains
covered  with  thick  snow.  Snow  in  the  plain,  around  the  mountains,  also,  till  about  the  19th;
but  not  so  much.  Even  on  approaching  Damascus  (20th)  this  traveller  had  often  to  make
his  way  through  water  and  ice.  At  the  same  time  the  Lebanon  mountains  were  impassable
from  snow,  and  the  post  from  Damascus  to  Beirout  had  been  obliged  to  return.  It  is  right  to
add,  that  this  winter  (1825)  appears  to  have  been  more  than  usually  severe  for  snow  and  cold.b
Nevertheless,  in  this  month,  and  especially  in  the  latter  half  of  it,  the  sun  shines  out  brightly
by  day,  and  the  air  is  mild  and  genial,  especially  in  the  country  west  of  the  Jordan.  On  the
14th,  Buckingham  found  the  heat  oppressive  even  on  the  summit  of  the  mountains  to  the
west  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  but  it  was  tempered  by  a  light  breeze  from  the  north-west.

According  to  Korte,  as  cited  under  January,  the  present  month  is  the  last  of  the  three  in
which  the  greatest  quantity  of  rain  falls  in  Palestine.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  accounts  of
Buckingham,0  Skinner,d  Madox,e  and  others.  From  their  collected  statements  it  appears  that
the  greatest  quantities  of  rain  fall  by  night,  and  in  the  early  morning,  although  there  are  often
heavy  showers  by  day,  and  sometimes  all  the  day  through.  Days  entirely  rainy  occurred  in
Gilead,  at  the  beginning  of  this  month,  in  the  year  of  Buckingham's  visit  (1815),  when  the
whole  country  west  of  the  Jordan  was  parched  by  unusual  drought  and  heat.  The  plains  and
hollow  lands  are,  to  a  great  extent,  inundated  by  the  rains  of  the  last  month  and  the  early  part
of  this.     On  this  account  Skinner  was  unable  to  make  his  way  across  the  plain  of  Esdraelon

a  '  Arab  Tribes,'  18,  20,  32,  43,  48.  t>  Madox,  ii.  169,  1/2,  174,  179,  180,  181,  192.

<■  '  Palestine,'  ii.  150,  240,  309 ;  '  Arab  Tribes,'  8,  &e  '>  '  Journey,'  i.  129,  130,  135,  136,  148,  150,  158,  164.

e  '  Excursions,'  ii.  169,  174,  &c.

VOL.  I.  2  f

ccxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

to  Jerusalem,  from  Nazareth,  but  was  obliged  to  return  to  the  coast.  The  same  traveller  notes
inundations  in  the  plain  of  the  coast  (south  of  Mount  Carmel)  which  extended  as  far  as  the
eye  could  reach ;  and  Madox  was  greatly  incommoded  by  water  in  crossing  the  plains  between
the  Haouran  mountains  and  Damascus.

The  sky  is  often  dark  and  cloudy,  especially  in  the  mornings.  Buckingham  speaks  of  a
mist  (on  the  hills  beyond  Jordan)  brought  by  a  strong  south  wind ;  and  the  same  wind
(blowing  on  the  10th)  is  described  by  him,  with  surprise,  as  colder  than  any  he  had  yet  felt
in  Palestine. a

Thunder  is  not  unfrequent,  particularly  in  the  north,  and  in  the  latter  half  of  the  month.
In  all  the  instances  we  have  collected,  it  was  accompanied  by  rain,  often  by  high  wind,  and
sometimes  by  hail.b

In  the  preceding  month,  as  well  as  in  this,  there  has  been  occasion  to  mention  the  destruction
of  houses  by  snow,  and  by  rain.  This  may  require  explanation.  Most  of  the  villages,  and
the  inferior  class  of  houses  in  towns  are  built  with  bricks  dried  in  the  sun ;  and  the  roofs  are
composed  of  mud  laid  over  branches  of  trees  supported  on  long  straight  trunks  of  aspen.
This  construction  may  do  very  well  in  a  dry  climate,  in  which,  no  doubt,  it  originated.  It  is
common,  and  answers  well,  in  Egypt  and  Arabia.  But  walls  and  roofs  thus  constructed
cannot  endure  continued  wet.  They  are  dissolved  and  broken  down  by  it.  Even  in  the  better
sort  of  houses,  the  walls  of  which  are  of  brick  or  stones,  and  the  roofs  of  a  prepared  compost,
these  evils  are  not  entirely  avoided.  It  often  happens  that  the  walls  are  of  immense  thickness;
but  they  are  only  coated  internally  and  externally  with  brick  or  stone,  the  interval  being  stuffed
up  with  loose  and  soft  rubbish,  earth,  &c,  for  the  most  part  easily  soluble  in  water ;  and  when,
from  continued  rains  or  inundations,  the  water  is  able  to  penetrate  through  the  outer  coating  to
the  internal  mass,  it  gives  way  under  the  pressure  and  disturbance  within  which  is  thus  pro-
duced. However,  for  the  most  part,  sufficient  care  is  taken,  in  constructing  the  better  class
of  houses,  to  prevent  such  calamities  from  the  operation  of  ordinary  local  contingencies  ;
although  a  season  unusually  wet  fails  not  to  occasion  extensive  ruin  among  the  best  habita-
tions, especially  in  the  commoner  towns,  where  the  stones  are  piled  loosely  up  in  their  building,
without  much  care  for  preserving  the  perpendicular.  But  with  respect  to  the  villages,  Mr.
Elliot  assures c  us  in  reference  to  Palestine,  and  we  know  it  to  be  true  in  other  parts  of
Western  Asia,  that  it  is  not  uncommon  to  see  half  a  village  destroyed  by  a  rainy  season,  while
the  loss  of  a  roof  is  an  event  of  ordinary  occurrence.  And  Major  Skinner  J  says,  "  The  snow
has  the  power  in  this  country  of  demolishing  a  town  in  a  night," — an  exaggeration,  certainly,
in  its  plain  terms,  as  such  destruction  can  only  be  extensive  in  a  night  from  the  effects
of  many  previous  falls  of  snow,  or  of  much  previous  rain,  whereby  the  walls  and  roofs
have  been  soaked  and  saturated,  so  that  they  are  not  able  to  sustain  the  weight  of  snow  thrown
on  them.  Successive  falls  of  snow,  and  successive  thaws,  would  be  alone  ruinous  to  such
roofs,  as  so  much  wet,  independent  of  the  weight  imposed.  Thus  Madox e  notices,  after  many
days  of  snow  and  rain,  even  in  one  of  the  comparatively  strong  houses  of  the  Haouran  : —
"  The  plaster  of  the  walls  began  to  come  down  and  the  snow  to  penetrate  and  drop  in  every
direction."  After  this  beginning,  the  roof  would  soon  fall  in.  The  inhabitants  of  Palestine
are  not  insensible  to  these  dangers,  hence  every  house  is  provided  with  a  stone  roller,  which  is
rolled  over  the  roof  after  heavy  rains f — a  practice  very  usual  throughout  Western  Asia,  and
which  offers  an  exhibition  not  unamusing.  With  respect  to  the  snow,  we  are  not  conscious
that  any  traveller  has  noticed  preventive  measures :  but  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  inhabitants
neglect  the  obvious  precaution,  observed  in  other  parts  of  Western  Asia,  of  casting  off  in  the
morning  whatever  snow  may  have  fallen  on  the  roofs  during  the  night.  In  northern  Persia
this  is  the  duty  of  the  young  people;  which  they  discharge  with  much  glee  and  merriment.

Trees. — Since  the  almond-tree  blossoms  in  January,  the  statement  of  Russell,  who  refers  its

a  *  Palestine,' ii.  309.  b  Gumpenberg,  i.  452.    Burckhaidt:  reference  lost.

c  Vol.  ii.  p.  2/8.  d  Vol.  i.  p.  216.  '  Vol.  ii.  p.  180.  f  Elliot,  ii.  278.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MARCH.  ccxix

blossoming  at  Aleppo  to  the  middle  of  February,  gives  an  advance  to  the  season  in  Palestine
which  must  be  understood  in  copying  his  statement  that,  "  The  almond-tree  puts  forth  its
blossoms  about  the  middle  of  this  month,  being  soon  followed  by  the  apricot,  the  peach,  and
the  plum  ;  and  although  other  trees  remain  in  their  leafless  state  until  the  second  week  of
March,  those  which  are  in  blossom,  together  with  the  lively  vegetation  of  the  plants  beneath,
give  a  pleasing  vernal  appearance  to  the  gardens. "a  Now,  the  analogy  of  the  almond-tree
suggests  that  all  this  occurs  early  in  February  in  Palestine.

The  orange-trees  on  the  plain  of  the  coast  are  laden  with  ripe  fruit.b  And  here  it  may  be
noted  that  no  oranges  can  be  finer  than  those  of  the  Palestine  coast.  Volney  observes  that
those  of  Tripoli  are  equal  to  those  of  Malta,c  and  Skinner, d  that  those  of  Jaffa  are  the  finest
in  the  world, — two  forms  of  expression  which  mean  the  same  thing.

Grain.— According  to  Russell,  barley  is  sown  this  month  in  the  Aleppo  district.e  In  the
country  beyond  Jordan,  the  ground  having  then  been  softened  by  recent  rains,  Buckingham
saw  the  peasantry  all  abroad  on  the  1st  of  this  month,  either  at  the  plough,  or  scattering  the
seed.  "  The  labours  of  husbandry  being  already  too  much  retarded  by  the  late  long  drought
to  admit  of  an  hour  being  lost."f  If  so,  these  operations  would  naturally  be  referred  to
January.  He  does  not  say  what  grain  they  sowed.  What  Russell  says  of  that  district  in
another  matter,  is  certainly  true  of  Palestine ; — the  fields  which  were  partly  green  before,
are  now,  from  the  springing  up  of  the  later  grain,  covered  with  an  agreeable  verdure. *>'
Accordingly,  the  rich  green  of  the  young  corn,  especially  in  the  plains,  is  this  month  much
spoken  of  by  the  travellers  in  Palestine.  In  the  southern  part  of  the  plain  of  the  coast,  about
Gaza,  where  the  climate  approximates  to  that  of  Egypt,  Furer  took  notice,  on  the  9th,  that
the  corn  stood  as  high  as  it  does  in  Germany  in  May  or  June.h

Esculent  Vegetables. — Beans  are  still  in  flower.  The  cauliflower  still  ripens.  Russell
says  that  cauliflowers  come  into  the  Aleppo  market  about  the  end  of  January,  and  are  common
until  the  middle  of  March.1

Plants. — The  same  flowers  which  open  in  January,  continue  in  bloom  this  month.  Early
in  the  month,  in  the  plain  of  Sharon,  Skinner k  saw  lilies  l  and  hyacinths  in  every  direction,
and  the  verdant  grass  was  strewed  with  the  richest  scarlet  poppies  he  ever  beheld.

Russell  states  that  the  banks  of  the  streams  near  Aleppo  are  this  month  ornamented  with
geraniums  and  daisies.  Myller  m  states  that  in  the  meadows  of  the  same  neighbourhood  he  saw
tulips,  hyacinths,  narcissuses,  and  anemones  in  full  bloom,  amidst  grass  of  the  most  beautiful
green.  Rauwolffn  notices  several  sorts  of  hyacinths  in  flower,  and  among  the  first  the  oriental
hyacinths,  called  by  the  natives  sumbel.  All  this,  without  doubt,  applies  equally  to  Palestine,
where  the  same  plants  grow,  and  where  the  season  is  rather  more  forward  than  at  Aleppo.

MARCH.

Weather. — The  account  which  Dr.  Russell  gives  of  the  weather  at  Aleppo  in  the  month  of
March  is,  that  a  good  deal  of  rain  falls  in  the  course  of  it ;  but  it  is  generally  in  short,  hard
showers,  and  often  accompanied  with  thunder,  at  which  times  the  weather  is  dark  and  gloomy  ;
but  for  the  most  part  the  sky  is  clear,  and  only  variegated  with  light  white  clouds.  It  begins
in  this  month  to  be  hot  in  the  open  air.  The  winds  blow  fresher  than  in  January  and
February,  and  are  oftener  westerly.  The  greatest  height  of  the  thermometer  is  6*7°, and  the  least
44°  ;  the  greatest  difference  in  any  one  day  9°.  The  morning  station  of  the  thermometer  in
the  beginning  of  the  month  is  49°,  about  the  middle  of  the  month  52°,  and  towards  the  end  58°

a  Russell,  i.  64.  b  Skinner,  i  185.  c  Vol.  i.  p.  297.  d  Vol.  i.  p.  184.  e  Vol.  i.  p.  /4.

f  *  Palestine,'  ii.  152.  S  Vol.  i.  p.  64.  h  '  Itineravium,'  p.  46.  '  Vol.  i.  p.  91.  k  Vol.  i.  p.  1/4.

1  Doubtless  the  common  white  lily  (lilium  candidum),  which,  besides  the  comparatively  rare  Persian  lily  mentioned   under
last  month,  is  the  only  one  we  know  of  as  growing  in  Palestine.
m  Reise,  p.  648.  »Th.  i.  p.  115.

2  f  2

ccxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

or  95°.     In  dark,  wet  weather,  the  difference  between  the  morning  and  evening  stations  is  very
little.

Neither  snow  nor  frost  occurs  in  this  notice  :  but  our  memoranda  gives  instances  of  both  in
Palestine.  In  the  early  part  of  the  month  Madoxa  found  the  nights  frosty  in  the  north  of  the
country,  about  the  head  of  the  Jordan ;  and  in  the  east  country,  beyond  the  hills  of  Gilead,
Buckingham  found  the  whole  land  covered  with  thick  hoar  frost  in  the  mornings,  and  the  cold
severe;  and  on  the  16th  the  hills  east  of  the  Haouran  were  still  covered  with  snow.b  Even  at
Jerusalem,  as  late  as  the  26th,  Madoxc  experienced  much  rain  and  snow,  even  until  about  1  o'clock
p.m.  On  the  21st  Burckhardtd  found  that  the  summit  of  Mount  Barouk  (one  of,  but  far
from  the  highest,  of  the  Lebanon  ridges)  was  covered  with  snow,  and  a  thick  fog  rested  on  it,
yet  the  next  day  he  found  that  the  heavy  rains  of  the  season  had  dissolved  most  of  the  snows
on  Anti-Lebanon.  The  same  day  (21st)  it  snowed  in  the  great  plain  between  Lebanon  and
Anti-Lebanon  ;  and  as  he  says  that  it  continued  to  rain  and  snow  for  several  days,  it  must  have
snowed  at  the  latter  end  of  the  month,  as  he  reached  that  city  the  day  after  this  observation
was  made.

The  notices  which  we  have  collected  of  rainy  weather  in  this  month  are  so  numerous,  and
so  refer  to  all  parts  of  the  country — from  uttermost  Lebanon  to  the  desert  of  Suez — as  to  show
that  the  statement  adduced  from  Russell  is  strictly  applicable  to  this  country ;  and  we  shall
not,  therefore,  multiply  authorities  in  order  to  confirm  it.  Much  rain  falls,  sometimes  in
torrents,  by  day  and  night,  but  chiefly  by  night ;  and  all  that  has  been  said  before  of  inundated
plains  and  hollows  is  strictly  applicable  to  this  month,  as  well  as  that  the  streams  are  in  many
cases  swollen  to  deep  and  rapid  rivers,  dangerous  to  pass.  The  rain  is  often  accompanied  by
hurricanes  of  wind  ;  and  the  sea  is  in  consequence  unusually  stormy  on  the  coast.  The  rains
are  oftener  than  in  the  preceding  months  attended  by  lightning  and  thunder ;  and  the  sky  is
often  much  obscured  and  blackened  by  thick  clouds.e  In  short,  the  spring  rainy  season,  called
in  Scripture  "  the  latter  rain,"  falls  principally  in  this  month,  the  want  of  which  is  always
spoken  of  as  a  great  calamity  to  the  husbandman.  And  this  is  still  most  true.  We  have
mentioned,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  that  the  season  in  which  Mr.  Buckingham  travelled
had  been  one  in  which  the  customary  rains  of  winter  and  early  spring  had  not  fallen;  and  all
his  incidental  statements,  with  reference  to  the  effects,  demonstrate  that,  as  the  prophet  states,
when,  at  this  season,  God  "  rebuketh  the  sea  and  maketh  it  dry,  and  drieth  up  all  the  rivers,
— Bashan  languisheth,  and  Carmel,  and  the  flower  of  Lebanon  languisheth."  f  Thus,  under
the  date  March  11,  when  in  the  Haouran,  he  remarks,  "  At  the  period  of  our  stay  here  we
learnt  that  the  late  drought  with  which  the  plains  had  been  afflicted  had  nearly  produced  a
famine  in  particular  parts  of  the  country,  and  this  was  one  in  which  it  was  severely  felt.
Corn,  for  instance,  in  this  plain,  which,  in  seasons  of  abundance,  formed  the  granary  for  the
whole  of  Syria,  and  was  consequently  cheaper  than  elsewhere,  was  now  selling  at  three
piastres,  or  more  than  half-a- crown  sterling  per  gallon,  which  price  was  almost  without  pre-
cedent or  example.  From  the  entire  absence  of  rain,  all  the  pasture  for  cattle  had  also  dried
up,  and  the  usual  supplies  of  milk  and  butter  were  therefore  equally  deficient.  Under  this
pressure  of  want  and  distress,  innumerable  families  had  migrated  into  the  eastern  hills  among
the  Druses,  and  into  the  mountains  near  the  Jordan,  in  both  of  which  districts  rain  and  snow
had  occasionally  fallen;  while  in  the  great  plain  of  the  Haouran,  which  separates  these  ranges
of  hills,  there  had  been  a  continued  drought  for  four  months  past,  without  the  means  of
watering  by  irrigation,  and,  consequently,  the  soil,  though  naturally  fertile,  was,  by  this  cala-
mity, rendered,  for  the  present,  at  least,  quite  unproductive."  On  the  other  hand,  the  good
effect  of  these  rains  appeared,  the  more  marked  by  the  contrast,  in  the  eastern  hills,  where
they  had  not  been  wanting.  "  From  the  abundance  of  water  obtainable  here  and  the  indus-
trious habits  of  the  Druses,  the  greater  part  of  the  good  soil  had  been  brought  into  cultivation,

a  Vol.  ii  p.  198.  b  <  Arab  Tribes,'  97,  131,  227-  c  Vol  ii.  p.  216.  d  ■  Syria,'  206,  208.

e  The  authorities  ou  which  the  preceding  statement  is  founded  are  : — Burckhardt;  Buckingham's  '  Arab  Tribes,'  122,  141  ;
Skinner,  i.  246,261,263,  264,269,  271,  286,290,  321;  Madox,  ii.  195,  &e. ;  Lindsay,  ii.  150;  Elliot,  ii.  217,  278,327,  347,  350;
Wilde,  ii.  108,  109,424,  &c.

f  Nalium,  i.  4.

Chap.  VII]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MARCH.  ccxxi

and  we  had  the  gratification  to  see  young  corn  spring  up  here  already  a  foot  in  height,  and  of
a  beautiful  fresh  green  colour,  while  the  whole  of  the  Haouran  below  was  a  dull  brown ;  and
from  the  prevalence  of  the  late  drought  and  want  of  rain,  was  at  the  present  moment  a  parched
desert."

Towards  the  end  of  this  month,  the  rivers  are  in  general  much  swollen,  not  merely  by  the
rain,  but  by  the  thawing  of  the  snows  which  have  remained  upon  the  mountains.  There  are
separate  testimonies  concerning  the  swelling  of  each  river.a  And  Maundrell,b  and  some  other
travellers,  think  that  the  Scriptural  "  swelling  of  Jordan  "  must  be  referred  to  this  time.

With  all  this  rain  and  its  concomitants,  there  is  much  splendid  weather  in  March  ;  such,  for
instance,  as  enchanted  Wilde  c  in  the  plain  of  Sharon  (on  the  15th). — "  Around  us  was  an
atmosphere,  such  as  can  only  be  perceived  and  breathed  in  the  East, — no  palpable  sky, — no
clouds  traversing  a  canopy  definite  in  extent,  but  an  ethereal  expanse  about  us  and  above  us,
terminating  only  where  the  powers  of  vision  fail,  and  creating  the  thought  that  we  looked  into
the  regions  of  boundless  space."

There  are  various  passages  of  Scripture,  besides  those  already  adduced,  which  obviously
refer  to  the  meteorology  of  the  present  and  preceding  months,  that  is,  of  winter  and  early
spring.  In  the  following,  much  of  the  force  lies  in  the  connection  of  the  separate  details : —
"  The  Lord  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from  the  ends  of  the  earth ;  he  maketh  lightning
for  the  rain  ;  he  bringeth  the  winds  out  of  his  treasures. "d — "  He  giveth  snow  like  wool ;  he
scattereth  the  hoar  frost  like  ashes.  He  casteth  forth  his  ice  like  morsels.  Who  can  stand
before  his  cold  ?  He  sendeth  out  his  word  and  melteth  them  ;  he  maketh  the  wind  to  blow.,
and  the  waters  flow."0

Considerable  heat  is  experienced  this  month  in  the  more  southern  parts  of  Palestine,  and  in
the  plains  along  the  Jordan,  and  (although  in  a  less  degree)  along  the  plain  of  the  sea.  Tra-
vellers who  have  visited  the  Jordan  at  Easter  (with  the  pilgrims)  when  that  season  fell  in  the
month  of  March,  speak  much  of  the  heat  of  the  plain  of  Jericho.  Egmont  and  Heyman  f
relate  that  several  persons,  being  obliged  to  live  in  the  open  air,  perished,  on  such  an  occasion,
in  this  plain.  And  Prince  Radzivil  §  mentions  that  those  who  go  from  Jericho  to  Jerusalem
perceive  the  air  to  be  much  colder.

The  hot  winds  begin  to  be  felt  very  sensibly  this  month  in  Palestine  and  the  desert  to  the
south.  In  the  desert  of  Suez,  Lord  Lindsay h  experienced  the  sirocco  (he  erroneously  calls  it
the  kamseen)  as  early  as  the  6th.  It  was  a  southerly  wind,  bringing  clouds  of  sand,  and  pelt-
ing the  travellers  with  small  pebbles,  with  the  effect  of  a  heavy  hail-storm.  At  the  end  of  the
month  (31st),  Dr.  Richardson,1  in  the  westerly  part  of  the  same  desert,  that  is,  near  the  coast,
travelled  all  day  under  a  burning  sirocco.  He  says,  "  We  were  afraid  that  the  dreaded  kam-
seen winds  had  set  in  ;  but  our  guide  assured  us,  with  the  certainty  of  fate,  that  they  would
not  commence  for  a  fortnight."  The  suffering  from  heat  and  thirst  was  very  great.  Still
earlier  (25th)  the  sirocco  was  experienced  in  Palestine  itself,  upon  the  highest  elevation  of  the
hill  country  between  Jerusalem  and  Ramla,  by  Dr.  Wilde.k  The  statement  of  this  traveller
respecting  this  wind  as  felt  in  Palestine,  is  so  much  more  clear  than  any  other,  that  we  feel
constrained  to  introduce  it,  notwithstanding  the  general  notice  which  has  been  taken  of  the
subject  in  a  previous  page  : — 1

"  While  upon  the  highest  elevation  of  the  hill  country,  we  had  perceived  ascertain  sultriness
of  the  air.  The  wind  was  then  blowing  from  the  S.E.,  and  on  looking  behind  us,  we  could
discover  a  peculiar  haziness  of  the  atmosphere,  which  momentarily  approached  towards  us,
while  in  front  all  was  yet  bright  and  distinct.  Presenlly  the  sultriness  increased,  although
the  sun  was  not  particularly  hot,  and  there  was  rather  more  breeze  than  usual.  In  fact,  this
wind,  which  was  no  other  than  the  sirocco,  appeared  to  move  as  a  stratum  of  the  atmosphere,
and  for  some  time,  even  after  it  reached  us,  it  did  not  descend  and  fill  the  valleys.  The  wind
had  been  hlowing  from  the  S.E.  for  the  two  days  previous,  and  it  had,  in  all  probability,  been
for  some  time  traversing  the  hot  and  arid   Idumean  desert,  where  it  met  no  particle  of  vege-

a  Among  others,  Tschudis  von  Glarus,  236  ;  Shaw,  238  ;  Pococke,  ii.  154  ;  Egmont  and  Heyman,  i.  385.

1>  Journey,  136.  c  Vol.  ii.  p.  174  d  Psalm  cxxxv.  7-  e  Psalm  exlvii.  16—18.

f  Vol  .i.  p.  333.  S  Peregrination,  94.  h  Vol.  i.  p.  250.  i  Vol.  ii.  p.  181.

k  Vol.  ii.  p.  427—8.  1  See  p.  cxliv.,  printed  before  Wilde's  book  appeared.

cexxn

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

table  life  to  modify  its  force  ;  and  where  the  sand,  in  all  likelihood,  had  never  cooled  during
the  night.  This  wind  also  takes  up,  and  holds  suspended  in  it,  the  minutest  particles  of  sand,
which,  in  the  space  of  a  couple  of  hours  we  could  perceive  upon  our  clothes.

"  We  now  began  to  feel  its  force,  and  its  effect  was  most  unpleasant,  though  difficult  to
describe.  The  air  itself  becomes  a  hot,  thick,  palpable  haze,  of  a  bluish-grey  colour,  rendering
the  outlines  of  objects  indistinct,  though  it  allows  you  to  see  much  farther  than  in  an  ordinary
humid  mist.  I  know  no  better  resemblance  of  the  character  the  air  assumes,  under  the  cir-
cumstances, than  that  peculiar  appearance  and  quivering  motion  which  the  heat  and  smoke  of  a
fire  has,  when  lighted  in  the  open  air  of  a  clear  hot  sunny  day.  Although  it  may  be  blowing
hard  at  the  time,  yet  the  breeze  is  unrefreshing,  and  comes  hot  and  sultry  on  the  brow,  pro-
ducing at  first  a  feeling  of  oppression  and  constriction  of  the  chest.  This  increases  in  time  to
a  sickening  sense  of  suffocation.  There  is  a  general  dryness  of  the  skin,  the  pores  cease  to
throw  out  their  secretions,  the  mouth  becomes  dry  and  parched,  attended  with  urgent  thirst ;  the
vessels  of  the  eyes  red  and  tinged ;  head-ache  and  lassitude  ensue.  Finally,  great  prostration
of  strength  is  felt,  which  remains  long  after  the  exciting  cause  has  ceased,  and  the  other
symptoms  have  been  removed;  and  above  all,  there  is  the  most  debilitating  effect  produced
upon  the  mind  by  this  sirocco — a  feeling  of  good-for-nothingness.

"  This  wind  is  one  of  the  most  trying  things  that  awaits  the  invalid  in  his  journeys  through
the  Levant ;  and  indeed  it  is  trying  to  all,  even  the  most  healthy.  The  residents  in  those
places  subject  to  it  shut  themselves  up  in  their  houses  during  its  continuance,  and  close  all
their  doors  and  windows.  Its  action  is  generally  modified  towards  evening,  though  it  may
continue  for  two  or  three  days  together.  For  this  reason  people  who  live  in  eastern  countries
seldom  travel,  if  they  can  avoid  it,  during  the  heat  of  the  day,  The  depressing  effect  of  the
sirocco  may  be  that  alluded  to  by  the  Psalmist  as  '  the  arrow  that  flieth  by  day.' "

The  traveller  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  above  was  in  Palestine  from  about  the
middle  to  the  end  of  the  month,  and  he  has  a  few  valuable  remarks  on  its  temperature  and
climate.  He  says  that  about  two  o'clock  was  about  the  hour  at  which  the  mercury  stood
highest,  and  frequently  it  was  higher  at  10  a.m.  than  at  noon.  He  adds : — "  Owing  to  the
great  difference  of  elevation  in  various  parts  of  Palestine,  the  greatest  dissimilarity  prevails
with  regard  to  its  temperature  and  climate.  We  were  so  fortunate  as  to  visit  it  at  the  most
favourable  and  healthy  period  of  the  year — the  snows  and  cold  of  winter  had  just  disappeared,
and  the  rainy  season  had  not  yet  commenced: — a  month  or  three  weeks  earlier,  we  should  have
been  travelling  in  some  places  with  snow  up  to  our  horses'  knees,  while  at  the  same  time  we
should  have  been  enduring  a  scorching  sun  overhead.  The  rainy  season  a  in  this  country  is
very  variable,  both  as  to  the  quantity  of  rain  which  falls,  and  the  period  at  which  it  occurs ;
it  is  however,  on  the  average,  generally  from  the  middle  of  March  to  the  middle  of  April."

Trees  and  Shrubs. — After  the  second  week  in  March  every  tree  is  in  full  leaf.b
Travellers  who  have  visited  Palestine  in  this  month  take  much  notice  of  the    prickly  pear.

This  plant,  cherished  in  our  English
hot-houses  in  small  pots,  in  Syria
grows  to  the  size  of  a  large  shrub,  the
stem  of  which  is  as  thick  as  a  man's
body.  A  few  of  these  planted  together
constitute  an  impervious  hedge,  uni-
versally adopted  in  the  plain  of  the
coast,  in  which  and  in  Galilee  it
chiefly  grows.  The  leaf  is  studded
with  thorns,  and  is  of  an  oval  shape,
about  ten  inches  long,  six  wide,  and
three-fourths  of  an  inch  thick ;  the
stem  and  branches  are  formed  by  the
r,,    ,     „.      ,  ,.      .  amalgamation  of  a  certain  number  of

[(..actus  bicus  Inuicus.j  ~

Meaning  the  season  of  spring  rains— that  is  "  th<>  latter  rains."  h  Russell,  i.  64.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MARCH.  ccxxiii

these  succulent  leaves,  that  grow  together  the  year  after  their  first  appearance,  when  each
is  laden  with  fifteen  or  twenty  gaudy  yellow  blossoms,  which  are  rapidly  matured  into  a  sweet
and  refreshing  fruit  of  the  size  and  shape  of  a  hen's  egg,  becomes  ripe  towards  the  end  of
July,  and  is  then  sold  in  all  the  markets  of  the  country.51

The  apricot  and  almond-tree?,  being  in  full  bloom,  crowned  with  their  elegant  wreaths  of
pink  and  white,  give  a  peculiar  beauty  to  the  gardens  of  Damascus  about  the  end  of  this
month.b     Sooner  in  the  plains  of  Palestine.

The  apple  and  pear-trees  are  also  in  blossom.  So  is  the  black-thorn,  which  has  been  little
noticed  by  travellers  in  Palestine;  but  on  the  15th  Wilde c  met  with  it,  for  the  first  time,  in
his  travels,  in  the  hill  country  about  Beth-horon,  and  it  was  then  in  blossom.

The  Jericho  plum-tree,  commonly  called  Zacchoum,  because  it  grew  formerly  in  the  plain  of
Jericho,  not  far  from  the  supposed  house  of  Zaccheus,  and  supposed  by  the  eastern  Christians
to  be  the  tree  which  Zaccheus  climbed  to  see  the  Saviour  pass, — is  said  "  to  afford  its  fruit  "
towards  the  end  of  March  or  beginning  of  April.  Naud  and  Maundrell,e  saw  some  on  the
trees  about  this  time.  A  full  and  clear  account  of  this  tree  and  its  fruit  has  been  given  by
Mariti,  of  which  the  following  is  the  substance  : — The  zacchoum  has  much  resemblance  to  the
plum-tree ;  its  leaves  are  covered  with  thorns  four  or  five  inches  long,  the  bark  is  knotty  and
shrivelled,  green  when  it  covers  the  tree,  but  turns  yellow  when  dry.  The  wood  is  of  the
colour  of  box ;  and  although  not  of  so  firm  a  texture,  it  will  take  the  same  polish  and  lustre.
The  leaves  resemble  those  of  the  olive,  but  are  straighter,  more  pointed,  of  a  finer  green,  and
almost  prickly.  The  flower  is  white  and  fragrant.  The  fruit  is  a  sort  of  large  acorn  without
a  calyx,  inclosed  in  a  kind  of  pellicle  :  this  has  little  pulp,  and  is  reduced  almost  to  nothing
when  separated  from  the  tree ;  but  it  contains  a  nut,  the  kernel  of  which  contains  an  abund-
ance of  oily  matter.  This  oil  is  obtained  by  pounding  the  whole  fruit  in  a  mortar,  after
which  the  murk  is  taken  out  and  pressed  (by  the  hands)  until  to  all  appearance  quite  dry ;
but  on  being  boiled  it  affords  a  further  quantity  of  oil,  which  is,  however,  much  inferior  to
that  obtained  from  the  first  operation.

The  oil  of  zacchoum  has  the  taste  and  colour  of  that  from  sweet-almonds ;  but  it  is  difficult  to
clarify,  as  the  manner  of  extracting  it  does  not  sufficiently  separate  the  dregs.  This  oil  is
held  in  the  highest  esteem  by  the  Arabs,  who  far  prefer  it  to  any  other  remedy,  for  internal
contusions,  as  well  as  for  sores  and  wounds ;  and  Mariti  seems  to  consider  that  its  virtues
are  well  attested.  Quaresmius  says  that,  within  his  own  experience,  the  oil  quickly  allays  the
severest  cholic.  The  Arab  women  often  anoint  themselves  completely  with  it,  under  the
impression  that  it  had  a  salutary  effect  by  closing  the  pores,  and  thus  checking  the  excessive
perspiration  which  the  heat  of  the  climate  (in  the  plain  of  Jericho)  occasions,  and  which  they
find  to  be  very  exhausting.  Formerly,  if  not  now,  when  the  Christian  caravan  advanced
towards  Jericho,  it  used  to  be  met  by  crowds  of  Arab  women,  offering  the  salutary  oil  for  sale
to  the  pilgrims,  in  small  leather  bottles.  The  demand  for  it  being  much  greater  than  the
supply,  it  used  to  be  much  adulterated  by  the  mixture  of  olive  oil.  Hardy  and  others  are
certainly  wrong  in  confounding  this  with  the  famous  balsam  of  Jericho,  since  that  was  a
medicinal  gum  obtained  by  incisions,  whereas  this  is  an  expressed  oil.  Hardy  says  that  a
friend  to  whom  he  gave  some  of  this  oil  (which  he  brought  home  with  him)  made  experi-
ment of  its  virtues,  and  found  them  "  little  less  than  miraculous. "f

Orange  and  lemon-trees  are  still  covered  with  blossoms  and  fruit .8

The  dwarf  oaks,  low  woods  of  which  cover  the  valleys  and  ravines  in  the  hill  country  of
Judea,  put  forth  their  young  leaves,  and  long  green  cat-skins  h  about  the  middle  of  March.

The  "  tall  waving  cypresses"  of  the  coast  this  month  engage  the  attention  of  travellers,
perhaps  from  the  brighter  green  of  its  leaves  at  this  season.  The  species  in  Palestine  is  the
common  one  (cupressus  sempervirens).     The  Turks  have  retained  the  ideas  and  usages  which

a  Elliot,  ii.  223.     Clarke,  iv.  133.  b  Elliot,  ii.  286.  c  Vol.  ii.  p.  182.  d  Page  351.

e  Page  144.

f  See  Mariti,  torn.  ii.  chap.  23;  see  also  D'Arvieux,  ii.  188  ;  Pococke,  ii.  49  ;  Hasselquist,  287;  Egmont  and  Heyman,  i.  331 ;
Hardy,  195.

?  Wilde,  ii.  171.  >>  Wilde,  ii.  182.,

CCXX1V

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

"        V  {>

the  old  Greeks,  their  predecessors,  connected  with
this  tree,  and  accordingly  plant  it  in  their  ceme-
teries. The  cypress  is  only  once  mentioned  in  the
Scripture  and  once  in  the  Apocrypha;  but  these
allusions  show  that  it  was  indigenous  in  Syria.
Isaiah b  mentions  it  among  the  trees  whose  wood
was  employed  in  the  fabrication  of  idols,  to  which
use  it  was  doubtless  recommended  by  the  com-
pact, heavy,  and  undecaying  character  of  its  wood.
The  other  passage  describes  it  as  growing  "  upon
the  mountains  of  Hermon  ;"c  which,  if  understood
of  the  great  Hermon,  may  be  illustrated  by  the
statement  of  Pococke,  who  says  that  the  cypress
is  the  only  tree  that  grows  towards  the  summit  of
Lebanon ;  but  being  checked  by  the  cold,  it  does
not  there  grow  spirally,  but  like  a  small  oak.

The  Date  Palm  blossoms  and  is  fructified  about
the  end  of  this  month  or  the  beginning  of  the
next.  The  flowers,  adhering  by  very  delicate
membranes  to  the  same  pedicle,  come  out  in  very
long  bundles  from  the  trunk  between  the  leaves,
and  are  covered  by  a  spatha  (or  sheath)  which
withers.  The  trees  have  male  flowers  on  different  plants  from  those  which
Therefore,  unless  the   flowers  of  the   fruit-bearing  (female)  tree   are

[The  Cypress.  aJ

opens   and
produce  the    fruit

impregnated  from  those  of  the  male,  the  fruit  is  abortive.  This  fact  has  long  been  known
and  acted  upon  in  the  East  by  persons  who  had  not  the  least  notion  of  the  sexual  system
of  plants,  of  which  system,  as  established  by  Linnaeus,  this  has,  therefore,  afforded  one  of
the  most  striking  and  popular  proofs.  Where  the  palm-tree  is  cultivated,  the  inhabitants  do
not  trust  to  the  spontaneous  impregnation  of  the  female  trees  from  the  male  blossoms;  but,
at  this  time,  when  the  sheaths,  that  respectively  enclose  the  young  clusters  of  the  male  flowers
and  female  fruit,  begin  to  open,  at  which  time  the  latter  are  formed  and  the  first  are  mealy,
they  take  a  sprig  or  two  of  the  male  cluster  and  introduce  it  into  the  sheath  of  the  female  ;
or  else  they  take  a  whole  cluster  of  the  male,  and  sprinkle  its  meal  or  farina  over  several
clusters  of  the  female.  The  latter  practice  is  common  in  Egypt,  where  the  proportion  of
male  trees  is  unusually  numerous  ;  but  in  Barbary  and  Arabia  d  the  other  method  is  resorted
to,  as,  under  it,  one  male  tree  suffices  for  four  or  five  hundred  date -bearing  palms.

The  palm-tree  is  an  evergreen,  which,  to  attain  perfection,  requires  a  hot  climate,  with  a
soil  sandy,  yet  humid,  and  somewhat  nitreous.  Hence  its  favourite  place  is  along  the  rivers
which  border  the  hot  and  sandy  deserts,  and  beside  old  wells  in  the  very  heart  of  the  desert
itself;  a  circumstance  which  renders  the  distant  prospect  of  it  a  delight  to  the  wanderer  in
those  parched  regions,  from  the  hope  or  assurance  of  water  which  it  conveys.  The  trees  found
in  the  desert  under  such  circumstances  are  supposed  to  have  sprung  up  from  date-stones
thrown  away  by  the  travellers,  who  usually  stop  where  water  is  found  for  refreshment  and
rest.  Mariti e  says  that  when  it  is  newly  planted,  the  natives  surround  its  root  with  ashes  and
salt,  to  promote  its  growth  and  vigour,  while  they  guard  it  carefully  from  all  gross  and
putrid  matters,  which  are,  in  the  highest  degree,  discouraging  to  this  tree.  It  is  propagated
chiefly  from  young  shoots  taken  from  the  roots  of  full-grown  trees,  which,  if  well  transplanted
and  taken  care  of,  will  yield  their  fruit  in  the  sixth  or  seventh  year;  whereas  those  that  are
raised  immediately  from  the  kernel  will  not  bear  until  their  sixteenth.  This  method  of  raising
the  palm  (phoenix),  and  what  may  be  further  observed,  that  when  the  old  trunk  dies,  there  is

a  Cupressus  sempcrvirens  (striata).  b  Chap.  xliv.  v.  14.  c  Eccles.  xxiv.  13.

a  We  believe  in  Arabia  generally  ;  and  we  know,  from  actual  observation,  that  it  is  so  in  Turkish  Arabia.

e  Tom.  ii.  p.  315.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MARCH.

ccxxv

never  wanting  one  or  more  of  such  offsprings  to  succeed  it,  may  have  given  occasion  to  the  fable
of  the  bird  of  that  name  dying,  and  another  rising  from  its  ashes.  But  a  more  strict  application
of  this  fable  results  from  the  alleged  fact  that  when  a  palm-tree  has  decayed,  the  Arabs  cut  it
down  to  the  roots  and  burn  it  on  the  spot,  and  the  ashes  being  covered  with  a  layer  of  earth,  a
new  shoot  springs  up,  which  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  becomes  a  strong  tree.  Although
the  palm  has  the  reputation  of  being  a  slow-growing  tree,  Mariti  says  it  grows  to  the  height
of  a  man  in  five  or  six  years  from  its  being  planted ;  and  this  is  a  very  rapid  growth,  consider-
ing that  the  trunk  rises  from  the  ground  of  a  thickness  which  is  never  increased.  It  is  one  of
the  peculiarities  of  this  class  of  trees  that  they  rise  to  a  great  height  without  increasing  in
bulk.  The  same  author  reports  the  traditions  of  the  natives  respecting  the  extended  life  of
this  tree.  They  allege  that  it  continues  for  many  ages ;  and  that,  in  fact,  no  one  ever  saw  a
well-rooled  palm-tree  perish,  unless  from
the  effect  of  a  wound  from  some  instrument,
or  some  other  external  damage.  But  we  have
more  confidence  in  the  information  of  Dr.
Shaw,a  who  was  instructed  that  the  palm-
tree  attains  its  greatest  vigour  about  thirty
years  after  transplantation,  and  continues  so
seventy  years  afterwards,  bearing  yearly
fifteen  or  twenty  clusters  of  dates,  each  of
them  weighing  fifteen  or  twenty  pounds.
After  this  period  it  begins  gradually  to  de-
cline, and  usually  falls  about  the  latter  end
of  its  second  century.  The  tree  needs  no
other  culture  and  attendance  than  to  be  well
watered  once  in  four  or  five  days,  and  to
have  a  few  of  the  lower  branches  lopped  off,
whenever  they  begin  to  droop  or  wither.
These,  whose  stumps,  or  pollicles,  in  being
thus  gradually  left  upon  the  trunk,  serve,
like  so  many  rounds  of  a  ladder,  to  climb
up  the  tree,  either  to  fecundate  it,  to  lop  it,
or  to  gather  the  fruit,  are  quickly  supplied
by  others,  which,  bearing  gradually  down
from  the  top,  or  crown,  contributes,  not  only
to  the  uniform  growth  of  this  tall,  knotless,
and  beautiful  tree,  but  likewise  to  its  per-
petual and  most  delightful  verdure.  "  To  be  exalted,"  c  or,  "  to  flourish  like  the  palm,"  are
just  and  proper  expressions  applicable  to  the  nature  of  this  tree,  as,  "  to  spread  abroad  like  the
cedar.  "d

Respecting  the  history  of  this  tree  in  Palestine,  the  following  observations  by  Shaw  e  are  too
valuable  to  be  omitted  : —

"  Several  parts  of  the  Holy  Land,  no  less  than  of  Idumea,
that  lay  contiguous  to  it,  are  described  by  the  ancients  to
abound  with  date-trees.  Judea  particularly  is  typified  in
several  coins  of  Vespasian  by  a  disconsolate  woman  sitting
under  a  palm-tree.  Upon  the  Greek  coin  likewise  of  his  son
Titus,  struck  upon  a  like  occasion,  we  see  a  shield  suspended
upon  a  palm-tree  with  a  Victory  writing  upon  it.  The  same
tree,  upon  a  medal  of  Domitian,  is  made  an  emblem  of
Neapolis,  formerly  Sichem,  or  Napl<5sa,  as  it  is  now  called;
as  it  is  likewise   of   Sepphoris  or  Saffour,  according    to    the

[The  Date-Palm.^]

Vol.i.  p.  261.
VOL.   I.

h  PhtenUl  dactylifera.

c  Eccles.  xxiv.  H.

''  Paulm  xcii.  11.

e  Vol.  ii.  y.  150.

2jr

CCXXV1

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

present  name,  the  metropolis  of  Galilee,  upon  one  of  Trajan's.  It  may  be  presumed,  there-
fore, that  the  palm-tree  was  formerly  very  much  cultivated  in  the  Holy  Land.  There  are,
indeed,  several  of  them  at  Jericho,  where  there  is  the  convenience  they  require  of  being
often  watered,  where  likewise  the  climate  is  warm  and  the  soil  sandy,  or  such  as  they  thrive
and  delight  in.  But  at  Jerusalem,  Sichem,  and  other  places  to  the  northward,  I  rarely  saw
above  two  or  three  of  them  together ;  and  even  these,  as  their  fruit  rarely,  if  ever,  comes  to
maturity,  are  of  no  further  service  than  (like  the  palm-tree  of  Deborah)  to  shade  the  retreats
of  their  sheikhs,  as  they  might  formerly  have  been  sufficient  to  supply  the  solemn  processions
(such  as  is  recorded  in  John  xii.  13)  with  branches.  From  the  present  condition  and  quality,
therefore,  of  the  palm-trees,  it  is  very  probable,  (provided  the  climate  and  the  sea-air  should,
contrary  to  experience,  be  favourable  to  their  increase)  that  they  could  never  be  either  nume-
rous or  fruitful.  The  opinion,  then,  that  Phoenice  is  the  same  with  a  country  of  date-trees,
does  not  appear  probable  ;  for,  provided  such  an  useful  and  beneficial  plant  had  ever  been
cultivated  here  to  advantage,  it  would  have  still  continued  to  be  kept  up  and  propagated,  as  in
Egypt  and  Barbary."

It  appears  to  us  that  Shaw  rather  underrates  the  extent  to  which  the  palm  was  anciently
cultivated  in  Palestine.  Every  circumstance  which  could  tend  to  diminish  their  number  has
been  in  operation  since  that  country  was  lost  to  the  Hebrew  nation.  It  is,  however,  remark-
able, that  even  in  the  time  of  Moses,  the  plain  of  Jericho  was  the  favourite  locality  of  the
palm-tree ;  and  from  the  number  of  the  trees  which  grew  in  and  around  the  city  of  that  name,
it  was  called  "  the  city  of  palm-trees. "a  No  one  would  think  of  thus  distinguishing  a  town  or
village  in  Egypt  or  Arabia,  where  the  absence  of  palm-trees  would  be  a  distinction.  The
palm-tree  was,  therefore,  doubtless  at  all  times  very  much  less  common  in  Palestine  than  in
Arabia  or  Egypt.

Reserving  some  notice  of  the  fruit  of  this  tree  for  the  month  in  which  it  is  produced,  we

have  next  to  notice  slightly  the  Doum-
Palm.h  We  confess  we  are  not  perfectly
satisfied  that  Palestine  affords  specimens
of  this  tree.  But  as  the  name  doum
occurs  in  a  few  travellers  as  that  of  a  tree
which  they  do  not  describe,  the  proba-
bility is  that  at  least  a  few  inferior  spe-
cimens may  be  found.  And,  indeed,  as
it  grows  not  only  in  Upper  Egypt  (seldom
in  the  lower  country),  but  in  Arabia,  and
even  so  near  as  the  Sinai  peninsula,"0  we
might  expect  to  find  some  specimens  in,
at  least,  the  plain  of  Jericho.  However,
we  shall  not  occupy  the  reader  with  a
tree  concerning  which  we  feel  thus  in
doubt.  It  may  suffice  to  point  out  a  few
of  the  most  marked  differences.  Instead
of  one  trunk  without  branches,  the  doum
throws  up  two  trunks,  or,  perhaps,  more
properly,  branches  at  the  same  time  from
the  soil.  From  each  of  these  spring  two
branches,  which  also  are  frequently  bifur-
cated higher  up.  The  terminal  branches
;  ^  "Uur  "irw  v  are  crowned  with  bundles  of  from  twenty

[Doum-Paim.]  to  thirty  palm  leaves  from  six  to  nine  feet

■*  Deut.  xxxiv.  3.

b  Cncifera  Thebaica.     It  takes  its  common  name  from  the  Isle  of  Doum,  in  the  Nile,  which  abounds   in   them,  while  its  Latin
name  comes  from  Thebes,  where  it  is  also  abundant.
c  Burckhardt's,  '  Syria,'  611.

Chap.  VII  ]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MARCH.

CCXXVll

[Carob-Tiee.     CeratoniaSiliqua.]

in  length.     The  fruit  of  the  doum  would  seem  from  description  to  be  not  very  different  from

that  of  the  date-palm.     The  tree  flowers  (in  Upper  Egypt)  in  April.     It  is  not  necessary  to

aid  its  fecundation  by  bringing  the  male  flowers  to  the  female  tree ;  as  it  is  found  that  the

pollen  of  the  stamens,  wafted  in  the  air,  sufficiently  impregnates  the  ovaries.     The  wood  is

much  more  solid  than  that  of  the  date-palm,  and  will  even  bear  to  be  cut  into  planks,  of

which  the  doors  are  made  in  many  villages  of  Upper  Egypt.a

The  Carob-Tree  we  are  induced  to  notice  this  month,  from  the  manner  in  which  it  is  men-
tioned  by  Wilde   (on   the   15th),

showing  that  its  fruit  had  already  S^lfeifea

been  perfected.    Being  in  the  plain

near  Mount  Carmel,  this  traveller

noticed  several  splendid  specimens

of  the  carob-tree.b     The  husks,  or

legumes,   were    scattered    on    the

ground,   where    some    cattle    had

been  eating  them.    They  reminded

him    of   the    prodigal    son,    who

"  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly

with  the  husks  that  the  swine  did

eat."      The    expressed    juice   and

also  the  pulp  of  the  fruit  is  much

esteemed  in  the  East.      This  tree

has  had  the  name  of   St.  John's

Bread   and  the  Locust-tree,  from

an  unquestionably  erroneous  notion,

however  taken  up,  that  it  furnished

the  Baptist  with  his    food  in  the

wilderness.     The  tree  is  an  evergreen,  and  grows  to  a  considerable  size,  affording  in  its  season

small  flowers,  of  a  dark  purple  colour,  succeeded  by  a  four-cornered,  smooth,  fleshy,  and

many-celled   legume,  of  a  sweetish   taste,  the  shells  of  which,  if  not  the  whole   legume,

probably  formed  the  husks  which,  although  the  food  of  swine,  were  viewed  with  desire  by

the  hungry  prodigal,  in  whose  father's  house  there  were  many  hired  servants.

The  Jig -tree  blossom  this  month,  and
frequently  while  the  winter-fig  is  still  on
the  tree.  Shaw c  observes  that  the  fig-
tree  does  not  properly  blossom,  or  send
out  flowers,  as  we  render  the  Hebrew
word  ni9/1  tiphrach  in  Hah.  iii.  17-
They  may  rather  be  said  to  shoot  out
their  fruit,  which  they  do  like  so  many
buttons,  with  their  flowers,  imperfect  as
they  are,  inclosed  within  them.  This
shooting  out  of  the  fig-tree  was  consi-
dered by  the  old  Jews  as  a  sign  that
"  summer  was  nigh  at  hand."d  As  it
was  about  the  end  of  this  month,  or  in
the  early  part  of  the  next,  that  our  Sa-
viour, at  the  time  of  the  Passover,  went
to  a  fig-tree  expecting  to  find  fruit  thereon,
but  finding  leaves  only,  laid  his  ban  upon
it  f  it  may  be  proper  to  remind  the  reader
that  the  fruit  appears  before  the  leaves,  and

■  The  best  account  of  the  Doum-palm  which  we  have  met  with  is  M.  Delisle's  '  Description  du  Palmier  Doum,'  from  which
the  above  facts  relating  to  it  are  taken.

b  CeratoniaSiliqua.  c  Vol.  i.  p  265.  '»  Luke  xxi.  29,  30.  *  Mark  xi.  12— 14.

2g2

SiSS^

[Fig-tree.]

ccxxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VI.

that  to  see  a  tree  in  leaf,  while  the  season  for  gathering  the  Jigs  as  ripe  had  not  yet  arrived,
rendered  it  a  reasonable  expectation  to  find  fruit  on  it ;  and  this  it  must  have  had,  if  it  had
not  been  barren.  It  is  well  known,  even  in  this  country,  where  the  natural  habits  of  the  tree
are  studied  to  disadvantage,  that  if  our  common  fig-trees  have  no  young  fruit  on  them  in
March  or  April,  they  can  produce  none  that  year.  The  fact  is,  that  the  tree  in  its  native
climes  affords  three  crops  of  figs,  which  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish : — First,  there  is  the
boccore  or  early  Jig,  called  in  Scripture  the  Jirst  ripe  Jig.3-  This  is  far  from  being  ripe
at  the  end  of  March,  for  its  time  of  ripeness  is  not  until  the  middle  of  June.  Hence  it
was  not  the  time  of  ripe  Jigs.  "  However,"  says  Shaw,  "  it  frequently  happens  in  Barbary,
and  we  need  not  doubt  of  the  like  in  this  hotter  climate,  that  according  to  the  quality
of  the  preceding  season,  some  of  the  more  forward  and  vigorous  trees  will  yield  a  few  ripe
figs  six  weeks  or  more  before  the  full  season."  And  he  might  have  gone  farther  than  this,
for  in  May  they  have  at  Naples  figs  brought  from  the  Levant,  and  called  fici  di  Pascha,
"  Easter  figs,"  and  which,  from  the  time  at  which  they  reach  that  place,  must  have  been  ripe
on  the  tree,  as  the  name  imports,  about  the  time  of  the  Passover.  Shaw  goes  on  to  report  that
'  when  the  boccore  draws  nearer  to  perfection,  then  the  kermouse,  the  summer  fig,  or  carica
(the  same  that  are  preserved)  begin  to  be  formed,  although  they  rarely  ripen  before  August,
at  which  time  there  appears  a  third  crop,  or  the  winter  fig,  as  we  may  call  it.  This  is  usually
of  a  much  longer  shape  and  darker  complexion  than  the  kermouse,  hanging  and  ripening  upon
the  tree  even  after  the  leaves  are  shed  ;  and  provided  the  winter  proves  mild  and  temperate,  is
gathered  as  a  delicious  morsel  in  the  spring."  From  this  statement  it  appears  that  the  figs  of
any  two  crops  may  be  seen  on  the  tree  at  once,  the  ripe  or  ripening  fruit  of  the  present  crop,
and  the  young  fruit  of  that  which  is  to  succeed ;  and  since  the  fruit  of  these  prolific  trees  always
precede  the  leaves,  any  one,  who,  at  this  time  of  the  year  should  see  a  fig-tree  in  full  vigour
of  leaf,  would  be  justified  in  expecting  to  find  some  forward  boccores,  if  not  some  winter  figs
likewise,  upon  it.     The  fig-tree  will  require  some  further  notice  under  a  future  month.

Lord  Lindsay ,b  travelling  in  the  middle  of  this  month  in  the  valleys  of  Sinai,  remarks : —
'  The  rattam,  a  species  of  broom,  bearing  a  white  flower  delicately  streaked  with  purple,
afforded  me  frequent  shelter  from  the  sun  while  in  advance  of  the  caravan."  This  rattam  is
the  white  single-seeded  broom,c  and  the  native  word  is  the  same  as  that  Hebrew  word  which
is  translated  "  juniper  "  in  our  version  of  the  Bible.d  Celsus,e  with  good  reason,  conceives
that  a  species  of  broom  is  intended ;  and  if  so,  this  is,  without  doubt,  the  precise  species.  It
is  a  remarkable,  because  undesigned,  coincidence,  that  it  was  in  travelling  to  the  very  same
Mount  of  Horeb  that  the  prophet  Elijah  rested,  as  did  Lord  Lindsay,  under  a  rattam-shrub.
Some  refer  the  native  name  not  to  this  species,  but  to  the  Spanish  broom  ;f  but  as  the  Arabs
do  not  so  nicely  as  ourselves  discriminate  the  varieties  of  plants  in  which  they  have  no  parti-
cular interest,  it  is  probable  that  they  do,  and  that  the  ancient  Hebrews  did,  apply  the  word
as  a  generic  name  answering  to  broom,  without  distinguishing  species  or  varieties.  However,
Palestine  possesses  both  the  species  which  have  been  named,  and  also  the  thorny  broom,?  which
grows  chiefly  about  the  mountains  of  Lebanon,  and  the  sand-broom,h  which  is  common  to  the
Arabian  deserts  and  southern  Palestine.

In  the  same  journey  towards  Sinai  Lord  Lindsay  noticed  "  two  other  shrubs,  the  sellah,
thorny,  with  leaves  of  the  lightest  tint  of  green,  bearing  a  very  pretty  flower,  of  a  light  pink
colour,  beautifully  streaked  inside, — and  the  ooraga,  deep  green,  with  hairy  pods,  ending  each
in  a  thorn,  instead  of  leaves,  and  bearing  a  small  pink  flower,  five  petals  with  yellow  stamina,
delighted  me  with  their  simple  beauty."  The  first  of  these  is  a  large  species  of  bunias ;  of
the  other  we  know  not  the  botanical  synonyme,  and  suspect  that  the  native  name  is  not
rightly  spelt.

The  Vine. — This  month  the  dead  branches  are  cut  away  from  the  vines.1

0  j"1"V"JT  bahiiah,  Jer.  xxiv.  2 ;  Hos.  is.  10  ;  the  name  is  essentially  the  same  that  it  now  hears.

*>  Vol.  i.  2ri3.  «  Spartium  monospermum,  for  which  identification  the  authority  is  Deliile's  '  Florae  jEgyptiacae.

d  1  Kings  xix.  4.  5  ,  Job  xxx.  4 ;  Psalm  cxx.  4.  e  ■  Hierobotanicon,'  i.  247.

Spartium  junceum.  8  Spartium  spiwsum.  h  Spartium  arenosum.  '  Brocard,  ji.  332.

Chap.  VII]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MARCH.  ccxxix

Grain. — In  Judea  and  Samaria  corn  ripens  sooner  than  in  the  northern  parts  of  Palestine  ;
and  in  the  plains  of  the  Jordan  all  kinds  of  grain  as  well  as  fruits  are  more  forward   than  in
any  other  parts  of  the  land.       Everything  is  ripe  in  the  plain  off  Jericho  a  fortnight  sooner
than  at  Jerusalem. a     Shaw  b  goes  farther,  and  intimates  that  corn  is  as  forward  on  the  plain
of  Jericho  as  it  is  in  even  the  plain  of  Acre  a  fortnight  after.     This  is  a  valuable  fact,  as  being
almost  the  only  one  we  possess  for  a  comparative  estimate  of  the  plains  of  the  sea  and  of  the
river.     About  the  middle   of  the  month  (15th)  Wilde c  observed,  in  the  plain  of  the  coast,
between  Jaffa  and  Ramla,  that  the  corn  (wheat)  was  about  a  foot  high,  and  looked  most
luxuriant.     Various  other  travellers  this  month  notice  corn  as  being  in  a  very  forward  state,
without  describing  the  precise  condition  of  its  progress.     In  the  comparatively  high  country
about  Adjeloon  in  Gilead,  the  young  corn  had  only  begun  to  appear  above  ground  in  the  early
part  (8th)  of  March.     According  to  Niebuhrd  barley  is  ripe  about  Jerusalem  at  the  end  of
this  month,  while  that  of  the  later  crop  has  only  lately  been  sown.     At  Damascus  (on  the
14th)  Skinner  e  notices  that  the  plain  was  sown  all  over  with  barley ;  and  adds  that  there  the
grain  is  kept  for  some  time  under  water  as  rice  is,  and  low  embankments  of  mud  divide  the
plots,  which  receive  their  allowance  of  water  alternately.     This  and  other  processes  of  irriga-
tion will  shortly  receive  from  us  the  notice  and  illustration  they  require.     Buckingham f  (on
the  16th)  noticed  persons  engaged  in  ploughing  in  the  Haouran  for  the  purpose  of  sowing
corn;    and  to  impress  upon  the  mind  of  the  reader  the  connection  in  such   simultaneous
notices  of  ploughing,  sowing,  and  ripe  corn,  his  attention  should  be  recalled  to  the  general
statements  which   have  already  been   given  in  this  matter  from  Russell  and  Volney.     To
which  we  will  here  add  the  conclusive  authority  of  the  Jewish  writers  themselves,  who  state
that  wheat  and  spelt,  "  the  lateward  seed,"  which  lie  long  in  the  earth,  and  do  not  ripen  soon,
were  sown  from  the  middle  of  Tizri  to  the  middle  of  Chisleu,  that  is,  in  October,  November,
and  December.     But  "  the  early  seed,"  the  barley  which  soon  ripens,  was  sown  in  the  months
Shebat  and  Adar,  or  in  January  (part),  February,  and  March  (part).     This  might,  at  the
first  view,  seem  to  contradict  the  statement  of  Volney,  or  at  least  might  intimate  that  the
present  practice  is  different  from  that  which  was  anciently  followed.      And  the  liability  of
this  inference  would  show  the  danger  of  trusting  to  isolated  passages ;    for  on  closer  inquiry,
we  shall  learn,  with  respect  to  barley,  that  it  was  not  only  thus  sown  in  late  winter  and  early
spring,  but  also,  like  wheat,  in  late  autumn  and  early  winter, — the  operation  of  sowing  being,
in  fact,  only  suspended  in  the  very  depth  of  winter,  and  resumed  again  as  soon  as  the  severity
of  that  season  has  subsided.     That  barley  was  sown  early  in  November,  and  again  in  spring  by
those  who  thought  proper,  is,  in  another  place,?  affirmed  by  the  very  same  authority  from  which
the  preceding  statement  is  adduced.     Thus,  therefore,  excepting  a  short   interval  of  dead
winter,  the  times  of  sowing,  taking  wheat  and  barley  together,  may  be  said  to  extend  over
half  the  year,  namely,  from  the  latter  end  of  September  to  the  early  part  of  March ;  and,  by
consequence,  the  time  of  harvest  extended  over  the  other  six  months;  for,  from  the  difference
of  localities,  and  of  times  of  sowing,  the  barley-harvest  commenced  in  some  places  as  early  as
March,  while  in  other  places  the  wheat-harvest  was  not  over  till  October.1'     With  respect  to
barley,  in  particular,  it  may  hence  be  said  that  the  Hebrews  had  two  crops,  one  sown  in  the
autumn,  and  the  other  in  spring,  as  is  still  the  case  in  the  same  country  and  in  the  same
parts  of  southern  Europe.     It  does  not  appear  that  the  seed  sown  in  the  former  season  was
generally  returned  to  the  garner  sooner  than  that  sown  in  the  beginning  of  the  latter  season ;
for  it  is  clear  that  the  Jews  expected  to  be  able  to  obtain  the  Paschal  first-fruits  of  barley
harvest  from  seed  sown  only  seventy  days  before  that  festival.1     This,  to  some  of  our  readers,
may  seem  a  prodigiously  rapid  growth,  but  in  our  own  agriculture  there  are  sorts  of  barley  k
which  become  ripe  in  less  time  than  this,  even  in  nine  weeks  after  being  sown.

Esculent   Vegetables. — It  appears    that,  to  a  considerable    extent,  the  products,  and
seasons  for  them,  in  Algiers  and  Tunis,  correspond  to  those  of  Palestine;   and  incidental

a  '  Peregrinatio,' 98  V>  Vol.ii.p.  137.  c  Vol.  ii.  177-  d  Beschreibung  von  Arabien,  p.  160.

e  Vol.  i.  p.  320.  f  Arab  Tribes,  p.  226.  S  T.  Bab.  Berach.  f'ol.  18—2.

h  Lightfoot,  Heb.  and  Talm.  Exercit.  upon  St.  Matt.  xii.  1.  '  Menncoth,  fol.  85,  i.  k  As  the  rath-ripe  sort.

ccxxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

corroborations  show  that  we  shall  not  err  in  the  few  occasional  illustrations  which,  in  the
absence  of  more  direct  information,  we  may  occasionally  seek  from  those  countries.  These
will  be  very  few.  From  this  source,  then,  it  would  seem,  that  peas  blossom  early  in  March.
At  the  same  time  beans  are  usually  full-podded,  and  continue  to  the  end  of  spring. a  Cor-
respondingly, Archbishop  Baldric  b  states  that  new  beans  are  gathered  towards  the  end  of  this
month  at  Tripoli;  and  an  anonymous  writer  in  the  '  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos '  c  mentions  his
having  eaten  them  at  Acre  towards  the  end  of  this  month.  Celery  d  sown  in  July  is  now  in  a
condition  to  be  gathered,*5  and  the  cauliflower  has  reached  its  full  size  and  perfection.  We
should  not  like,  without  distinct  authority,  to  apply  to  Palestine  Shaw's  statement/  that  in
northern  Africa  he  had  seen  several  cauliflowers,  very  white,  solid,  and  compact,  that  measured
a  yard  or  more  in  circumference.

Plants. — We  shall  here  set  down  the  names  of  such  plants  as,  being  noticed  by  travellers
this  month,  may  be  supposed  to  be  then  in  their  most  nourishing  condition.  But  they  are,
for  the  most  part,  named  without  reference  to  their  precise  state,  as  to  bloom  or  fruit,  and  we
have  not  deemed  it  proper  to  supply  the  omission  by  a  reference  to  their  periods  in  other
countries.  But,  from  their  attracting  special  notice  in  this  month,  we  presume  that  a  large
proportion  of  them  were  in  bloom  : —

In  the  beginning  of  the  month  Shaw&  took  notice,  on  the  mountains  of  Quarantania,  of
yellow  poley,  thyme,  sage,  and  rosemary.  In  a  preceding  page  (142)  he  ascribes  these  and
"  other  aromatic  plants  of  the  like  nature  "  to  the  mountains  of  Judea.  We  may,  therefore,
mention  that,  together  with  these,  Mariti11  ascribes  rue,  lavender,  hyssop,  and  parsley,  to
Mount  Carmel.  Of  the  plants  thus  named,  rue  is  of  some  interest  from  the  notice  taken  of
it  in  Scripture.1  It  grows  spontaneously  in  Palestine,k  particularly  on  or  about  mountains.
Hasselquist l  saw  it  on  Mount  Tabor.  The  species  seems  to  be  the  common  one.1"  One
hardly  knows  what  to  make  of  the  story  told  by  Josephus  n  of  a  wonderful  sort  of  rue  that
grew  within  the  castle-palace  of  Machserus,  built  by  Herod,  and  which  was  not  inferior  to  a
fig-tree  in  height  and  thickness,  and  which  had  remained  there  ever  since  the  time  of  Herod.
There  are  certainly  some  species  of  rue  which  grow  to  a  much  larger  size  than  the  common
sort,  but  none  to  explain  this  statement.  The  hyssop,  which  has  been  named,  is  doubtless
the  common  sort,0  which  is  said  to  grow  abundantly  in  the  mountains  around  Jerusalem.
But  whether  it  is  the  same  plant  which  is  so  often  mentioned  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  has
much  been  questioned,  and  must  ever  remain  doubtful.?  The  hyssop  (ezob)  mentioned  in  the
sacred  books  was  much  used  under  the  law  as  a  sprinkler  in  the  rites  of  purification ;  and
Solomon,  in  his  lost  work  on  botany,  is  said  to  have  described  plants  from  "  the  cedar  of
Lebanon  to  the  hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  the  wall."0-  The  common  hyssop  is  a  shrubby
plant,  growing  to  about  eighteen  inches  high,  and  has  an  aromatic  smell  and  warm  bitterish
taste.     Its  flowers  are  blue,  varying  to  white  and  red.

Also,  in  the  early  part  of  this  month,  Pococke  r  took  notice,  near  Rama,  of  the  artichoke,
fennel,  and  sand- thistle,  besides  anemones  and  tulips,  which  have  been  observed  in  preceding
months.  Of  artichokes,  Morison"  also  took  notice,  about  the  same  time,  about  Mount  Tabor,
and  observes  that,  although  wild,  they  were  to  the  full  as  fine  and  large  as  those  which  were  in
France  cultivated  with  so  much  care  in  gardens.  We  suppose  they  are  the  same  that  Burckhardt
noticed  in  the  same  neighbourhood  later  in  the  year  (June  26th).  "  The  plain  (below  Mount
Tabor)  was  covered  with  the  wild  artichoke,  called  khob  ;  it  bears  a  thorny  violet-coloured
flower,  in  the  shape  of  an  artichoke,  upon  a  stem  five  feet  in  height.'     Fennel  seems  widely

a  Shaw,  i.  256.  b  '  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,'  129.

c  In  the  Memoir,  in  that  useful  collection,  which  bears  the  title  of  Gesta  Francorum  et  aliorum  Hierosolymitanorum .
d  Apium  graveolens.  e  Shaw,  i.  259.  f  Ibid.  B  Vol.  ii.  p.  147.

1>  Tom.  ii.  p.  124.  '  Luke,  xi.  42.  k  Brocard,  92.  1  Page  281.

m  Ruta  graveolens.  n  De  Bello,  \ii.  6.  3.  °  Hyssopus  officinalis.

P  Celsius  has  a  long  and  curious  paper  on  the  subject  in  his  ■  Hierobotanicon,'  pars.  ii.  p.  407 — 448.

  Buckingham,  A.  T.  396,  &c.  k  Monro,  ii.  101.  '  '  Viagge,'  torn.  ii.  p,  117-  .

»  Tom  i.  p.  390.  "  '  Arab  Tribes,'  492.  °  Monro,  ii.  101.  P  Vol.  ii.  p.  201.

'i   Vol.  ii.  p. 409.  'Th.  v.  p.  87.  M  bid.  p.  137.  l  Vol.  ii. p.  135.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— APRIL.

ccxxxv

[Oleabter.     Eloeagnus  orientalis.]

two  species  of  oleasters,  which  have

been     named,    are     distinguished

chiefly  by  the  E.  orientalis  having

sharp    straight     thorns    scattered

variously  over  its  branches,  while

the  other  is   unarmed.     The  leaf

of  the  oriental  species  is  also  twice

as  broad  as  that  of  the  other.     In

stature  and  manner  of'  growth  it

resembles  a  middle  sized  millian.

Schulzea    saw  the  oleaster    laden

with  fruit,  but  he  does  not  say  of

which  species.     The  fruit  of  this

tree  differs  much  in  size  according

to  climate  and  soil,  from  that  of

the  berry  of  the.  barberry  to  that

of  a  plum — of  which  latter  size  were  those  seen  by  our  author  in  the  plain  of  Jericho, —  a

circumstance  which  supports  the  conjecture  of  some  writers  that  the  zacchoum-tree,  noticed

under  the  preceding  month,  may  be  identified  with  the  oleaster.

The  Oleander  flourishes  with  extraordinary  vigour,  and  in  some  instances  grows  to  a  consi-
derable size,  by  all  the  waters  of
Palestine.  The  Jordan,  and  the
streams  which  flow  into  it,  are  in
many  parts  bordered  by  thick
groves  of  the  oleander;  and  when
the  shrub  expands  its  splendid
blossoms  the  effect  is  truly
beautiful.  The  few  travellers
who  love  flowers  (Lord  Lindsay
for  instance)  speak  with  rapture
of  the  glorious  appearance  which
the  groves  of  blooming  oleanders
make  in  this  season,  along  the
streams  and  in  the  lone  valleys  of
Palestine.  It  grows  everywhere
— in  the  valleys  and  by  the  waters
of  Lebanon,  Israel,  Edom,  and

Sinai.     Burckhardt  speaking  of  the  Zerka  Mayn  (not  to  be  confounded  with  the  more  northern

Zerka,  i.  e.  Jabbok)  describes  it  as  flowing  through  a  wood  of  these  trees  (which  the  natives

call  defieh)  which  form  a  canopy  over  the  rivulet,  impenetrable  to  the  meridian  sun.     The  red

flowers  of  these  trees  reflected  in  the  river  gave  it  the  appearance  of  a  bed  of  roses.     The

water  of  the  stream  (which  flows  into  the  Dead   Sea)  has   a  disagreeable  taste,  which  the

traveller  thought  was  probably  occasioned  by  the  quantity  of  dejie  flowers  that  fall  into  it.

This  was  in  the  middle  of  July,  to  which  time  it  appears,  therefore,  that  in  proper  situations

the  oleander  continues  its  blossom.0     The  Arabs  think  the  blossoms  poisonous  to  their  cattle.
The   Nebek   shrub   grows  abundantly  in  the  plain  of  Jericho  (where  it  forms  extensive

thickets),  and  in  other  of  the  warmer  parts  of  Palestine,  as  well  as  throughout  Edom  and  the

Sinai  peninsula.    This  branching  shrub  is  the  Rhamnus  Lotus,  the  true  lotus  of  the  Lolophagi.

The  fruit,  which  formed  so  prominent  an  article  of  diet  to  these  lotus-eaters  of  old,  is  ripe  in

a  Th.  v.p.  86.

b  Burckhardt' s  editor  gives  Solarium  furiusum  as  the  botanical  syuonyme  oidefle,  an  error  which  we  have  inadvertently  tran-
scribed in  some  preceding  page.  That  the  defle  could  not  be  S .  furiusum  is  evident  from  Burckhardt  himself,  who  calls  it  a
tree  or  shrub ;  and  that  it  is  the  oleander  we  have  now  ascertained  beyond  question.

c  ltauwolit,  49,  233 ;  Hasselquist,  147;  Burckhardt,  320,  369,  3/0,  401,  411;  Buckingham,  ii.  108;  Lindsay,  ii.  30,  and
elsewhere.

2  h  2

.-*-<_

[Oleander.     Nerium  oleander.']

CCXXXV1

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

April,  and  is  still,  wherever  it  grows,  as  much  an  article  of  food  as  in  former  days.  The
fruit,  as  growing  on  the  western  verge  of  the  plain  of  Jericho,  is  described  by  Monro,a  as
resembling  in  size  and  appearance  a  Siberian  crab,  in  flavour  a  bad  mellow  apple,  but  it
contains  a  stone  like  that  of  a  cherry.  It  is  a  favourite  food  of  the  Bedouins ;  they  grind  the
dried  fruit  together  with  the  stone,  and  preserve  the  meal,  called  by  them  bsyse,  in  leathern
skins.  It  is  an  excellent  provision  for  journeying  in  the  desert,  for  it  requires  only  the
addition  of  butter-milk  to  make  a  most  nourishing,  agreeable,  and  refreshing  diet.b  Lord
Lindsay0  says  that  they  also  make  it  into  small  cakes  with  water  or  milk.  He  describes  the
fruit,  of  which  he  ate  this  month  in  Sinai,  as  "  delicious."

Although  their  fruit  is  later,  we  may  as  well,  for  the  sake  of  the  connection,  mention  here
two  other  species  of  Rhamnus,  which  grow  very  profusely  in  all  parts  of  Palestine.  These  are
the  R.  paliurus,  or  common  Christ's  Thorn,  and  Rhamnus  spina  Christi,  the  Syrian  Chris-
tian's thorn. — Hasselquist  noticed  the  former  near  Jaffa  in  this  month,  and  Rauwolff  describes
it  as  contributing  to  form  the  hedges  near  Tripoli.*1  This  species  rises  with  a  pliant  shrubby
stalk  to  the  height  of  eight  or  ten  feet,  sending  out  many  weak  and  slender  branches,  garnished
with  pale  green  oval  leaves.  The  greenish  yellow  flowers  are  succeeded  by  curious  broad,
round,  buckler-shaped  seed  vessels,  which  have  borders  like  the  brim  of  a  hat,  so  that  it  has
considerable  resemblance  to  a  head  with  a  broad-brimmed  hat  on — hence  its  French  name
forte  chapeau.  This  Rhamnus  paliurus  is  by  many  supposed  to  be  the  plant  which  supplied
the  crown  of  thorns  which  was  placed  on  our  Saviour's  head ;  and  from  the  commonness  of
this  shrub  in  Palestine,  from  the  pliableness  of  its  thorny  branches,  which  can  be  bent  and
twisted  into  any  shape,  there  is  much  probability  in  this  conclusion.

But  it  is  seen,  by  the  name,  Rhamnus  spina  Christi,  that  the  other  species  contests  this
distinction  with  that  which  has  been  described.  The  one  now  named  has  been  noticed  in
various  parts  of  the  country,  particularly  about  the  mountain  Quarantania  and  the  plain  of
Jericho. e  It  grows  up  in  several  shrubby  stalks,  divided  into  slender  branches  armed  with
straight  spines,  set  by  pairs  at  each  joint.  Its  small  yellow  flowers  are  succeeded  by  a  round
edible  and  pleasant  fruit,  about  the  size  of  the  sloe.

Among  the  low  rocky  mountains  which  back  the  plain  of  Sharon,  Monro f  (on  the  13th)
noticed,  among  a  great  variety  of  shrubs,  the  clethra  arborea,  or  tree  clethra  (which  is  found
in  our  conservatories),  flowering  in  great  vigour.

The  White  Mulberry  offers  its  ripe  fruit  about  the  middle  of  this  months  The  tree  is  men-
tioned in  Scripture11  in  such  a  way  as  to
show  that  it  was  anciently  very  common  in
the  country.  This  is  still  the  case,  and  as
growing  naturally,  or  in  gardens,  it  is
suffered  to  attain  its  proper  size  and  pro-
portions, except  in  those  parts  where  it  is
solely  cultivated  for  the  sake  of  the  food
which  its  leaves  afford  to  the  silk-worm.
The  orientals  generally  have  one  or  more
trees  in  the  large  court-yards  of  their
houses.  In  Arabia  this  is  generally  the
palm-tree  ;  it  is  often  the  mulberry-tree  in
those  parts  of  Palestine  most  favourable  to
its  growth.1  The  mulberry-tree  is  the
source  of  wealth  to  the  whole  country  of
the  Druzes,  by  the  quantities  of  silk
which  it  enables  them  to  produce.
Throughout  the  mountains  of  Lebanon
and    Kesraoun,  and  in    the  plain  below,

a  Vol.  p.  135.

d  Hasselquist,  276 ;  Rauwolff,  21

6  Hasselquist,  165.

[White  Mulberry.     Morus  alba.']

b  Burckhardt's

Syria,'  602.
e  Hasselquist,  129,  2/6.
li  2  Sam.  v.23,  24;  1  Chron.  xiv.  14,  15.

c  Vol.i.  p.  281.

f  Vol.  i.  p.  99.
'  Burckhardt,  91.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— APRIL.  ccxxxvii

the  mulberry-tree  is,  for  this  reason,  most  extensively  cultivated ;  and  as  the  price  of  silk,
the  staple  commodity  of  the  district,  has  doubled  within  the  last  twelve  years,  the  culti-
vation is  increasing,  in  some  places  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other  tree,  and  even  to  the
neglect  of  garden  produce,  which  it  is  found  cheaper  to  purchase  from  places  which  have  not
the  same  inducements  to  forego  the  culture.  Thus  Beirout  derives  its  principal  supply  of
garden  vegetables  from  Sidon,a  to  which  place  the  peasants  of  the  surrounding  country  bring
their  surplus  produce  for  sale;  for  at  Sidon  itself,  much,  although  not  exclusive,  attention  is
paid  to  the  mulberry  culture.b  It  seems  that,  at  least  in  the  plain,  the  Italian  system  of
culture  is  followed.  The  mulberry  plants  are  set  in  rows,  distant  from  each  other  six  or  eight
feet ;  cut  off  at  a  corresponding  height,  and  suffered  to  retain  only  the  fresh  twigs.  Under
this  system  a  given  plot  of  ground  produces  more  foliage  than  one  of  equal  size  in  which
fewer  trees  are  allowed  to  attain  their  natural  dimensions  ;  and  all  the  leaves  can  be  gathered,
which  is  impracticable  when  the  branches  attain  a  certain  growth.  Every  year  in  the  month  of
June  the  trees  are  topped,  having  been  previously  stripped  of  their  foliage,  and  none  but  the  first
fresh  leaves  are  given  to  the  silkworms.  Here  and  there  in  the  plantations,  a  solitary  house
consisting  of  two  rooms,  one  above  another,  occupied  by  the  cultivator,  reminds  a  stranger  of
the  Scriptural  allusion  to  "  a  cottage  in  a  vineyard,"  or  "  a  lodge  in  a  garden  of  cucumbers."
(Isa.  i.  8.)  c

In  the  mountains,  the  inhabitants,  with  great  industry,  construct  terraces  one  over  another,
as  well  to  find  a  series  of  levels  for  their  plantations,  as  to  arrest  the  earth  washed  down  from
above,  and  to  retain  the  water  which  flows  down.  On  these  terraces  (the  general  effect  of
which  is  shown  in  the  engraving  at  the  head  of  this  chapter)  they  cultivate  their  mulberry-trees,
and  whatever  other  produce  engages  their  attention.  The  traveller  will  often  see  then  these
ascending  narrow  slips  planted  not  only  with  mulberries,  but  with  olives,  vines,  and  corn,
while  the  inaccessible  parts  are  covered  with  pines  and  wild  shrubs,  among  which  are  often
found  fine  springs  of  excellent  water,  the  rills  from  which  are  of  great  importance  to  the
terraces  below. d  In  this  district  the  miri,  or  land-tax,  which  is  paid  by  the  peasantry,  is  taken
upon  the  mule-loads  of  mulberry-leaves,  eight  or  ten  trees,  in  common  years,  yielding  one
load.  Burckhardt  states  that  the  peasant  who  lives  by  rearing  silkworms  pays  at  the  rate  of
twenty  or  twenty-five  per  cent,  upon  his  income  ;  while  he  who  lives  by  the  produce  of  his
fields  pays  more  than  fifty  per  cent.  e

The  Terebinth-tree,  which  in  England  does  not  blossom  till  June  or  July,  is  in  flower  at
the  beginning  of  April  in  Palestine. f  Of  the  forest-trees  in  Palestine,  this  is  one  of  the  most
common  ;  and  it  would  seem  to  have  been  regarded  there,  as  in  other  eastern  countries,  with
that  distinction  and  respect  which  the  oak  acquired  in  our  northern  latitude.  It  is  true  that
its  name  does  not  once  occur  in  our  translation  of  the  Bible  ;  but  a  criticism  of  Celsius,  in
his  '  Hierobotanicon,'  in  which  he  has  been  followed  by  most  modern  translators  and  inter-
preters, gives  to  this  tree  many  of  the  passages  in  which  our  translation  names  the  oak,s
which  tree  is  then  restricted  to  the  passages  cited  below.11  And  this  conclusion  is  supported
by  ancient  versions,  and  by  probabilities  and  corroborations,  which  the  reader  who  feels
interest  in  the  question  may  examine  in  Celsius.  The  tree  is  long-lived ;  and  it  is  certain  that
there  were  in  the  country  ancient  terebinths  which  were  renowned  and  venerated  from  their
real  or  supposed  connection  with  Scriptural  incidents  :  thus,  there  was  a  large  and  very  old
terebinth-tree  in  the  valley  of  Mamre  near  Hebron,  which  was  highly  venerated  in  consequence
of  the  belief  that  the  tent  of  Abraham  was  pitched  under  its  boughs,  and  that  beneath  its  shade

a  Elliot,  ii.  224.  b  Buckingham,  '  Arab  Tribes,'  p.  416.  c  Elliot,  ii.  224.

d  Buckingham,  '  Arab  Tribes,'  469.  e  Burckhardt,  169,  188.  f  Sandys,  176.

6   Celsius  thinks  that  the  terebinth-tree  is  indicated  in  all  the  following  passages : — h>k>  oil,  Gen.  xiv.  6  ;  Q>7^*$,  a«7i'm,

Isa.  i.  29;  Q^Sji  a-lim,  Isa.  lvii.  5;  V^V*  ailun,  Josh.  xix.  43;  1  Kings  iv.  9;  VOV>  alon,  translated  "plain"  in  the
following  places  :  Gen.  xii.  6  ;  xiii.18;  xiv.  13;  xviii.  1;  Deut.  xi.  30;  Josh.  xix.  33  ;  Judges  iv.  11;  ix.  6,  37  ;  1  Sam.  x.  3  ;
•"Phi.  a*ah'  renclered  by  "  oak"  in  Gen.  xxxv.  4;  Josh.  xxiv.  26  ;  Jud.  vi.  11,  19 ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  2.  19 ;   xxi.  10  ;  2  Sam.  xviii.

9,10,14;  1  Kings  xiii.  14;  1  Chron.  x.  12;  Isa.  i.  20 ;  vi.  13,  where  it  is  translated  "teil-tree;"  Ezek.  vi.  13;  Hos.  iv.  13,
where  it  is  rendered  "  elms."

h  It  is  considered  that  only  the  word  'JYIV^    alon,  signifes  an  oak,  as  in  the  following    passages: — Gen.  xxxv.  8;    Josh.  xix.
33  ;  Isa.  ii.  13  ;  vi.  13 ;  xliv.  14;   Hosea  iv.  13 ;  Amos  ii.  9  ;  Zech.  xi  2.

CCXXXV111

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

the  three  angels  were  entertained  by
him.  Eusebius,  Jerome,3  and  Sozomen,11
attest  that  this  tree  was  a  place  of  great
concourse  to  pilgrims  from  different
parts,  in  and  before  the  time  of  Con-
stantine,  in  consequence  of  which  a
great  and  celebrated  fair  was  held  at
the  spot  every  year.  And  this  is  per-
haps the  same  tree  which  Josephuse
had  in  view,  when  he  takes  note  of  a
terebinth-tree  near  Hebron,  which,  the
inhabitants  alleged,  had  stood  there
from  the  creation  of  the  world.

The  terebinth  (or  turpentine)  tree  is

Br^-_     an   evergreen    of   moderate    size,    but

[Pistacia  Teiebinthus.]

having  the  top  and  branches  large  in
proportion  to  the  trunk ;  the  leaves
resemble  those  of  the  olive,  but  are
of  a  green  colour  intermixed  with  red
and  purple,  the  foot-stalks  that  bear  them  always  terminate  in  a  single  leaf;  the  flowers
are  of  a  purple  colour,  they  are  like  those  of  the  vine,  and  grow  in  clusters  like  them ;  the
fruit  is  of  the  size  of  juniper  berries,  hanging  in  clusters,  and  each  containing  a  single
seed  of  the  size  of  a  grape-stone;  they  are  of  a  ruddy  purple,  and  remarkably  juicy ;  another
fruit,  or  rather  excrescence,  is  found  on  the  tree,  scattered  among  the  leaves,  of  the  size
of  a  chestnut,  of  a  purple  colour,  variegated  with  green  and  white.  The  people  of  Cyprus
believe  that  this  is  produced  by  the  puncture  of  a  fly :  on  opening  them  they  appear  full
of  worms.d  From  the  trunk  distils  a  valuable  resin,  or  gum,  from  which  the  tree  takes
its  name.  It  is  called  Cyprus  or  Chian  turpentine,  and  is  obtained,  in  July,  by  wound-
ing the  bark  in  several  places,  leaving  a  space  of  about  three  inches  between  the  wounds.
From  these  the  turpentine  is  received  on  stones,  upon  which  it  becomes  so  much  condensed
by  the  coldness  of  the  night  as  to  admit  of  being  scraped  off  with  a  knife,  which  is  always
done  before  sunrise.  It  is  again  liquified  in  the  sun  and  passed  through  a  strainer,  in  order  to
free  it  from  all  extraneous  matters.  The  quantity  produced  is  very  small,  four  large  trees,
sixty  years  old,  only  yielding  two  pounds  nine  ounces  and  six  drachms ;  it  may  be  somewhat
more  in  very  favourable  situations.  In  consequence  of  this,  and  its  superior  qualities,  this
turpentine  is  very  costly,  and  is  often  much  adulterated  with  other  and  inferior  turpentines.

The  Fig  tree. — Shaw  e  remarks  that  in  the  early  part  of  this  month  the  boccores,  or  first
ripe  figs,  were  still  hard,  and  not  larger  than  common  plums.  The  people  have,  however,  a
method  of  making  them  soft  and  palatable  by  steeping  them  in  oil.

The  Vine. — In  the  month  of  April  a  new  shoot,  bearing  fruit,  springs  from  that  branch  of
the  vine  that  was  left  in  March,  and  this  must  also  be  lopped/

Grain. — Buhle's  statement,  under  this  month,  explains  many  apparent  discrepancies  in  the
reports  of  travellers  respecting  the  corn  in  Palestine.  "  The  harvest  falls  out  entirely  accord-
ing to  the  duration  [or  rather  period,  for  it  is  of  irregular  occurrence]  of  the  rainy  season.
After  the  rains  cease,  the  corn  soon  arrives  at  maturity.  Much  also  depends  on  the  time  of
its  being  sown,  which,  as  already  shown,  is  sooner  done,  by  some  than  by  others.  Nor  must
we  omit  that  the  corn  remains  long  in  the  fields  after  it  is  ripe.  The  threshing  of  corn  is
performed  in  the  open  air,  and  in  some  degree  interrupts  the  harvest.  Lastly,  allowance  is  tu
be  made  for  the  temperature  of  the  air,  which  varies  in  different  levels  and  situations."

a  De  loc.  Heb.  fol.  87.
d  Mariti,  i.  209;  ii.  114.

b  Eccles.  Hist.  1.  ii.c.  4,  p.  447.
e  Vol.  ii.  p.  137.

c  De  Bello  Jud.  1.  v.  c.  9,  sect.  7-
f  Hvocard,  332.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— APRIL.  ccxxxix

The  condition  of  the  wheat  is  more  uniform  than  that  of  barley,  seeing  that  it  is  sown  only
in  the  autumn  and  early  winter,  whereas  barley  is  sown  also  in  the  latter  end  of  winter  and
early  spring.  Hence  two  fields  of  this  grain  will  often  be  found  in  a  very  different  condition  in
the  very  same  neighbourhood.  Thus  Richardson,  in  the  very  south  country  between  El  Arish
and  Gaza,  saw,  on  the  5th,  barley  in  the  leaf,  much  less  forward,  as  he  remarks,  than  in
Egypt ;  but  the  day  after,  still  between  the  same  two  towns,  he  beheld  barley  in  the  ear  and
nearly  ripe.3-  In  the  plain  of  Jericho  it  is  quite  ripe,  according  to  Mariti,  in  the  beginning
of  April,  and  almost  everywhere  is  at  that  time  in  full  ear.b  Even  in  the  north,  between
Beirout  and  Tripoli,  barley  is  fully  ripe  by  the  21st.c  In  fact,  by  a  comparison  of  different
statements,  it  appears  that  in  this  country,  as  in  others  of  the  same  latitude  and  analogous
climate,  the  greater  part  of  the  barley  becomes  perfectly  ripe  in  the  course  of  this  month,  in
which  the  barley-harvest  commences  early,  and  a  large  proportion  of  it  is  got  in  before  the
month  ends.d  Or,  in  other  words,  the  barley-harvest  may  be  considered  at  its  height  towards
the  end  of  the  month,  having  commenced  before  the  middle  of  it,  and  being  continued  into  the
next  month.

Wheat  is  in  a  less  advanced  state  than  barley,  but  it  begins  to  be  reaped  towards  the  end  of
April,6  and  continues  through  May  into  June.  Although,  therefore,  April  might  be  called  the
month  of  barley-harvest,  May  may  be  considered  the  great  harvest-month,  seeing  that  the
barley-harvest  extends  into  it,  and  the  wheat-harvest  reaches  its  height.  To  May,  therefore,
we  shall  refer  such  observations  as  we  have  to  make  on  the  agricultural  operations  connected
with  the  harvest  season.

The  growing  corn,  in  various  states  of  progress,  gives  to  the  cultivated  districts  a  strikingly
fine  appearance  ;  for  the  corn-land  being  undivided  by  separate  enclosures,  and  unbroken  by
hedge-rows,  a  whole  plain  or  valley  is,  under  the  most  gentle  breeze,  agitated  from  end  to  end
by  the  peaceful  undulations  of  the  waving  grain.

Esculent  Vegetables. — Russell  says  that  (at  Aleppo)  in  April  and  May  come  in  lettuce/
beans,°  peas,h  artichoke,1  purslain,k  and  two  species  of  cucumber,1  all  of  which  continue  in
season  till  July.  Correspondingly,  Hasselquist m  ate  lettuce  at  Jerusalem  on  the  23rd.  And
with  respect  to  beans,  Burckhardt n  states  that  the  bean-harvest  takes  place  at  the  end  of  April
in  the  Haouran,  where  vast  tracts  are  sown  with  this  legume,  and  the  product  serves  as  food  for
cows  and  sheep.  The  bean-harvest  seems  to  be  there  and  everywhere  the  first  of  the  year ;
and  this  being  at  the  end  of  April,  it  becomes  necessary  to  note  that  the  seasons  are  somewhat
later  in  the  high  plain  of  the  Haouran  than  in  many  other  parts  of  the  country.

In  the  plain  of  Sharon,  Monro,0  on  the  12th,  crossed  a  small  plot  of  ground  which  had  been
carelessly  turned  over  with  the  plough,  and  sown  with  melons.  The  husbandman  had  gone
his  way  to  a  distance,  and  would  not  return  until  he  should  calculate  that  the  time  of  harvest
had  arrived.     The  plants  were  just  peeping  above  the  surface.

The  sugar-cane  has  long  been  cultivated  to  some  small  extent  in  Palestine.  "  The  sweet
cane"  of  the  sacred  books  is,  however,  not  to  be  understood  of  the  sugar-cane,  but  of  an  aromatic
cane,  perhaps  the  calamus  aromaticus.  The  constant  and  exclusive  mention  of  "  honey  "  in
Scripture  would  indeed  suffice  to  intimate  that  sugar  was  wanting.  It  must  have  come  into
culture,  however,  some  time  after  the  Captivity ;  for  an  article  in  the  Mishna  enumerates
certain  products  which  the  Jews  were  forbidden  to  sell  to  the  polytheists,  lest  they  should  offer
them  to  their  idols,  and  among  these  is  the  sugar-cane.?  It  has  not  been  much  noticed  by
travellers,  only  just  enough  to  apprise  us  of  its  continued  culture  in  that  country.  Abulfedai
says  that  it  was  cultivated  in  his  time  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tripoli ;  Benjamin  of  Tudela  r

a  Richardson,  ii.  192,  193,  197.  b  Shaw,  ii.  137-  c  Buckingham,  ■  Arab  Tribes,'  p.  451.

d  See  Koite,  187.  145,  432  ;  Egmont  and  Hey  man,  i.  335  ;  Ecklin,  p.  16  ;   Cotovic,  93  ;  Radzivil,  159,  4i  1 .

e  Bp.  Baldric  in  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,  129;  confirmed  by  the  author  of  the  Gesta  Francurum,  t$c.,  in  the  same  work.

f  Lactuca  satiua.  S  Vicia  faba.  >>  Pisum  sativum.  i  Cynara  sculymus.

k  Portulaca  olcracea.  1  Cucumis  sativus .  ln  Page  154.  n  '  Syria,' 296.

°  Vol.  i.  p.  77.  P  Mishna,  tit.  Avoda-sara,  c.  i.  §  6.  1  •  Tab.  Syria?,'  p.  102.

r  '  Itinerarium,'  cap.  vii.

ccxl  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

noticed  it  in  the  environs  of  Tyre;  its  presence  is  noticed  by  Brocard a  and  Rheinfelder.b
And  Buckingham,0  early  in  January,  noticed,  not  far  from  Tyre,  sugar-canes  already  two  or
three  feet  above  the  ground.  We  notice  the  subject  this  month  because  both  in  Egypt  d  and
Cyprus  e  the  cuttings  are  planted  either  at  the  latter  end  of  March  or  in  the  beginning  of
April.  The  only  traveller  who  has  taken  any  notice  of  the  process  followed  in  Palestine  is  Rau-
wolff,  who  observes  that  the  plants  are  not  grown  from  seeds,  neither  are  they  propagated  by
the  roots,  but  by  the  canes  themselves.  The  cultivator  lays  into  the  ground  some  green  pieces
two  or  three  joints  long ;  and,  that  they  may  grow  the  sooner,  rather  large  holes  are  bored  in
between  the  joints;  when  they  begin  to  grow  they  sprout  out  in  the  joints,  and  grow  up  into
large  canes.  These  canes,  he  says,  "  are  as  high  and  big  as  our  canes,  and  not  much  differing
from  them,  but  within,  and  down  towards  the  root,  where  they  are  best,  they  are  full  of  this
pleasant  juice ;  wherefore  the  Turks  and  Arabs  (who  are  passionately  fond  of  sweetmeats)
buy  a  great  quantity  of  them,  which  it  gives  them  great  pleasure  to  chew  and  eat.  They  strip
off  the  long  leaves,  and  cut  away  the  tasteless  parts,  retaining  only  what  is  juicy  and  good,
which  is  about  two  feet  in  length.  Of  the  canes  thus  prepared,  they  carry  many  along  with
them  through  the  streets,  and  cut  off  one  piece  after  another,  peel  them,  and  so  chew  and  eat
them  openly,  everywhere  in  the  streets,  without  shame.  The  parts  which  are  eaten  are  very
tender,  and  feel  as  mellow  between  the  teeth  as  sugar  itself."  f  Some  small  quantities  of
sugar  were  then,  and  we  believe  are  now,  made ;  but  it  is  for  the  use  of  them  thus  described
that  the  canes  are  cultivated.     The  case  is  the  same  in  Egypt.

Plants. — What  Dr.  Russell  says  of  the  neighbourhood  of  Aleppo  at  this  season  is  strictly
applicable  to  most  of  Palestine.  To  a  lover  of  botany  nothing  can  exceed  the  beauty  of  the
country  about  the  end  of  April  and  the  beginning  of  May.  The  rising  and  waste  grounds  on
all  hands  meet  his  eye,  and  the  corn-fields,  which  are  never  weeded,^  seem  as  if  sown  pur-
posely for  his  entertainment.  The  lion'  s-leaf}1  which  earlier  in  the  season  decorated  the
later-ploughed  lands,  still,  in  some  places,  towers  above  the  ripening  barley,  while  its  bright
yellow  is  finely  contrasted  by  the  gladiolus,  the  deep  azure  of  a  luxuriant  borage,  and  a  beau-
tiful plant  with  a  pale  blue  flower.1

"  Numerous  are  the  pentandria,  tetradynamia,  and  diadelphia  plants  of  humble,  growth,
found  among  the  wheat  and  barley,  or  in  the  wide-extended  fields  of  various  legumes ;  and  it
is  there  the  corn-poppies  are  seen,  of  a  hue  so  vivid  as  to  dazzle  the  eye.

"  The  sloping  sides  and  the  rocky  summits  of  the  low  hills,  as  well  as  the  uncultivated
stony  dales,  by  which  the  hills  are  intersected,  are  not  at  this  time  without  their  peculiar
plants  ;  but  the  botanical  harvest  of  the  former  falls  somewhat  later  in  May."k

In  his  first  edition,  Russell  gives  the  names  of  the  plants  which,  in  the  above  extract  (from
the  second  edition),  are  indicated  by  their  classes  only.

In  availing  ourselves  of  this  list,  we  have  arranged  the  plants  in  the  received  order,  which
is  very  different  from  that  in  which  they  are  placed  by  Russell ;  and  in  some  instances  we
have  exchanged  his  synonymes  for  those  which  are  more  generally  understood  : — Sage  ;l  corn-
sallad  ;m  gladiole  ;n  scabious;0  ladies' bed-straw ;  P  viper's  bugloss  ; i  gromwell;r  comfrey  ; s
bugloss;'  pimpernel;11  yellow-hoary  mullein ;  v  bell-flower  ;w  eryngo;x  flax  ;?  lily-daffodil;
nasturtiums ;  berry-bearing  chick-weed  ;  lychnis  ;z  base-rocket  ;aa  poppies  ;bb  horned-poppy  ;cc

a  Descript.  T.  S.,  316.  b  Hieros.  Bilgevfahrt,  46,  47-  <=  •  Palestine,'  i.  91.

d  *  Agriculture  de  l'Egypie,'  115.  e  Cotovic,  137.  f  Rauwolff,  48,  49.

S  This  is  not  now  the  ease  in  all  parts  of  Syria.     Between  Beirout  and  Tripoli,  in  this  very  month,  Buckingham  observed  the
peasantry  out  weeding  by  himd  in  the  fields,  which  were  as  clean  as  could  be  desired. — '  Arab  Tribes,'  451.
h  Leontice  leontapctalon.  '  Amaryllis  montana.  k  Russell,  ii.  240.  1  Sa hia,  three  species.

m  Valeriana  olituria.  n  Gladiolus  communis.  °  Scabiosa  orientalis.

P  Galium  luteum  ;  G.arvense;  G.  album.  q  Echium  vulgarc ;  E.violaceum.

r  IAthospernum,  arvense ;  L.  dispermum.  8  Two  varieties  of  Sympldtum  orientale.  t.  Lycopsis  vesicaria.

«  Anagallus  arvensis,  and  the  blue-flowered  (flore  cceruleo)  variety.  T  Verbascum  pulverulentnlum.

w  Campanula pentagonia.  x  Eryngium  stellatum.  J  Linum  orientale;  L.  sativum.

z  Fourteen  species.  aa  Reseda  vulgaris.  bb  Puparer  liybridum;  P.  Rhoeas.

cc  Glaucium  luteum;  G.  violaccum  ;  G.  orientale.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— APRIL.

ccxli

larkspurs  ;a  columbine  ;b  iron-wort  ;c  ground-pine  ;d  betony  ;c  scull-cap  ;f  Moldavian  balm  ;S
fig-wort  ;h  delphinium;  toad-flax;1  mad-wort ;k  pepper-wort;1  common  whitlow-grass  ;m
rocket;11  hedge-mustard;0  wild-mustard ;  p  common  kidney-vetch  ;  °-  milk-vetch1  and  four
other  species  of  vetch  (vicia)  ; s  rest-harrow ; '  trefoils ;  u  sanfoin  (St.  Foine)  ; v  bird's-foot ;  w
horse-shoe-vetch  ;  *  goat's-rue ; y  bird's-foot-trefoil ; z  moon-trefoil  ;aa  knapweed  ;bb  satyrion  ;cc
birth-wort.dd

We  also  learn  from  Dr.  Russell  that  among  the  rank  herbage  in  the  gardens  are  found  at
this  season — borage ;ee  German  mad-wort;  hound's-tongue ;ff  broom  rape ;  mint;&s  rush;hh
balm ;"  thyme  ;  vervain  ;kk  dittander ; u  common  and  fig-leaved  hollyhocks ;  mm  cinquefoil ;
lily ;  burdock,  but  in  smaller  quantity.

ThevenotPP  travelling  towards  the  latter  end  of  this  month,  from  Damascus  to  Aleppo,  jour-
neyed over  an  extensive  plain  covered  with  heath  and  "  Abrotanurn  foemina."^  On  a  following
day  he  passed  over  another  great  plain,  "  full  of  daffodils,  crowfoots,  wind-flowers,  willow-
herbs,  hyssop,  dragon-wort,  and  several  other  flowers,  wdiich,  by  their  variety  and  multitude,
yielded  a  very  lovely  prospect."

In  the  rich  pasture-land  of  the  plain  of  Sharon,  Mr.  Monro  tells  us  (on  the  10th)  that
"The white  clover  springs  spontaneously,  and
among  a  variety  of  shrubs  and  flowers  were  a
few  dwarf-tulips.  I  observed  nothing  bearing
the  appearance  of  what  we  call  a  rose ;  and
unless  '  the  rose  of  Sharon '  is  the  cisius
roseus"  of  Linnaeus,  which  grows  abun-
dantly, I  know  not  what  it  may  be."  Mr.
Wilde,  travelling  over  the  same  plain  some-
what earlier,  says,  "  Much  has  been  written,
and  many  opinions  expressed,  regarding  '  the
rose  of  Sharon.'  I  agree  with  those  authors
who  state  that  it  is  not  a  rose,  but  a  cistus,
white  or  red,  with  which  this  vale  in  parti-
cular and  other  parts  of  Judea  abound. "SB
This  procumbent  species  of  cistus  is  held  by
some  to  be  only  a  variety  of  cistus  helian-
themum,"  which  is  better  known  in  England
than  the  cistus  roseus :  this  last  was,  how-
ever, cultivated  in  the  botanic  garden  at
Chelsea  so  long  back  as  1723,  from  seeds
sent  from  Smyrna  by  Dr.  Sherard.

Lavender  is  noticed  by  Mr.  Monro""  among
the  plants  with  which  the  plain  of  Sharon  is

[Cistus  roseus.]

a  Delphinum  segetum;  D.  arvense-  b  Aquileyia  sylvestris-

c  Sideritis  montana  ;  S.  romana  ;  S.  lanata.  d  Teur.rium  chamccpytis.  e  Betonica  orientals.

f  Scutellaria  orientalis.  S  Dracocephulum  Moldavica.  lj  Scrophularia  orientahs.

I  Antirrhinum  pelt sserianum;  A.  Halepense ;  A.  calycinum.  k  Alyssum  minimum ;  A.  campestre ;  A.  strigosum.

I  Lepidium  perfoliatum;  L.  sativum;  L.  I ati folium.  ln  Draba  verna.
n  Eruca  Halapensis ;  E.latifolia.                                                     °  Erysimum  officinale;  E.  repandum.

V  Sinapis  ai-vensis :  there  are  also  S.  alba  and  S.  Halepensis.  q  Anthyllis  vulncraria.

r  Astragalus,  several  species.  s  Vicia  segetum;  V .  orientalis  ;  V.  sylvestris ;  V.  augustifolia.

t  Ononis  antiquorum ;  O.cherleri;  0.  natrix ;  O.pubescens.

»  Several  species  not  very  clearly  distinguished.  T  Hedysarum  onobryches.

w  Ornithopus  scorpioides.  x  Hippocrepis  unisiliquosa.  7  Galega  vulgaris.

z  Species  not  named;  but  the  Lotus  Arabicus,  and  that  only,  occurs  in  the  classed  list  of  the  second  edition.

aa  Medicago  radiata;   M.  echinata  ;  M.  sutiva;  M.  pulymorpha,  six  varieties.  bb  Centaur ea  scabiosa.

cc  Orchis  colli na.  dd  Arislolochia  maurorum ;  A.  tonga.  ee  Borago  officinalis.

ff  Cynoglossum  creticum.  SS  Mentha  sylvestris ;  M.  augustifolia.

hb  Species  not  named  :  but  those  in  the  classed  list  of  the  second  edition  are  Juncus  acutus ;  J.  tenor ;  J.  bufonis.

»  Melissa  Imrtensis.  kk  Verbena  tenuifolia,  and  another  not  distinguished.

II  Lepidium  perfoliatum ;  L.  sativum;  L.  latifolium.  mm  Althcea  rosea ;  A.ficifolia.
nn  Litium  candidum  :  and  another, purple,  perhaps  L.  Martagon.  °°  Arctium  lappa.

PP  '  Travels,  pt.  ii.  p.  26,27.  1q  Artemisia  abro'anutn,  or  "  southernwood."  rr  "  Rose-flowering  cistus.''

s»  •  Narrative,'  Vol.  ii.  174.  tt  <<  Dwarf  cistus,"  or  "  little  sun-flower."  uu  Vol.  i.  p.  87.

vol.  i.  2  i

ccxlii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

overgrown.  Near  Ramlah,  he  noticed,  among  the  wheat,  many  plants  of  the  Amaryllis  orien-
talis  in  flower,  with  its  round  terminal  head,  thick  set  with  florets. a  In  the  same  neighbour-
hood the  anemone  alpina  grew  abundantly,  and  the  cyclamen  hedercefoliumh  attained  a  size
and  brightness  of  colour  beyond  its  wont  in  Europe.0

MAY.

Weather. — Dr.  Russell  reports  of  the  weather  at  Aleppo,  that  in  May  the  sky  is  some-
times variegated  with  transient  white  clouds,  but  generally  is  quite  serene.  There  are
commonly  a  few  hard  showers  of  rain,  often  accompanied  with  thunder,  and  sometimes
intermixed  with  hail.  The  weather  becomes  very  hot  in  this  month,  especially  in  calms,  or
when  the  wind  is  either  northerly  or  easterly,  but  the  winds  for  the  most  part  are  westerly.
It  is  also  remarked  that,  during  the  whole  summer,  the  westerly  winds  have  great  influence
on  the  weather.  When  they  blow  weakly  the  heat  increases,  but  when  they  cease  it  becomes
extreme.  These  alterations,  however,  of  the  west  wind  are  more  sensibly  felt  by  the  human
body  than  they  are  indicated  by  the  thermometer;  whereas  during  the  north  and  the  east
winds  the  weather  is  not  only  most  oppressively  hot  to  the  senses,  but  the  mercury  also  is
raised  several  degrees.

The  greatest  height  of  the  thermometer  this  month  is  92°,  and  the  least  61° ;  and  the
greatest  difference  in  any  one  day  is  10°.  The  morning  station  of  the  mercury  at  the
beginning  of  the  month  is  70°,  and  as  the  month  advances  it  rises  to  76°  and  80°.  The
difference  in  the  afternoon  increases  gradually  from  6°  to  9°.

For  the  seventeen  first  days  of  this  month  we  continue  to  enjoy  the  advantage  of  the
comparisons  which  Mr.  Turner's  registrations  offer,  and  which,  as  before,  we  collect  and
embody  in  a  tabular  form  : —

Day.

Therm.

Time.

Place.

Day.

Therm.

Time.

Place.

Day.
10

Therm.

Time.

Place.

1

65°

Noon

Jerusalem

4

64°

4  P.M.

Near  Jerusalem

73°

Noon

Jerusalem            •

2

m

H  P.M.

Plain  of  Jericho"1

5

70

Noon

Jerusalem

12

69

lOiP.M.

Jerusalem

—

83

8  P.M.

Plain  of  Jericho

6

64

7  A.M.

Jerusalem"5

13

76

Noon

Jerusalem

3

78

8  A.M.

In  water  of  Dead

7

69

3  P.M.

Jerusalem

14

73

Noon

Jerusalem

Sea

—

71

9  P.M.

Jerusalem1

15

Missed

—

85

Noon

Plain  of  Jericho

8

67

Noon

Jerusalem

16

68

Noon

Jaffa

—

89

2J  P.M.

Plain  of  Jericho

9

63

9  P.M.

Jerusalem

17

66

Noon

Jaffa

This  again  illustrates  the  applicability  of  Dr.  Russell's  statements  respecting  Aleppo  to
Palestine  ;  for  although  the  noted  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  are  greater  in  Palestine,  this  is
not  considerable,  nor  more  than  we  might  expect  from  the  changes  in  the  station  of  Turner's
thermometer,  while  that  of  Dr.  Russell  was  stationary.  The  only  instance  in  which  the
thermometer  rose  above  the  highest  point  at  Aleppo,  was  in  the  proverbially  hot  plain  of
Jericho ;  but  then  this  was  at  the  beginning  of  May,  whereas  doubtless  Russell  obtained  his  92°
towards  the  end  of  that  month  at  Aleppo.

Before  leaving  Jerusalem  Mr.  Turner  was  informed  by  the  monks  of  the  convent  of  St.
Salvador  in  that  city,  that  the  climate  of  Jerusalem  is  seldom  excessively  hot.  The  nights
are  cool,  and  in  Jerusalem,  as  all  over  Syria,  the  dews  at  night  fall  most  copiously.  The
west  wind  is  that  which  most  commonly  blows.  During  Mr.  Turner's  own  stay  there  were
five  days  of  siroc  wind,  and  every  other  day  besides  the  west  wind  blew.e  This  observation
is  valuable  as  respecting  the  general  character  of  the  summer  climate  at  Jerusalem.  But  in
estimating  its  effect,  we  are  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  report  is  rendered  by  persons  who  are
for  the  most  part  natives  of  the  warmest  country  of  Europe  (Spain),  and  who  therefore  use

b  Ivy-leaved  cyclamen.

c  Vol.  i.  p.  99.

a  Vol.  p.  89.

11  This  was  within  the  tent.

e  Later  in  the  day  Mr.  Turner  went  to  Bethlehem,  and  states  that  the  sun  was  burning  hot,  and,  as  it  was  a  siroc  wind,  the
weather  was  insufferably  sultry.    Padre  Manuela  and  the  dragoman  had  prudently  provided  themselves  with  umbrellas,
f  The  siroc  continued,  and  the  heat  was  as  suffocating  as  yesterday,
e  Turner,  ii.  274.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  ccxliii

the  comparative  terms  "  cool  "  and  "  not  excessively  hot,"  in  a  sense  somewhat  different  from
that  in  which  they  would  in  our  colder  climate  be  received.

With  respect  to  the  summer  quarter  generally,  as  at  Aleppo,  Russell  remarks a  that  the
westerly  winds,  predominating  through  this  season,  serve  to  moderate  the  excessive  heats,
which,  were  it  not  for  this  kind  dispensation  of  Providence,  would  render  the  country  in  a
great  measure  uninhabitable ;  considering  the  cloudless  sky,  the  intense  power  of  the  sun,
and  the  reflection  from  the  white  chalky  soil,  and  from  the  stone  walls  of  the  houses.  The
vicissitude  of  the  seasons  is  much  less  irregular  than  in  more  northern  regions ;  and  the  air
is  so  salubrious,  that  from  the  end  of  May  to  the  middle  of  September  it  is  usual  for  the
inhabitants  to  sleep  exposed  on  their  terraces,  under  the  open  canopy  of  heaven,  without  danger
from  damps  or  other  noxious  qualities  of  the  atmosphere.

Lord  Lindsay ,b  whose  statement  refers  from  the  11th  of  this  month  to  the  early  part  of  the
next,  describes  the  weather  generally,  in  the  different  parts  of  Palestine  which  he  then  visited,
as  delightful,  seldom  excessively  hot,  even  at  noon ;  while  the  mornings  and  evenings  were
delicious  indeed.  He  afterwards  extends  this  observation  to  the  Haouran,  remarking  that  the
weather  was  there  sunny,  but  not  too  hot,  with  refreshing  breezes  from  the  west.

Nevertheless  the  hot  Syrian  summer  gives  evidence  that  it  has  commenced,  in  the  occasional
complaints  of  the  various  travellers  cited  below  of  the  excessive  heat  which  they  endured  while
travelling  in  the  day-time,c  or  which  prevented  them  from  travelling  other  than  by  night.
Pococked  describes  the  ground  in  and  bordering  the  plain  of  Esdraelon  as  cleft  and  chapt  by
the  burning  heat.  The  spontaneous  vegetation  of  the  country,  in  the  more  exposed  situations,
also  becomes  parched  and  withered  under  the  increasing  force  of  the  sun's  rays.  Kortee
alleges  that  the  face  of  the  country  is  thus  in  May  rendered  as  barren  as  by  too  sharp  a
winter  with  us.  And  Richardson,f  as  early  as  the  12th,  found  the  vegetation  quite  burnt  up
around  Bysan,  where,  however,  the  heat  was  greater  than  he  had  previously  experienced  in
Palestine.  Shulze  s  and  Hasselquist,11  however,  complain  of  heat  even  on  the  coast,  where
the  reflection  of  the  sun's  rays  from  the  sea  and  the  sands  rendered  it  almost  unbearable;
and  if  this  should  seem  to  contradict  the  testimony  of  other  travellers,  the  reader  may  be
reminded  that  morning  and  evening  the  air  is  refreshed  by  the  breezes  which  blow  from  the
sea.  In  this,  as  in  all  other  months,  for  which  reason  we  shall  not  (in  general  terms)  repeat
the  observation,  the  heat  is  the  greatest  in  the  plain  of  Jericho  and  the  whole  valley  of  the
Jordan.  There,  even  early  in  May,  every  plant  is  already  dried  up,  and  the  whole  country
appears  as  if  in  the  midst  of  summer;  at  the  same  time  that  the  plains  of  the  Haouran  are
covered  with  the  richest  verdure  of  wild  herbage.1

Nevertheless,  the  air  still  is  cool  in  the  more  elevated  parts.  Egmont  and  Heymank  found
the  air  at  Safet  so  pure  and  salubrious,  and  at  the  same  time  so  cool,  that  the  summer  heat,
which  was  already  so  strong  in  the  adjacent  plains,  was  hardly  perceptible  there.  The  snows
of  Lebanon  thaw  rapidly  now,  but  in  the  more  elevated  parts  the  cold  is  still  very  sharp ;  and
there,  in  the  early  part  of  this  month  (7th),  Maundrell  found  the  snow  still  so  hard  frozen  as
to  be  able  to  sustain  the  weight  of  men  and  horses.1  On  the  11th  Burckhardt  found  the
night  so  cold  in  Sinai,  that  the  fire  was  kept  up,  and  the  party  lay  around  it  all  night.  Some
notion  of  the  difference  caused  by  differing  elevation  may  be  formed  from  the  fact  that,  later
in  the  month,  the  same  traveller  found  the  thermometer  often  at  102°,  105°,  and  once  even  at
1 10°,  in  the  plains  of  the  Sinai  peninsula,  whereas  at  the  Convent  of  St.  Catherine  it  never
rose  higher  than  *15°.m

Rains  sometimes  fall  in  the  early  part  of  this  month,  but  from  the  end  of  it  to  September
are  not  known  in  Palestine."  In  Northern  Syria,  and  in  the  mountains  of  Lebanon  and  of
Arabia  Petrsea,  rain  is  more  frequently  mentioned.0     Thevenotf  found  the  sky  sometimes

a  Nat.  Hist.,  vol.  i.  pp.  63,  64.  b  Vol.  ii.  p.  70.

c  Robertas  Monsichus  in  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos;  Schulze  repeatedly,— as  at  Mount  Tabor  on  the  15th,  at  Magdala  on  the  16th,
and  at  Caesarea  on  the  25th ;  Schweigger,  317 ;  Hasselquist,  180.

d  Vol.  ii.  p.  1 14.                               «  Reise,  257.                               f  Travels,  ii.  424.  S  Leitungen,  167,  169.

*  Reise,  134.                                              i  Burckhardt,  275.  k  Travels,  ii.  47.

1  Journey,  236.                                              m  '  Syria,' pp.  537,  571.  nKorte,257;  Schweigger,  280.

°  Burckhardt's  •  Syria,'  and  Buckingham's  '  Arab  Tribes,'  passim.  V  Tome  ii.  p.  51.

2  i  2

ccxliv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

cloudy  with  rain  at  Aleppo,  in  May  and  Jnne,  but  he  adds  that  all  the  natives  appeared
astonished  at  the  circumstance.  Mr.  Buckingham,  travelling  in  the  early  part  of  this  month
(to  the  11th,  when  he  reached  Antioch  from  the  south),  speaks  of  rain  almost  daily,  mostly
in  showers,  but  sometimes  in  continued  torrents.  The  rain  was  brought  by  gales  from  the
south-west.a  What  Burckhardt  statesb  of  the  Sinai  mountains,  is  probably  true  also  of
Lebanon,  that  flying  showers  occur  during  the  summer,  but  are  never  sufficiently  copious  to
produce  torrents.  Safet,  near  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  on  account  of  its  elevated  site,  can  scarcely
be  cited  in  evidence  of  the  general  climate  of  Palestine;  we  would  therefore  exclude  any
general  inference  from  the  fact  that  there  Monro  experienced  heavy  rain  on  the  9th.  On
arriving  there,  he  says,  "  the  rain  had  fallen  in  floods  for  the  two  last  hours,  and  as  we
ascended  through  the  town  the  narrow  streets  seemed  little  better  than  mountain  torrents.
The  water  was  flowing  furiously  down  them,  while  the  old  ladies  were  hoeing  up  drains  upon
the  flat  roofs  of  their  mud-built  abodes,  to  prevent  it  from  soaking  through."0  But,  upon  the
whole,  it  is  to  be  considered  that  the  expectations  of  rain  in  Palestine  are  well-nigh  over  when
the  month  of  May  begins.

Travellers  speak  of  thunder  and  lightning  this  month,  but  more  of  these  notices  refer  to
Lebanon  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  Sinai  on  the  other,  than  to  Palestine.  The  thunder  and
lightning,  often  in  violent  and  successive  peals,  appear  to  occur  most  frequently  on  those
days  in  which  it  rains,  and  sometimes  are  attended  by,  or  alternate  with,  falls  of  hail.  And
here  it  may  be  observed,  after  Russell,4  that  hail  in  Syria  falls  most  commonly  in  the  latter
part  of  spring,  and  the  hail-stones  are  often  of  enormous  size.  This  writer  had  seen  hail-
stones at  Aleppo  two  inches  in  diameter ;  but  sometimes  irregularly  shaped  pieces  are  found
among  them  weighing  about  twenty  drachms.  These  hail-storms  make  terrible  havoc  among
the  windows,  as  likewise  among  the  glazed  frames  which  are  often  employed  in  winter  to  shut
up  the  great  divan  facing  the  court-yard,  by  which  means  it  is  converted  into  a  cheerful
winter  apartment :  in  summer  these  frames  are  removed.  Above  twelve  hundred  panese  of
glass  in  one  seraglio  have  been  broken  in  a  short  hail-storm.  This  is  quite  in  conformity
with  the  various  allusions  to  storms  of  hail,  and  to  hail-stones  of  large  size,  which  the
Scriptures  contain.

This  month  the  sky  and  atmosphere  are  generally  clear.  It  is  cloudy  on  those  days  which
bring  or  threaten  rain ;  and  mists  or  fogs  occur  in  particular  situations,  especially  in  the
morning.  Mount  Tabor  is  sometimes  wholly  covered  by  fogs.f  Schulze,  travelling  (on  the  18th)
from  Tabor  to  Tiberias,  observed  a  dry  mist,  such  as  usually  obscures  the  sun  with  us ;  and
yet  he  neither  observed  smoke,  dust,  vapour,  nor  smell ;  he  learned  from  the  natives  that  this
is  often  observed  when  the  heat  is  excessive. s  On  the  19th  Maundrell  beheld  heavy  clouds
rolling  from  the  tops  of  the  mountains  into  the  valleys  of  Lebanon.11

Russell's  statement  respecting  the  winds  at  Aleppo  applies  very  well  to  Palestine.  It  has
further  been  noticed  that  the  south-west  wind  continues  to  bring  cloudy  weather  and  rain.
Sometimes  gales  arise  very  suddenly,  especially  in  the  evening  after  a  very  hot  day.  Thus
Monro,  when  encamped  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Hermon  (near  Tabor)  after  sunset,  found  the
evening  breeze  fresher,  and  a  sudden  blast  blew  down  his  tent.  The  wind  afterwards  settled
into  a  steady  gale  from  the  south,  and  the  light  fleeting  clouds,  chasing  each  other  across  the
sky,  foreboded  its  continuance.1

Trees  and  Shrubs. — Oleanders,  continuing  still  in  bloom,  are  as  much  noticed  in  this  as
in  the  preceding  month  by  travellers.  Besides  abounding  in  all  the  water-courses  of  the
country,  Madox  noticed  in  this  month  that  fine  oleanders  in  full  bloom  were  growing  all
along  the  borders  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  mostly  in  the  water .k  The  same  observation  was
made  by  Monro.1     The  lake  is  here  richly  margined  with  a  wide  belt  cf  oleanders,  growing  in

»  '  Arab  Tribes,'  505,  519,  543,  552.  b  '  Syria,'  539.

c  *  Summer  Ramble,' ii.  12,  13.  d  Vol.  i.  p.  71.

e   The  panes  in  oriental  windows  are  small,  as  in  our  lattices.    They  are,  however,  set  in  wood,  not  in  lead.

f  Zollam  vel  Zolm  Schlammah,  in  Walch.  g  Leitungeu,  p.  199.  h  Journey,  239.

i  '  Summer  Ramble,' i.  279.  k  '  Excursions,'  ii.  251.  '  Summer  Ramble,' ii.  5.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.

ccxlv

such  luxuriance  as  they  are  never  known  to  do  even  in  the  most  genial  parts  of  Europe ;  they
were  at  this  time  (May  9th)  in  full  flower,  and  when  seen  from  the  rocks  above,  presented  an
unbroken  surface  of  the  brightest  roseate  hue,  and,  imaged  in  the  mirror  of  the  clear  blue  lake,
had  decked  the  scene  with  all  the  glowing  charms  of  nature,  ever  the  fairest  and  most  fasci-
nating on  which  the  eye  can  rest.a

In  the  valley  ofPetra,  inEdom,  Captain  Mangles  took  notice  of"  a  very  beautiful  species
of  aloe,  bearing  a  flower  of  an  orange  hue,  shaded  to  scarlet ;  in  some  instances  it  had  upwards
of  a  hundred  blossoms  in  a  bunch. "b  This  is  the  only  notice  which  we  find  of  any  species  of
aloe  growing  in  or  near  Palestine.  The  word  "  aloes"c  in  our  version  of  the  Scriptures,  is
applied  to  the  resinous  distillation  from  a  foreign  tree,  much  used  anciently  in  embalments,
and  the  "  lign-aloe,''d  more  frequently  mentioned,  is  agreed,  even  by  the  Jewish  writers,  to  be
a  foreign  plant.e

Apricots,  which  are  extensively  cultivated  in  the  orchards  of  Palestine,  begin  this  month
to  yield  ripened  fruits.  From  the  conspicuous  manner  in  which  this  tree  is  mentioned  by
travellers  in  this  country,  the  statement  of  Clarke  with  respect  to  the  apricot  trees  of  Cyprus
seems,  to  a  considerable  extent,  applicable  also  to  Palestine.  He  was  shown  a  beautiful  garden
filled  with  standard  apricot  trees  laden  with  ripe  fruit.f  There  was  one  variety  of  the  apricot,
which  bore  fruit  with  a  smooth  shining  skin,  like  our  common  nectarine.  All  these  trees  in  the
gardens  of  Nicotia  equal  in  size  the  apple  trees  of  our  English  orchards,  and  their  branches  are
supported  by  props,  to  prevent  their  breaking  by  the  load  of  fruit  which  covers  them.s  The  atten-
tion which  is  paid  to  the  culture  of  this  tree  in  Syria  is  indicated  on  approaching  Damascus,
by  the  nurseries  of  apricot  trees,  for  ultimate  transplantation  into  the  gardens  of  that  city.h

Adam's  apples,  or  plantains,  gooseberries,  and  currants,  are .  mentioned  by  Rauwolff  as
cultivated,  in  his  time,  in  the  gardens  of  Aleppo.  In  Russell's  time  none  of  these  were  found
there ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  cherries,  unknown  there  in  the  time  of  Rauwolff,  had  become
common  when  Russell  wrote ;  and  strawberries  had  been  brought  from  Europe,  and  were
cultivated  in  chests  upon  the  terraces.  This  statement  is  valuable,  inasmuch  as  Palestine
cannot  be  supposed  to  have  possessed,  at  any  time,  such  of  these  fruits  as  were  not  known  at
Aleppo.  We  quite  conclude  that  the  ancient  Hebrews  knew  nothing  of  strawberries,  goose-
berries, cherries,  and  currants.

The  common  early  apples  also  ripen  towards  the  end  of  May.1  In  Sinai  orange  trees  are
now  in  blossom,  diffusing  a  fine  perfume.k

From  the  frequency  with  which  the  Arbutus  is  mentioned  by  travellers,  more  particularly
by  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles,  and
by  Lord  Lindsay,  it  would  seem  that
this  shrub  is  very  common,  especially
in  the  hills  and  river-valleys  beyond
Jordan,  but  not  so  in  the  open  plains.
The  species  are  the  common  and  ori-
ental strawberry-trees,1  of  which  the
latter  would  appear  to  be  much  the
commoner.  The  rich  appearance
which  the  former  makes  at  the  latter
end  of  the  year,  when  it  bears  its
fresh  flowers,  together  with  the  fruit
of  the  preceding  year,  in  fine  contrast
with  the  leaves,  is  well  known.  The
latter,  which  is  a  proper  Levantine
shrub,  affords  its  flowers  (which  are
like  those  of  the  other  species)  in  the

feci

[Arbutus  andrachne.]

a  Respecting  oleanders  observed  in  bloom  this  month,  see  also  Irby  and  Mangles,  361,  374,  427;  Lindsay,  ii.  77,  125.

b  Travels,  427-  «  John,  xix.  13.  d  Num.  xxiv.  6 ;  Psalm  xlv.  9  ;  Prov.  vii.  17;  Sol.  Song,  iv.  14.

e  See  the  '  Pictorial  Bible '  on  Psalm  xlv.  9.  This  was  in  June.

S  Clarke,  iv.  62;  see  also  pp.  6,  17,  62.  h  Burckhavdt,  47;  see  also  583;  and  Mariti,  ii.  135.

1  Pococke,  ii.  126.  k  Burckhardt,  578.  1  Arbutus  unedo  and  A.  andrachne.

ccxlvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

months  from  March  to  May  in  Palestine,  when  it  attracts  much  attention,  for  it  grows  to  a  much
larger  size  than  it  attains  in  our  latitudes,  the  trunk  heing  in  some  instances  six  feet  in  circum-
ference. Lord  Lindsay  speaks  of  the  arbutus  as  one  of  the  three  trees  which  principally  give  a
wooded  character  to  the  hills  of  Gilead  and  Bashan.  The  other  two  are  the  oak  and  the  fir.  In
this  hill  country  he  thought  it  possible  to  distinguish  three  races  of  vegetation :  the  uppermost
producing  chiefly  the  prickly  oak  and  the  arbutus ;  the  central,  the  same,  with  the  addition  of
the  fir;  while  in  the  lowermost  the  prickly  and  evergreen  oaks  prevailed.a  The  association
of  these  three  trees  also  forms  the  woodland  scenery  of  southern  Judea,  as  noticed  by  Captain
Mangles,  who  speaks  with  much  satisfaction  of  the  pleasant  appearance  they  gave  to  the
country  about  Hebron — far  more  pleasant,  he  deems,  than  that  of  Jerusalem.b  The  fir  is  the
Scotch  fir.c

As  the  thorns  in  Palestine  seem  to  attract  the  notice  of  travellers  more  in  this  month  than
in  any  other,  and  as  most  of  them  are  now  in  their  most  conspicuous  condition,  they  may  well
be  noticed  in  this  place.  The  great  difference  in  the  Hebrew  words  which  are  all  rendered
by  the  word  "  thorn"  in  our  translation  of  the  Scriptures  has  been  a  subject  of  great  per-
plexity to  those  who  study  the  natural  history  of  the  Bible,  while  it  may  suffice  to  intimate
the  variety  of  the  thorns  which  the  country  affords.  It  is  therefore  useful  for  the  purposes  of
further  inquiry  that  the  noticed  species  which  the  country  actually  produces  should  be  known.
Of  the  proper  thorns,  we  find  but  three  named  species.  These  are, — 1 .  The  common  hawthorn  ;d
2.  The  parsley-leaved  hawthorn  f  and,  3.  The  three-styled  hawthorn/  The  first  of  these  is
too  well  known  to  require  notice.  The  second  has  a  lighter  bark,  with  a  larger  and  paler  leaf;
its  fruit  also  is  larger,  and  when  fully  ripe  has  an  agreeable  acid  taste,  for  which  it  is  esteemed
as  a  table  fruit  in  the  Levant.  Of  the  third  we  know  nothing  but  the  name  ;  and  seeing  there
has  been  so  much  controversy  about  number  of  styles  in  the  different  species  of  cratagus,  the
erection  of  this  into  a  distinct  species  may  be  of  doubtful  propriety.  Accordingly  we  do  not
find  it  in  any  modern  list,  nor  does  Strand  give  the  authority  on  which  he  has  introduced  it
into  his.  For  the  sake  of  the  students  of  Biblical  Natural  History,  who  are  accustomed  to
have  plants  grouped  according  to  some  more  marked  or  popular  characteristic  than  those  which
determine  their  place  in  a  scientific  arrangement,  we  will  here  depart  from  the  plan  we  have

generally  followed,  for  the  sake  of
bringing  together  the  various  thorny
and  prickly  plants  which  are  usually
connected  in  Scriptural  notices.

The  various  species  of  Rhamnus  (in-
cluding the  "Christ's  thorns")  growing
in  Palestine  have  been  noticed  in  a  pre-
ceding page.  The  black  thorns  or  sloe
we  do  not  find  named  in  the  lists  or
memoranda  before  us,  although  we  have
an  impression  that  some  modern  traveller
has  noticed  its  presence  in  Palestine.
Towards  the  end  of  this  month,  Monro,h
high  up  Lebanon,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  snows,  took  notice  of  thorns,  bear-
ing a  bright  pink  flower,  which  spread
themselves  upon  the  ground,  or  run  over
the  trees  near  them,  like  a  creeper.  Bar-
berrv  bushes  were  noticed  by  this  tra-
veller in  the  same  locality.  Brambles,
although  not  very  common,  occur  in  par-
ticular localities.    Morison1  notices  their

[Holy  Bramble.    Rubus  Sanctus.']

a  Letters,  ii.  122.

d  Cratevfl'is  oryacantha.

h  Vol.  ii.  p.  18.

t>  Travels,  342,  447-

c  C.  azarolus.  f  C.  bryginia.

Voyage,  p.  1/9;  also  Richardson,  ii.  442.

Pinus  sylvestris.

8  Prunus  spinnsa.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  ccxlvii

abundance  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sepphoris  :  the  most  valuable  species  of  rubus,  the  rasp-
berry, the  country  does  not  appear  to  possess,  although  there  is  reason  to  expect  that  it  might
be  found  in  the  mountains  of  Lebanon.  The  species  more  peculiar  to  Palestine,  or  at  least  to
Syria,  is  the  one  which  on  that  account  bears  the  name  of  Rubus  Sanctus,  or  holy  bramble,  of
which  we  introduce  a  cut,  it  being  one  of  the  few  plants  which,  in  the  stricter  sense  of  the.
term,  are  "  natives"  of  Palestine,  or  which,  at  least,  are  more  common  in  that  country  than  in
any  other.  This  species  of  rubus  is  the  only  one  that  occurs  in  Russell's  catalogue  of  the
Aleppo  plants  ;  but,  besides  it,  Palestine  possesses,  as  we  have  just  seen,  the  common  bramble,
and  also  the  Rubus  creticus,  if  that  be  different  from  the  R.  sanctus  ;  a  point  on  which  we
are  not  assured.11

We  may  be  excused  if,  for  the  sake  of  the  connection  we  have  indicated,  we  here  also  notice
thistles,  in  what  will  certainly  seem  to  the  scientific  reader  an  improper  place.  Another  reason
for  this  is,  that  these  plants  appear  this  month  in  their  full  growth  and  bloom.  Thistles  cover
large  tracts  of  ground,  and  grow  to  a  prodigious  size  in  Palestine ;  the  species,  however,
although  not  distinguished  by  passing  travellers,  are  not  the  same  that  are  most  common  in
this  country.  They  are  the  white-flowered  Syrian  thistle,b  and  the  musk-scented  carduus
mollis.  But  there  would  appear  to  be  other  species  than  these,  although  only  these  have  been
named.  Clarke  says,  "  the  variety  and  beauty  of  the  different  species  of  carduus,  or  thistle,
in  this  country,  are  well  worthy  notice ;  a  never  failing  indication  of  rich  soil  in  any  land,  but
here  [between  Acre  and  Nazareth]  manifesting  the  truth  of  Jacob's  prophecy,  who  foretold
the  'fatness  of  the  bread  of  Asher,'  and  the  'royal  dainties'  of  his  territory.0  We  observed
one  in  particular  whose  purple  head  covered  all  the  inland  parts  of  Palestine  with  its  gorgeous
hue.  "d  This  possibly  may  be  the  Egyptian,  or  purple  variety,  of  the  Syrian  thistle.
Again,  the  same  traveller,  between  Nazareth  and  Tiberias,  says,  "  the  earth  was  covered
with  thistles  in  such  numerous  variety,  that  a  complete  collection  of  them  would  be  an
interesting  acquisition  for  the  botanist. "e  Buckingham,  Richardson,  and  Lord  Lindsay
have  repeated  notices  to  the  same  effect.  The  last-named  traveller  describes  every  fallow  and
uncultivated  field  of  the  plain  of  Sharon  as  overgrown  with  "  thistles  of  the  deepest  hue  and
most  luxuriant  growth,  often  overtopping  my  head  on  horseback  :  dear  old  Scotland  can  boast
of  none  so  beautiful."f

Burckhardt,  travelling  this  month  in  the  deserts  southward  of  Palestine,  takes  much  notice
of  the  shrub  rethem,  which  he  says  is  the  same  as  the  genista  rectum  of  Forskal.  This,  we
suspect,  is  no  other  than  that  which  we  mentioned  in  April  8  under  Lord  Lindsay's  name  of
rattam,  and  which  we  set  down  on  the  authority  of  Delisle  as  the  Spartium  monospermum.
Whether  the  same  or  different,  we  may  here  set  down  Burckhardt's  further  information,
which  is  to  the  effect,  that  whole  plains  are  sometimes  covered  with  this  shrub,  and  that  such
became  favourite  places  of  pasturage,  as  the  sheep  are  remarkably  fond  of  the  small  berries
which  it  yields.h

The  frequent  mention  of  oak  trees,  of  different  species,  made  during  this  month  by  Lord
Lindsay,  suggests  the  present  as  a  suitable  place  for  noticing  this  interesting  class  of  trees.
The  observations  in  a  preceding  page *  tend  to  reduce  the  number  of  allusions  to  oaks  which
the  Scriptures  have  seemed  to  contain  ;  but  sufficient  will  still  remain  to  show  that  this  genus
of  trees  figured  conspicuously  among  the  forest  trees  of  Palestine.  "The  oaks  of  Bashan,"  in
particular,  are  always  mentioned  in  terms  of  proverbial  distinction ;  and  there,  accordingly,
and  in  other  districts  of  the  country  beyond  Jordan,  oak  trees,  which  are  comparatively  rare
to  the  west  of  that  river,  take,  even  at  this  day,  a  leading  part  in  the  scenery  of  the  wooded
hills.  Among  these  oak?,  however,  is  not  found  that  speciesk  which  grows  to  so  large  a  size,
and  makes  so  imposing  a  figure  among  our  own  forest  trees.     All  the  species  of  Quercus

a  The  reason  for  the  doubt  is,  that  in  the  '  Flora  Palaestina '  there  is  a  JR.  creticus,  but  not  R.  sanctus,  and  we  do  not  find  R.
creticus  in  any  list  that  gives  R.  sanctus.    In  fact,  we  have  met  with  no  notice  of  the  one  as  distinct  from  the  other.
b  Carduus  Syriacus.  c  Gen.  xlix.  20.  d  Clarke,  iv.  ] 28.

e  Clarke,  iv.  195.  f  Letters,  vol.  ii.  p.  77-  8  Page  cexxviii.  li  Burckhardt,  537.

>  Page  cexxxviii.  k  Quercus  robur.

ccxlviii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

[Quercus  Valonidi  ]

which  grow  in  Palestine  are  of  much  inferior  size  and  importance,  as  the  trees  of  this  genus
generally  find  colder  climates  than  that  of  Syria  more  congenial  to  their  nature.  The  species
which  grow  in  Palestine  are  enumerated  in  the  '  Flora  Palaestina '  as  below.a

The  two  species  which  are  most  frequently,  if  not  exclusively,  noticed  by  Lord  Lindsay,  are
the  "evergreen"  and  "prickly"  oaks.     We,  with  most  persons,  should  understand  by 'the

former  the  Quercus  ilex,  and  by
the  latter  Q.  valonidi.     But  from
such  expressions  as  "  the  evergreen
or  valonidi  oak,"  and  "  the  valonidi
and  prickly  oaks,"  it  appears  evi-
dent that  the  term  valonidi,  which
properly  applies  to  the  prickly  oak,
is  by  him  given  improperly  to  the
evergreen  oak,  and  that  which  he
calls,    distinctively,   "  the   prickly
oak"  is  the  real  valonidi.     This
error  we  shall  take  the  liberty  of
correcting  in  using  his  statements.
He  describes  the  hills  of  southern
Judea,  about  Hebron,  as  covered
to  the   top  with  the  prickly  oak.
Striking  across  the  country  from
Samaria  towards  Mount  Carmel,
regular    English   park   scenery  is
formed  by  the  evergreen  oak ;  which,  together  with  the  prickly  oak,  also  covers  the  hills
about  the  southern  prolongations  of  Carmel  and  the  banks  of  the  Kishon.     The  traveller,
journeying  from  Cana  to  Mount  Tabor,  strikes  into  a  lovely  valley,  wooded  chiefly  with  these
same  trees.b     Mount  Tabor  itself  is  entirely  covered  with  thick  woods,  chiefly  of  oak  and
pistachio  trees.0     The  species  of  oak  is  not  named,  but  is  probably  one  or  both  of  these.
Passing  the  Jordan,  Burckhardtd  speaks   gratefully  of  the  shade  afforded  by  the  oaks  of
Gilead,  the  presence  of  which  is  probably  what  gives  to  this  locality  that  appearance  which
he  describes  as  more  reminding  him  of  Europe  than  aught  else  he  had  seen  in  Syria.     In  the
same  quarter,  this  traveller  speaks  of  forests  of  oaks,  thicker  than  any  forests  he  had  seen  in
Syria,  where  the  term  "  forest  "  is  often  applied  to  places  where  the  trees  grow  twenty  paces
apart  from  one  another .e     From  Lord  Lindsay  we  learn  that  these  oaks  are  also  of  the  prickly
and  evergreen  species.  With  these  two  trees  many  of  the  hills  of  Bashan  and  Gilead  are  covered
to  their  very  summits,  and,  in  descending  to  the  arid  plains,  the  evergreen  f  oak  is  the  last  by
which  the  traveller  is  forsaken.?    He  also  mentions  a  variety  of  the  evergreen  oak  of  a  broader
leaf  than  usual,  and  conjectures  that  this  may  be  the  oak  of  Bashan.     But  we  believe  that  the
term  "  oaks  of  Bashan"  is  not  determined  to  any  particular  species ;  but  merely  indicates  that
country  to  have  been  distinguished  for  its  oaks,  as  it  actually  is  at  this  day.  The  hills  of  Bashan
itself  are  described  by  the  same  traveller  as  richly  wooded  to  their  summits  with  noble  prickly
oaks,  a  few  pine  trees  towering  over  them ;  and  he  adds,  "  I  never  could  have  thought  that  the
shrub  I  had  seen  covering  the  hills  of  Hebron  could  have  attained  such  size  and  beauty,  yet
the  leaf  of  the  largest  tree  is  not  larger  than  the  shrubs."     Among  the  trees  of  this  district  an
arbutus  is  occasionally  seen,  but  the  prevailing  trees  are  oaks  prickly  and  broad-leaved,  of  the
variety  just  mentioned.11

a  Quercus  glande  recondita,  Q.  cupula  crinnta,  Q-  gramuntia,  Q.  Ilex  aquifolia,  Q.  coccifera.  The  four  first  on  the  authority  of
Pococke,  and  the  last  on  that  of  Hasselquist.  To  these  we  add,  on  the  authority  of  Lord  Lindsay,  the  valonidi  oak  (Q.  valonidi,  or
Q.csgilops).

b  Lindsay,  51,77,  85.  c  D'Arvieux,  ii.280;  Burckhardt,  335.  "i  Syria,  348.

e  Syria,  265.

f  He  says  the  valonidi;  but,  as  explained,  by  that  he  always  means  the  evergreen  (//ear).

8  Lindsay,  122,  124.  h  Lindsay,  127.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.

ccxlix

Oaks  are  very  frequently  mentioned  by  Burckhardt,  but  without  distinguishing  the  species.
It  is  interesting,  however,  to  mark  the  localities  in  which  these  trees  engaged  his  notice.
There  are  woods  of  stunted  oaksa  on  the  lower  slopes  of  the  mountains  (Jebel  Haouran),
beyond  the  great  Haouran  plain  ;  and  even  in  the  stony  district  (the  inner  Ledja),  which
completes  the  eastward  boundary  of  that  plain,  the  oak  is  named  first  among  the  trees  which
grow  in  great  numbers  between  the  rocks.b  Burckhardt  passed  through  a  thick  oak  forest
on  the  way  from  Feheis  to  the  ruins  of  Amman  (the  capital  of  the  Ammonites) ;  and  this  is
the  most  southerly  notice  of  oaks  which  we  have  found  in  the  country  beyond  Jordan.0  From
the  dispersed  notices  of  the  same  traveller  it  would  appear  that  oaks  of  low  stature  are  frequent
in  the  plains  and  hills  near  the  sources  of  that  river.'1  He  also  takes  notice  of  large  oaks
growing  in  different  parts  beside  natural  reservoirs  of  water  fed  by  springs.6  The  eastern
slopes,  even  to  the  summits  of  Anti-Lebanon,  abound  in  short  oak  trees,  of  which  none  are
higher  than  twelve  or  fifteen  feet.1  In  Lebanon  itself  oaks  are  numerous.  Its  eastern  ascent
from  the  valley  of  Baalbec,  as  high  as  Ainnetto,  is  covered  with  low  oak  trees  "  of  the  round-
leaved  and  common  English  species."  The  natives,  on  and  below  this  slope  of  the  mountain,
in  constructing  the  flat  roofs  of  their  houses,  lay  branches  of  the  oak  over  beams  of  the  pine.s
On  the  western  slopes  large  oaks  are  found  as  high  as  the  neighbourhood  of  Deir  el  Kammer,
the  residence  of  the  Emir  Beschir.11

The  Quercus  coccifera,  or  kermes  oak,  is  noticed  only  by  Hasselquist.  Crossing  from
Acre  to  Nazareth,  on  the  2nd  of  May,  he  found  the  country  beyond  the  plain  of  Acre  con-
sisted of  small  hills,  or  rather  rising  grounds,  covered  with  plants,  and  fine  vales  between
them.  On  approaching  this  he  passed  through  "  fine  groves  of  the  eastern  oak  (Quercus
coccifera),  whose  fly,  called  tenihreda,  had  made  its  hard  gall,  in  which  lay  its  caterpillar,
with  others  dried  up,  which  the
insect  had  already  quitted." '
The  insect  of  which  he  speaks
is  the  kermes,  one  of  the  ge-
nus coccus,  which  sticks  to  the
branches  of  the  tree  in  the  form
of  little  red  balls,  the  size  of  a
pea,  and  which  afforded  a  co-
louring matter  highly  valued  in
former  times,  but  now  out  of
use  with  the  dyers,  being  super-
seded by  cochineal.  It  transpires
incidentally  that  this  dye  was
used  by  the  ancient  Hebrews.
For  the  word  Jl^^Jl,  tolath,
which  means  a  worm,  and  par-
ticularly the  kermes  worm,  is
used  alsok  to  denote  the  crimson
dye  prepared  from  it,  and  is  ac-
cordingly rendered  kokkwov  by
the  Septuagint  in  the  passages
indicated.

One  of  the  noblest  trees  of
Palestine,  as  indeed  of  any  coun-
try in  which  it  grows,  is  the
oriental  plane}     It  is  not  com-  [Plane  Tree.]

a  These  are  prickly  oaks,  according  to  Lord  Lindsay.

b  Burckhardt,  19,  112.  c  Id,  356_  A  u   45>  312j  3l5

f  u-  4  g  Id.  18,  7-  I'  Id.  193;  see  also  312,  &c.

k  In  Isa.  i.  18,  and  Lam.  iv.  5.  1  Platanus  Orientalis.

VOL.   I.

e  Id.  193,315.
'  Hasselquist,  153.

2k

ccl

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

mon  in  Syria,  but  is  mentioned  -with  sufficient  frequency  to  intimate  that  it  is  not  rare.  The
enjoyment  which  the  writer  has  derived  from  its  presence,  under  various  circumstances  of
rest  and  travel  in  the  East,  enables  him  to  transcribe  with  entire  sympathy  and  concurrence
the  warm  praise  which  Mr.  Urquhart a  bestows  upon  this  magnificent  tree  :  "  The  platanus,
the  chenar  of  the  Persian  poets,  is  a  tree  so  elegant  in  its  form,  so  docile  in  its  growth,  that
it  gives  beauty  to  all  that  surrounds  it ;  shooting  up  like  the  poplar,  when  confined  ;  spreading,
when  at  liberty,  like  the  oak  ;  and  drooping  like  the  weeping  willow  over  streams  ;  it  adapts
itself  to  every  position  of  soil,  and  assimilates  itself  to  every  style  of  landscape.  The  foliage,
by  the  broadness  of  the  leaves  and  their  springing  at  the  extremity  of  the  branches,  is  bold
and  massive,  without  being  dense  or  heavy.  '.Vast  and  airy  vaults  are  formed  within,  excluding
the  strong  light  and  the  sun's  rays ;  and  through  these  verdant  domes,  the  round,  long,  naked
boughs,  of  a  light  green  hue  and  velvety  texture,  meander  like  enormous  snakes."

Early  in  this  month  fine  large  walnut  frees  may  be  seen  bending  to  the  ground  under  their
loads  of  fruit.b  The  walnut  tree  sometimes  joins  with  the  oak  to  overshadow  the  streams
beyond  Jordan.0

Of  Poplars  we  only  know  with  certainty  that  the  black  poplar,  the  aspen,  and  the  Lombardy
poplar  grow  in  Palestine,  although  from  analogies  almost  as  assured  as  positive  facts,  we  should
infer  that  the  white  poplar  is  also  known  there.  The  aspen,  whose  long  leaf-stalks  cause  the
leaves  to  tremble  with  every  breath  of  wind,  unites  with  the  willow  and  the  oak  to  overshadow
the  water-courses  of  the  lower  Lebanon,*1  and  with  the  oleander  and  the  acacia  to  adorn  the
ravines  of  southern  Palestine.6  We  do  not  know  that  the  Lombardy  poplar  (now*  so  common
in  England)  has  been  noticed  but  by  Lord  Lindsay,?  who  describes  it  as  growing  with  the
walnut  tree  and  weeping  willow  beside  the  deep  torrents  of  the  upper  Lebanon.  Poplars  figure
largely  in  the  groves  which  extend  for  many  miles  around  Damascus.  The  poplar  is  men-
tioned only  twice h  in  the  Scriptures,  and  in  both  places  the  etymology  of  the  word  would
suggest  that  the  white  poplar  is  intended.

Juniper  is  common  in  Palestine,  and  in  the  valleys  and  mountains  of  Edom.     On  Mount

Hor,  on  which  Aaron  died,  and  where
his  tomb  is  still  honoured,  it  grows
even  to  the  summit ;  nor  is  it  want-
ing in  the  renowned  valley !  below,
in  which  the  metropolis  of  Seir  is
entombed.k  The  species  is  not  men-
tioned by  those  who  supply  this  in-
formation ;  but  those  which  have
been  named  as  growing  in  Palestine
are  the  Phoenician  juniper,1  the  com-
mon savine,m  and  the  brown-berried
juniper.11  The  first  of  these  is  a  tree
of  about  twenty  feet  high,  growing
with  its  branches  in  a  pyramidal
form.  The  common  savine  is  suffi-
ciently known  as  a  popular  medicine
in  some  female  complaints.  And  as
to  the  J.  oxycedrus,  many  are  of
opinion  that  its  wood,  rather  than
that  of  the  so  called  "  cedar  of  Le-

[Juuiperus  Phoenicea.    Young  and  Old.*]

c  Burckhardt,  265.

d  Elliot,  ii.  276.

a  *  The  Spirit  of  the  East,'  i.  118.  b  Richardson,  ii.  458.

e  Mangles,  358  ;  and  with  respect  to  poplars  generally,  see  Rauwolff,  51,  100,  226  ;  Richardson,  ii.  246 ;  Burckhardt,  119.

f  Common  as  it  is  now  in  England,  it  is  not  above  seventy  years  since  that  it  was  first  brought  from  Italy  by  Lord  Rivers  in  his
travelling  chariot.

e  Vol.  ii.  p.  219.  b  Gen.  xxx.  37  ;  Hosea  iv.  13.  >  Wady  Mousa.

k  Irby  and  Mangles,  378;  Burckhardt,  430.  1  Juniperus  Phcenicea.  m  J.  Sabina.  n  J.  Oxycedrus.

*  The  young  tree  is  here  about  three  feet  high,  of  a  compact  pyramidal  form  :  it  afterw.irds  spreads  and  reaches  a  height  of  fifteen
feet.    This  explains  the  difference  between  them  in  the  cut.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  ccli

bancm,"  a  is  the  cedar  wood  so  famed  in  ancient  times  for  its  durability,  and  of  which  statues
were  framed  before  the  use  of  marble  was  introduced.

Much  notice  is  this  month  taken  of  the  acacia,  various  species  of  which  are  found  in
Palestine,  more  especially  in  the  southern  parts,  and  in  the  deserts  which  separate  it  from
Egypt  and  Arabia,  as  well  as  in  these  two  countries  themselves.  Strand's  list  contains  only
four  species,b  which  probably  omits  many,  since  Delisle's  '  Flora  Egyptiaca '  contains  not
fewer  than  nine,c  being  the  same,  with  five  more.  The  Mimosa  Nilotica  of  Linnseus,  and
the  Acacia  Nilotica  of  Delisle,  or  rather  of  Willdenow,  is  that  which  is  more  usually  known  as
the  A.  vera.  It  was  thought  that  this  was  the  species  producing  the  gum  arabic,  or  that  the
gum  was  afforded  by  different  species,  either  by  natural  exudation,  or  from  incisions  made  in
the  bark.  But  it  is  now  established  that  the  gum  is  obtained  from  a  distinct  species  called
Mimosa  gummifera  by  Forskal,d  and  the  Acacia  gummifera  by  Delisle.e  This  does  not  appear
to  grow  in  Palestine  ;  but  as  the  Hebrews  knew  and  valued  the  product,  with  the  plant
affording  which,  they  had  ample  opportunities  of  becoming  acquainted  in  the  deserts  of  Arabia
Petrsea,  some  notice  of  it  may  be  taken.

The  acacias  (or  at  least  one  species)  claims  particular  notice  from  us,  from  the  fact  of  its  fur-
nishing the  shittim  ivood  so  often  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  which  was  exclusively  employed  in
the  construction  of  the  tabernacle  which  the  Israelites  made  in  the  desert :  and  also  as  producing
the  valuable  gum,  so  well  known  under  the  name  of  "  gum  arabic."  It  has  been  well  agreed
by  writers  on  the  natural  history  of  the  Bible,  that  the  shittim  wood  was  afforded  by  a  species
of  acacia;  but  the  particular  species  has  been  less  determinately  mentioned.  But  now  that  the
labours  of  the  French  commission,  and  of  different  recent  travellers,  have  made  us  acquainted
with  the  botany  of  Arabia  Petrsea,  we  have  little  difficulty  in  concluding  that  the  required
species  is  found  in  either  the  acacia  gummifera?  or  in  the  A.  seyal,%  or  rather  in  both.  They  both
grow  abundantly  in  the  valleys  of  that  region  in  which  the  Israelites  wandered  for  forty  years,
and  both  supply  products  which  must  have  rendered  them  of  much  value  to  the  Israelites.
They  are  closely  allied  species,  and  are  both  distinguished  from  other  acacias  by  their  falciform
legumes.  We  think  the  probability  is  that  the  A.  seyal  supplied  the  shittim  wood, — if  indeed
that  name  do  not  denote  acacia  wood  in  general.  This  tree  grows  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet
in  height.  Its  branches  are  armed  with  white  horizontal  thorns  above  an  inch  in  length
towards  the  extremity  of  many  of  the  branches;  but,  from  the  base  to  the  middle  part  of  the
branch,  these  are  replaced  by  straight  and  very  short  spurs.  It  endures  a  dry  soil  better  than
most  other  plants,  although  there  are  situations  too  dry  and  hot  for  its  production.  Its
abundance  and  predominance  in  very  ancient  times  is  evinced  very  remarkably  by  the  vast
quantities  of  petrified  trunks  which  are  found  in  particular  situations.  This  has  been  alluded
to  in  an  early  page,11  and  it  is  further  remarkable  that  were  it  not  for  the  presence  of  a  few
date  trees,  nearly  the  whole  of  these  petrifactions  may  be  ascribed  to  the  acacia.  The  wood
is  not  very  well  suited  to  the  uses  of  the  carpenter ;  but  it  is  the  best,  if  not  the  only  sort,  which
its  locality  supplies ;  and  this  fact  sufficiently  explains  the  use  made  of  it  in  the  works  of  the
Tabernacle.  It  thus  also  appears  that  the  "  shittim  wood"  was  not  some  costly  foreign  timber,
as  cursory  readers  of  the  Bible  are  apt  to  conclude ;  but  was  that  which  was  the  most  easily
obtained  on  the  spot.  The  wood  of  the  acacia  (not  indeed  of  this  species,  but  the  closely
allied  one  of  A.  Nilotica)  was  and  is  much  valued  by  the  Egyptians  for  the  planks  and  masts
of  boats,  the  handles  of  offensive  weapons  of  war,  and  various  articles  of  furniture.  To  the
same  purposes  it  is  still  applied.  The  legumen  of  the  acacia  was  also  highly  valued  for  its
use  in  tanning}  But  it  was  the  pod  of  another  species  (A.  Nilotica)  rather  than  of  this  which
the  ancient  Egyptians  employed  for  this  purpose.  It  is  probable,  however,  they  used  for  the
same  purpose  the  bark  of  this  desert  acacia,  which  is,  for  it,  as  valuable  as  the  pod  of  any
other.     The  Arabs  of  the  desert  now  use  the  epidermis  of  the  seyal,  and  the  wood  of  the

a  Pinus  cedrus.  t>  Mimosa  Nilotica,  M.  Senegal,  M.  farncsiana,  M.  lebbek.

c  Acacia  lebbeli,  A.farnesiana,  A.  Nilotica,  A.  albida,  A.  seyal,  A.  gummifera,  A.  pataocarpa,  Mimosa  Senegal,  M.  stellatu.
d  In  the  *  Flora  Egyptiaca-Arabica.'  c  In  '  Flora  Egyptiaca,'  as  above.  f  Called  by  the  Arabs  talk.

S  Set/alls  the  Arabic  name.  li  See  before  p.  lxix.  '  And  also  the  A.  gummifera.

2  k  2

cclii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII

errin,a  for  tanning.  Of  the  inner  rind  of  the  former,  they  also,  as  did  the  ancient  Egyptians,
frequently  make  thin  but  strong  ropes.  Its  wood  also  furnishes  the  best  charcoal,  and  large
quantities  of  it,  with  other  shrubs  and  brushwood,b  are  burnt  yearly  by  the  Arabs  of  Sinai
and  taken  to  Cairo  for  sale.  Burckhardt c  says,  that  the  pods  of  this  shrub  as  well  as  its
tenderest  shoots  serve  as  fodder  to  the  camels.

This  tree  produces  the  gum  arabic,  as  do  most  of  the  other  species  of  acacia.  But  the
proper  and  valued  sort  is  afforded  by  the  A.  gummifera,  which  is  even  more  abundant  than  the
seyal  in  Arabia  Petrsea.  In  May  the  acacias  in  this  region  are  thickly  covered  with  the  gum.
In  summer  the  Bedouins  collect  the  gum  produced  in  this  quarter,  which  they  sell  at  Cairo
for  thirty  or  forty  patachs  the  camel  load,  or  about  twelve  or  fifteen  shillings  per  cwt.  English.
The  gum  is  of  very  inferior  quality  to  that  of  Sennaar.  Burckhardt's  companions  ate  up  all
the  small  pieces  that  had  been  left  upon  the  trees  by  the  road  side.  The  traveller  found  it  to
be  quite  tasteless,  but  was  assured  that  it  was  very  nutritive.d  The  Bedouins  pretend  that
upon  journeys  it  is  a  preventive  of  thirst,  and  that  the  person  who  chews  it  may  pass  a  whole
day  without  being  inconvenienced  by  the  want  of  water.

The  same  traveller,  when  journeying  in  the  desert,  which  is  still  called  El  Tyh  from  the
memory  of  the  Hebrew  wanderings,  rested  in  the  Wady  Lahyane,  where  many  of  these  trees
grew.  Here  he  met  with  a  few  Arab  families  who  had  chosen  this  place  that  their  camels
might  herd  upon  the  thorny  branches  of  the  gum  arabic  tree,  of  which  they  are  extremely
fond.  These  poor  people  had  no  tents  with  them,  and  their  only  shelter  from  the  burning
rays  of  the  sun  and  the  heavy  dews  of  the  night,  was  afforded  by  the  scanty  branches  of  the
acacias.  The  ground  was  covered  with  the  large  thorns  of  these  trees;  and  as  this  and  other
species  of  acacias  abound  in  the  desert,  the  thorns  are  a  serious  annoyance  to  the  Bedouins
and  their  cattle :  in  consequence,  every  Bedouin  carries  in  his  girdle  a  pair  of  small  pincers  to
extract  the  thorns  from  his  feet ;  for  they  have  no  shoes,  and  use  a  sort  of  sandal  made  of
camel's  skin,  and  tied  on  with  leathern  thongs.

We  must  now  proceed  to  notice  some  trees  and  shrubs  which  we  know  only  by  native
names  and  imperfect  descriptions,  and  which  we  are  therefore  unable  so  to  identify  as  to  give
them  the  place  and  name  which  they  have  very  probably  found  in  botanical  catalogues.  We
have  in  vain  sought  the  botanical  synonymes  of  the  native  names  which  are  given ;  but  having
these  before  them,  some  of  our  readers  may  be  more  fortunate  than  ourselves.

And  first  there  is  the  Zaarour  tree,  which  grows  in  considerable  profusion  in  Syria  and  the
southern  deserts  ;  but  is  rare,  if  it  exists,  in  Egypt.  It  is  found  in  Palestine,  at  least  beyond
Jordan.  Zaarour  is  the  name  given  to  it  by  the  inhabitants  of  Lebanon,  while  the  people  of
Damascus  call  it  Zaaboub ;  and  the  Arabs  have  also  another  name  for  it  which  Burckhardt
forgot,  unfortunately,  as  we  might  with  that  name  have  been  able  to  identify  it.  It
bears  a  fruit  like  a  small  apple,  very  agreeable  to  the  taste  ;  the  size  is  more  clearly  stated
elsewhere,  as  that  of  a  small  cherry,  with  much  of  the  flavour  of  the  strawberry.  It  is  in
bloom  in  May.e

The  Aszef  is  spoken  of  this  month  by  Burckhardt,  while  travelling  in  the  Sinai  peninsula.
On  noticing  its  presence  in  Wady  Kheysey,  he  describes  it  as  a  tree  which  he  had  already
seen  in  several  other  wadys.  It  springs  from  the  fissures  in  the  rocks,  and  its  crooked  stem
creeps  up  the  mountain  side  like  a  parasitical  plant.  According  to  the  Arabs  it  produces  a
fruit  of  the  size  of  the  walnut,  of  a  blackish  colour,  and  very  sweet  to  the  taste.  The  bark  of
the  tree  is  white,  and  the  branches  are  thickly  covered  with  small  thorns  :  the  leaves  are  heart-
shaped,  and  of  the  same  shade  of  green  as  those  of  the  oak.f

Advancing  towards  Kerek  from  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea,  Captains  Irby  and

a  Rhus  oxycanthdides.

b  The  shrub  Genista  roetam  of  Forskal,  called  by  the  Arabs  rethem,  is  also  much  sought  after  for  this  purpose.    Burckhardt,  483.

c  Syria,  474.

d  For  the  preceding  account  of  the  acacia  the  authorities  are— Descript.  de  l'Egypte,  torn.  xix.  pp.  Ill,  384;  Burckhardt,  442,
462,  476,477,4/9,493,496,503,505,533;  Hasselquist,  131;  Rauwolff,  102,  126,  152,  178,233;  Morison,  81;  Mariti,  124;
Wilkinson's  '  Topography  of  Thebes,'  210,  211 ;  and  '  Ancient  Egyptians,'  iii.  168.

c  Burckhardt,  83,  275,  569.  f  Syria,  536,  537.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.

ccliii

Mangles  soon,  on  leaving  the  borders  of  that  sea,  entered  "  into  a  very  prettily  wooded  country
with  high  rushes  and  marshes.  Leaving  this,  the  variety  of  bushes  and  wild  plants  became
very  great :  some  of  the  latter  were  rare  and  of  remarkable  appearance.  Occasionally  we  met
with  specimens  such  as  none  of  our  party  had  seen  before  ;  a  botanist  would  have  had  a  fine
treat  in  this  delightful  spot.  Amongst  the  trees  which  we  knew,  were  various  species  of  the
acacia,  and  in  some  instances  we  met  with  the  dwarf  mimosa ;  we  saw  also  the  doom*  and
the  plant  which  we  saw  in  Nubia,  and  which  Norden  calls  the  oschar.h  There  was  one  curious
tree  which  we  observed  in  great  plenty,  and  which  bare  a  fruit  in  bunches,  resembling  in
appearance  the  currant,  with  the  colour  of  the  plum.  It  has  a  pleasant  although  strongly
aromatic  taste,  exactly  resembling  mustard  •  and,  if  taken  in  any  quantity,  produces  a  similar
irritability  of  the  nose  and  eyes  to  that  which  is  caused  by  taking  mustard.  The  leaves  of  the
tree  have  the  same  pungent  flavour  as  the  fruit,  although  not  so  strong.  We  think  it  probable
that  this  is  the  tree  our  Saviovir  alluded  to,  in  the  parable  of  the  mustard  seed,  and  not  the
mustard  plant  which  we  have  in  the  north ;  for  although  in  our  journey  from  Bysan  to
Adjeloun  we  met  with  the  mustard  plant,  growing  wild,  as  high  as  our  horses'  heads,  still,
being  an  annual,  it  did  not  deserve  the  appellation  of  '  a  tree;'  whereas  the  other  is  really
such,  and  birds  might  easily,  and  actually  do,  take  shelter  under  its  shadow  "c

This  discovery  will  be  of  much  interest  to  those  who  are  aware  of  the  great  difficulty  which
has  been  experienced  in  identifying  the  tree  to  which  our  Saviour  alludes,  when  comparing  the
kingdom  of  heaven  to  "  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took  and  sowed  in  the  earth,
which  is  indeed  the  least  of  all  seeds,
but  when  it  is  grown,  is  the  greatest
among  herbs,  and  becometh  a  tree,  so
that  the  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge
in  the  branches  thereof."d  The  Jewish
writers  speak  of  a  mustard  tree,  com-
mon among  them,  in  quite  correspond-
ing terms,  seeming  to  show  that  a  spe-
cies of  the  sinapis  or  some  analogous
genus,  existed  in  Palestine,  with  which
we  are  not  well  acquainted;  and  which
may  very  probably  prove  to  be  that
which  Captain  Mangles  has  pointed
out.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  he  did
not  make  himself  acquainted  with  its
name.  As  to  the  more  common  species
of  mustard,  of  which  he  incidentally
speaks,  we  may  as  well  mention  here
(although  rather  out  of  place  among
"  trees  and  shrubs")  that  it  was  pro-
bably the  Sinapis  Orientalis,  attaining,
under  a  favouring  climate  and  circum-
stances, a  stature  which  it  will  not  reach
in  our  climates.  This  species  is  common
in  Palestine.  In  essential  character  it
differs  little  from  the  Sinapis  arvensis  (which  supplies  the
tinguished  chiefly  by  the  beak  only  of  the  pod  being  smooth

-
-     -

[Sinapis  Orientalis.]

"  Durham  mustard"),  being  dis-

The  Vine.— Although  the  vintage  itself  does  not  begin  before  September,  still  quantities
of  grapes  are  gathered  for  the  table  from  the  latter  end  of  May  until  that  season.6     The

a  Not  the  doum-palm,— Crucifera  T/wbuica.

b  This  is  the  native  name  of  the  Asclepias  prorera,  or  bell-flowered  gigantic  swallow-wort.

c  Travels,  353.

d  Matt.  xiii.  31,  32.

e  Thevenot,  ii.  C2.

ccliv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

early  grapes  thus  supplied  were  accounted  great  delicacies  by  the  Hebrews,  and  were  doubtless
among  the  "  first  ripe  fruits"  which  the  bride  in  the  Canticles  desired ;  and  if  she  were  an
Egyptian  princess,  this  desire  may  have  been  the  more  strongly  entertained,  as  the  grapes  of
Egypt  are  very  inferior  to  those  of  Palestine.  In  that  tender  poem,  the  time  of  which  is
evidently  the  spring  of  the  year,  there  are  other  allusions  to  this  as  one  of  the  characteristics
of  spring,  or  rather  early  summer :  as,  "  The  vines  with  the  tender  grape  give  a  good  smell  ;"a
and  just  after,  "  Take  us  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes,  that  spoil  the  vines ;  for  our  vines  have
tender  grapes. "b  And  again  the  bridegroom  says: — "  I  went  down  into  the  garden  of  nuts,
to  see  the  fruits  of  the  valley,  to  see  whether  the  vine  flourished  and  the  pomegranates
budded."c

Grain. — We  stated  under  April  that  May  is  the  great  harvest  month  in  Palestine ;  and
instead  of  occupying  our  space  with  proofs  of  what  the  reader,  after  the  repeated  statements
already  made,  will  be  disposed  to  admit,  some  account  of  the  harvest  operations  of  Syria  will
probably  be  considered  more  acceptable.  At  p.  91  there  is  a  cut  representing  a  harvest  scene
near  Cana  of  Galilee;  and  in  pp.  375,  37  J  several  cuts  are  furnished,  showing  the  manner
in  which  such  operations  were  conducted  by  the  ancient  Egyptians,  which  approximate  very
closely  to  those  still  in  use,  as  well  as  to  those  which  the  Scriptures  evince  to  have  formed  the
agricultural  practice  of  the  Hebrews.  We  shall  illustrate  such  of  these  as  the  occasion  brings
before  us.

To  every  reader  of  the  Bible  it  must  be  obvious  that  the  culture  of  corn  engaged  a  very
large  share  of  the  attention  of  the  ancient  Hebrews.  Indeed,  with  the  facilities  which  they
possessed  of  sending  their  flocks  and  herds  to  pasture  in  the  deserts,  it  is  probable  that  when
the  country  was  in  its  best  and  most  flourishing  condition,  none  but  lands  absolutely  uncul-
tivable  were  abandoned  to  pasturage.  The  corn  of  Syria  well  deserves  to  be,  as  it  then  was,  a
primary  object  of  attention  to  the  inhabitants;  for,  under  the  congenial  clime  and  in  the
generally  congenial    soil  which  that  country  offers,  there  are  few  countries  in  which  corn  of

better  quality  is  produced.
This  was  of  old  well  under-
stood at  Rome ;  Pliny  d
assigns  the  third  rank  to  its
wheat,  and  even  classes  it
above  the  wheat  of  Egypt.
And  this  comparison  could
easily  and  well  be  made  at
Rome  which  derived  its  sup-
ply of  corn  from  the  different
provinces  of  the  Empire.

The  allusions  to  the  dif-
ferent qualities  of  wheat
which  the  Scriptures  con-
tain, and  the  mention  of
such  a  rate  of  return  for  the
grain  sown  as  seems  extra-
ordinary to  us,  gives  great
interest  to  the  discovery  by
Captain  Mangles  of  a  species
of  bearded  ivheat  in  Pales-
tine his  statement  concerning
which  we  transcribe.    When

Asia  Minor.  Heshbou.

.__      ,  at  Heshbon,  bevond  Jordan,

[Ears  of  Wheat.]  J  '

a  Sol.  Song,  ii.  18.

b  Sol.  Song,  ii.  15.

c  Sol.  Song,  vi.  11.

(l  Nat  Hist,  xviii.  7-

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  cclv

"  A  man  brought  some  -wheat  to  parch,  and,  to  our  surprise,  we  observed  the  ears  of  an
unusual  size,  one  of  them  exceeding  in  dimensions  two  of  the  ordinary,  and  on  one  stalk.
Mr.  Legh  procured  some,  which  he  brought  to  England,  and  it  has  succeeded  very  well.  We
have  since  learned  that  it  was  not  wholly  unknown  to  botanists.  It  is  a  bearded  wheat."  It
is  evidently  to  this  that  Laborde  also  alludes  in  stating : — "  There  is  to  be  found  at  Kerek  a
species  of  hundred  wheat  which  justifies  the  text  of  the  Bible  against  the  charges  of  exaggera-
tion of  which  it  has  been  the  object."  Of  one  of  these  ears  of  corn  a  figure  is  given,  contrasted
with  a  grain  of  English  wheat,  which,  it  must  be  confessed,  has  not  been  very  fairly  chosen.
To  this  we  have  added  an  ear  of  the  bearded  wheat,  which  is  the  only  kind  grown  in  Asia
Minor.     Captain  Mangles  annexes  to  his  engraving  the  following  comparative  statement : —

Heshbon  Wheat.  English  Wheat.

Weight 130  g'r.  or  1  dr.  2sc.  3  gr.  43  gr.  or  8  dr.  2  sc.  2  gr.

Length  of  Straw      ....     5  feet  1  inch.  4  feet  2  inches.

Number  of  Grains  in  Ear     .     84  41

It  would  be  interesting  to  know  to  what  extent  this  wheat  was  cultivated  by  the  ancient
Hebrews,  and  may  have  been  the  subject  of  the  Scriptural  allusions  to  which  we  have
adverted.

Russell  says  : — "The  barley  harvest  commences  early  in  May,  ten  days  or  a  fortnight  before
that  of  the  wheat ;  and  early  in  June  most  of  the  corn  of  every  kind  is  off  the  ground.
Wheat,  as  well  as  barley,  in  general  does  not  grow  half  so  high  as  in  Britain,  and  is  therefore
like  other  grain,  not  reaped  with  the  sickle,  but  plucked  up  with  the  root  by  the  hand.  In
other  parts  of  the  country,  where  the  corn  grows  ranker,  the  sickle  is  used  "a  This  is
important,  as  showing  the  reasons  for  the  different  processes  being  contemporaneously  used,  by
which  some  enquirers  have  been  perplexed.  The  cuts  at  p.  375  show  that  the  same  reason
operated  anciently,  for  there  the  tall  stalked  grain  is  cut  with  the  sickle,  while  the  shorter  kind
is  plucked  up  by  the  roots.  Both  modes  of  operation  are  indicated  in  the  Scriptures ;  but
there,  as  the  corn  grows  higher  generally  than  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aleppo,  to  which
Russell's  statement  more  particularly  refers,  the  sickle  was  and  is  more  generally  in  use,  and
the  allusions  to  it  are  more  frequent.b

It  was  not  properly  in  Palestine,  but  as  far  north  as  Tripoli,  that  Maundrell  noticed  the
practice  of  plucking  up  the  corn ;  and  although  he  speaks  of  it  as  a  general  practice,  it  is
evident  from  his  own  statement  that  he  had  not  made  this  observation  at  any  more  southern
portion  of  his  journey.  We  adduce  the  passage,  as  it  is  usually  copied  as  of  final  authority
on  the  subject.  It  is  dated  May  11th  o.  s.  (21st  n.  s.)  : — "  All  that  occurred  to  us  in  three
days'  travel  was  a  particular  method  used  by  the  country  people  in  gathering  their  corn,  it
being  now  harvest  time.  They  pluck  it  up  by  handfuls  from  the  roots ;  leaving  the  most
fruitful  fields  as  naked  as  if  nothing  had  ever  grown  on  them.  This  was  their  practice  in  all
places  of  the  East  that  I  have  seen  ;c  and  the  reason  is  that  they  may  lose  none  of  their  straw,
which  is  generally  very  short,  and  necessary  for  the  sustenance  of  their  cattle,  no  hay  being
here  made.  I  mention  this,  because  it  gives  light  to  that  expression  of  the  Psalmist, '  Which
withereth  afore  it  be  plucked  up  ;'d  where  there  seems  to  be  a  manifest  allusion  to  this
custom.  Our  new  translation  renders  this  place  otherwise ;  but  in  so  doing  it  differs  from
most,  if  not  all,  other  copies,  and  here  we  may  truly  say,  '  the  old  is  better.'  There  is
indeed  mention  of  a  mower  in  the  next  verse,  but  it  is  such  a  mower  as  fills  not  his  hand,
which  confirms  rather  than  weakens  the  preceding  interpretation."  This  is  all  correct,  subject
to  the  understanding  that  the  corn  is  cut  wherever  the  stalk  rises  high.  It  will  be  noted  that
in  the  comparative  measurements  just  given,  the  Heshbon  wheat,  although  its  rate  is  double  in
all  other  respects,  is  a  foot  shorter  than  the  English  wheat  in  length  of  straw.

a  '  Hist.  Nat.'  xviii.  12.  b  <  Nat.  Hist,  of  Aleppo.'  i.  74.

c  Too  much  stress  must  not  be  laid  on  this.  He  had  but  "  newly  come  to  Aleppo"  when  he  uudertook'his  journey  to  Jerusalem,
and  his  travels  in  Palestine  were  prior  to  the  commencement  of  harvest.
d  Psalm  exxix.  6.

cclvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

The  reapers  go  out  into  the  fields  very  early  in  the  morning,  and  return  home  soon  in  the
afternoon.  The  certainty  of  favourable  weather  renders  unnecessary  the  haste  and  the  long
continued  labour,  with  which  the  corn  is  got  off  the  ground  in  a  less  steady  climate  and  in  a
season  when  the  weather  is  more  variable.  They  take  provisions  along  with  them,  and
leathern  bottles,  or  dried  gourd  bottles,  full  of  water.  Among  the  Hebrews,  refreshments  for
the  reapers  appear  to  have  been  provided  by  the  owner  of  the  field.  The  reapers  of  Boaz  had
vinegar  and  water  to  cool  their  thirst,  and  parched  corn  for  their  food  ;a  and  in  the  apocry-
phal story  of  Bel  and  Dragon  we  find  a  Jewish  prophet  named  Habakkuk,  who  had  made
pottage,  and  had  broken  bread  in  a  bowl,  which  he  was  taking  to  the  field  to  give  to  his
reapers.  From  the  cut  at  p.  375  it  would  appear  that  in  ancient  Egypt  also  drink  at  least
was  provided  by  the  master.

Gleaning  in  the  harvest  field  has  engaged  our  attention  as  a  matter  of  law.b  It  appears  that
the  right  of  gleaning  was  not,  among  the  Hebrews,  exercised  without  reference  to  the  will  or
permission  of  the  owner,  which  however  probably  only  operated  in  limiting  the  number  of
gleaners  in  a  particular  field.  At  present  the  reapers  are  followed  to  and  in  the  field  by  their
own  children,  and  others.  They  glean  with  much  success,  although  probably  not  equal  to
that  of  the  Hebrew  gleaners,  who  had  a  right  to  even  the  sheaves  which  might  be  dropped,  or
which  had  been  left  behind.

That  the  Hebrew  reapers  bound  the  corn  into  sheaves  has  already  been  shown,8  and
illustrated  by  pictorial  examples  from  Egypt.  The  sheaves  were  never  set  up  in  shocks,  as
with  us,  although  the  public  version  of  Judges,  xv.  5,  and  Job  v.  26,  might  convey  that  im-
pression. But  the  word  rendered  "  shock"  in  those  passages  signifies  neither  a  shock  com-
posed of  a  few  sheaves  standing  in  a  field,  nor  a  stack  of  many  sheaves  in  the  barn-yard,
probably  thatched,  so  as  to  stand  for  a  length  of  time ;  but  a  heap  of  sheaves  laid  loosely
together  in  order  to  be  threshed  out  as  quickly  as  possible.  From  a  difference  as  exhibited  in
the  Egyptian  paintings,  we  think  we  can  collect  that  the  corn  was  bound  into  sheaves  when  the
threshing-floor  was  at  some  distance  from  the  field  ;  but  that  when  it  was  close  at  hand,  the
corn  was  conveyed  to  the  floor  in  a  loose  state,  in  large  baskets  borne  by  two  men,  as  shown  in

[Carrying  Corn.d]

the  annexed  engraving.     At  present,  in  Syria,  the  corn  is  most  usually  carried  to  the  threshing-
floor  on  asses.

Dr.  Russell  mentions  a  curious  custom  peculiar  to  the  reapers,  and  which  prevails  throughout
Syria.     It  bears  some  resemblance  to  what,   in   some  English  counties  is  called  a   Largess.

a  Ruth,  ii.  14.  b  See  the  General  History,  p.  296.  c  See  the  History,  pp.  107.

d  In  this  cut  two  men  are  conveying  a  load  of  corn  in  the  large  basket;  the  other  two  are  returning  for  another  load,  after
having  discharged  at  the  threshing-floor  that  which  they  previously  bore.  One  carries  the  basket,  and  the  other  the  pole.  In
the  original  the  mirthful  expression  which  has  been  thrown  into  the  countenances  of  the  men  is  more  observable  than  in  our
copy.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  cclvii

When  a  traveller  happens  to  pass  a  field  where  the  reapers  are  at  work,  they  dispatch  one  of
their  number  with  a  handful  of  corn,  which  he  offers  to  the  traveller,  at  the  same  time  taking
hold  of  the  horse's  bridle.  The  messenger  runs  as  fast  as  he  can,  and  from  the  moment  of  his
setting  out  continues  calling  with  a  loud  voice,  Ska-bash!  Slta-bash  !  which  words  are
repeated  by  the  whole  band.  A  small  present  is  expected  in  return  for  this  compliment,  and
when  received,  the  messenger  holding  up  his  hands  as  a  signal,  the  women  join  in  a  general
ziraleet*  by  way  of  thanks.b

Threshing  is  the  operation  which  next  requires  attention.  The  floor,  as  in  the  times  to  which
the  Scriptures  refer,  is  in  the  open  air,  and  is  such  a  level  and  hard  piece  of  ground  as  can
be  found  nearest  the  harvest  field.  If  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  it  is  preferred  for  the  advantage  of
the  subsequent  winnowing.  For  use  as  the  regular  threshing-floor  of  the  estate,  this  spot  is
often  prepared  by  the  removal  of  about  six  inches  deep  of  the  soil,  and  filling  up  the  vacancy
with  a  firm  compost  made  of  cow-dung  and  clay.

Such  threshing-floors  were  common  almost  everywhere,  being  only  covered  in  those  countries
where  showers  are  frequent  in  the  time  of  harvest.0  The  Roman  writers  give  ample  instructions
as  to  the  manner  of  preparing  the  threshing-floors.  Varro  says  the  threshing-floor  ought  to
be  on  high  ground,  much  exposed  to  the  wind,  large  enough  for  the  extent  of  the  fields  of
corn,  as  round  as  possible,  and  raised  in  the  middle,  so  that  the  rain  which  falls  upon
it  may  the  sooner  and  more  easily  find  its  way  off.  He  adds,  as  the  reason  for  making  it
round,  that,  in  a  round  figure,  the  distance  is  shortest  from  the  middle  to  an  extremity ;  but
doubtless  the  advantage  of  driving  circularly  the  animals  employed  in  the  operation  afforded
a  share  of  the  reason  for  this  figure  of  the  threshing-floor.  Having  thus  described  the  situation
and  form  of  the  area,  he  proceeds  to  describe  the  manner  of  preparing  it :  "  It  ought  to  be
laid  with  solid  earth,  and  well  beaten  (particularly  if  laid  with  potter's  clay,  argilla),  so  that
the  heat  may  not  open  it  in  chinks,  and  the  grain  falling  into  these  chinks  lie  hid,  the  rain
water  be  received,  and  a  passage  opened  for  ants  and  mice.  It  is  also  usual  to  sprinkle  it
with  amurca,  which  is  a  poison  to  ants  and  moles.  Some  persons,  that  the  floor  may  be
very  firm,  surround  it  with  a  stone  wall,  and  lay  it  with  a  stone  pavement. d  In  some  places
the  area  is  covered,  as  in  Bagienna,e  because  in  that  country,  through  the  whole  harvest
season,  there  are  frequent  showers;  and,  where  it  is  not  covered  and  the  climate  hot,  a  shade
ought  to  be  made  near  it,  for  the  workmen  to  repose  themselves  during  the  mid-day  heat."f

There  is  no  intimation  that  the  threshing-floors  were  paved  among  the  Israelites ;  and  the
sole  reason  for  which  the  covering  of  threshing-floors  is  recommended,  did  not  exist  in  that
country.  &

In  such  floors  the  separation  of  the  grain  from  the  straw  was  effected  by  the  different
processes  which  remain  to  be  described.

1.  By  the  treading  of  cattle. — This  appears  to  have  been  the  most  ancient  practice  for  the
larger  grains,  of  wheat,  barley,  and  rye.  It  is  in  fact  the  only  process  of  threshing  to  which
allusion  is  made  in  the  books  of  Moses,  as  in  the  celebrated  precept,  "  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle
the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn,"h  an  injunction  conformable  to  the  existing  practice  of  all
the  nations  of  the  East,  none  of  whom,  whatever  be  the  mode  of  threshing,  muzzle  the  animals
which  labour  in  it.  It  is  seen  by  the  cut  at  p.  316  that  threshing  by  the  feet  of  cattle  was
also  the  practice  in  ancient  Egypt.     Homer  mentions  no  other  mode  of  threshing  than  by

a  A  rejoicing  shout  made  by  women.  b  •  Nat.  Hist,  of  Aleppo,'  i.  75.  c  Varro,  lib.  i.  cap.  51.

<*  Columella  says  that  the  best  floors  are  there  paved  with  flint-stones,  because  by  this  the  coin  is  more  quickly  rubbed  out,  as
the  floor  does  not  yield  to  the  pressure  of  the  hoofs  of  the  cattle  or  of  the  tribute  ;  and  likewise  because  it  is  much  cleaner  and
freer  from  the  small  stones  and  gravel,  which  an  earthen  floor  almost  always  throws  up  in  threshing.  De  Re  rustica,  lib.  ii.
cap.  20.

e  A  district  of  Armenia  Major.  f  Varro,  lib.  i.  cap.  51.

6  Besides  Varro,  the  reader  can  also  consult  Cato, '  De  Re  rustica,'  cap.  xci.  et  cxxix.  ;  Virgil,  Georg.  i.  v.  178,  &c. ;  Columella,
lib.  i.  cap.  6  ;  Palladius,  lib.  i.  tit.  36.  These  ancient  works  on  agriculture  were  printed  in  one  folio  volume  as  Ion"  since  as
1496,  under  the  title  of  Opera  Agricoltiunum,  forming  a  body  of  valuable  information  from  which  a  diligent  student  might  glean
much  information  respecting  the  agricultural  practices  mentioned  in  Scripture.

I>  Deut.  xxv.  4.

VOL.  I.  2  1

cclviii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[CHAr.  VII.

driving  oxen  over  the  corn.  He  compares  the  slaughter  made  by  the  horses  and  chariot  of
Achilles  to  the  beating  out  of  grain  by  the  trampling  of  oxen  :  —

"  As  when  the  peasant  his  yok'd  steers  employs
To  tread  his  barley,  the  broad-fronted  pair
With  ponderous  hoofs  soon  triturate  the  grain  —
So,  bearing  terrible  Achillea  on,
His  coursers  stamp'd  together,  as  they  pass'd,
The  bodies  and  the  bucklers  of  the  slain."d

It  was  also  one  of  the  modes  in  use  among  the  Romans.  Among  them,  however,  horses
were  preferred  to  oxen  for  this  work,b  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  their  superior  adaptation
to  it ;  but  the  Hebrews  for  many  ages  had  no  horses,  and  when  they  had,  did  not  soon  learn
to  employ  them  in  any  agricultural  labour.  Neither  did  the  Egyptians.  But  horses  appear
to  have  been  employed  for  threshing  in  the  time  of  Isaiah. c

At  the  present  time  the  custom  of  threshing  by  the  treading  of  animals  is  common  in

[Threshing  by  Animals.]

Northern  Africa,  and  several  parts  of  the  East ;  but  horses  are  more  employed  than  oxen.  In
this  case  a  strong  post  is  planted  in  the  centre  of  the  threshing-floor,  with  a  movable  wooden
ring  at  top,  through  which  passes  the  cord  that  yokes  the  animals,  and  which  can  he  lengthened
or  shortened  at  pleasure,  so  as  to  make  them  move  round  in  a  wider  or  narrower  compass.
So  Shaw,  in  describing  the  practice  of  the  Moors  and  Arabs  of  Barbary,  states  :  "  These
nations  continue  to  tread  out  their  corn  after  the  primitive  custom  of  the  East.  Instead  of
beeves  they  frequently  make  use  of  mules  and  horses,  by  tying,  in  like  manner,  by  the  neck,
three  or  four  of  them  together,  and  whipping  them  afterwards  round  about  the  nedders,d  as
they  call  the  threshing-floors,  where  the  sheaves  lie  open  and  expanded,  in  the  same  manner
as  they  are  placed  and  prepared  by  us  for  threshing.  This,  indeed,  is  a  much  quicker  way
than  ours,  though  less  cleanly.  For  as  it  is  performed  in  the  open  air,e  upon  any  round  level
plot  of  ground,  daubed  over  with  cow-dung,  to  prevent,  as  much  as  possible,  the  earth,  sand,
or  gravel  from  rising  ;  a  great  quantity  of  them  all,  notwithstanding  this  precaution,  must  be
unavoidably  taken  up  with  the  grain.  At  the  same  time  the  straw,  which  has  been  taken
notice  of  as  their  chief  and  only  fodder,  is  hereby  shattered  to  pieces ;  a  circumstance  very
pertinently  alluded  to  in  2  Kings  xiii.  7,  where  the  king  of  Syria  is  said  to  have  made  the
Israelites  '  like  the  dust  by  threshing.'  "f

2.  Another  kind  of  threshing  is  by  the  drag,  being  a  strong  frame  of  planks,  or  large  block
of  wood,  armed  and  roughened  at  the  bottom  with  flints  or  pieces  of  iron,  and  drawn  by  oxen,

a  Horn.  II.  lib.  xx.  v.  495,  &c.     Cowper's  translation,  v.  593,  &c.

b  Columella,  ii.  21 ;  Virgil,  Georg.  iii.  132.  c  Isa.  xxviii.  28.

d  The  figure  and  use  of  the  nedder  seems  to  be  implied,— 1.  In  the  Hebrew  name    >n^}   goran,  from  whence,  perhaps,  the

Greek   yuoot,  and  the  Latin  gyrus ;  2.  In  the  Greek  appellation   h,\wf,   and,  3.  In  the  Ethiopic,  awdy;  viz.,  from  whipping  the
cattle  that  tread  out  the  corn  round  about,  or  in  a  circle.
e  Hos.  xiii.  3.  f  Shaw,  i.  234.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.

cclix

mules,  or  horses,  over  the  corn
sheaves  spread  on  the  floor,
the  driver  sitting  upon  it  when
its  form  allowed  him  to  do  so.
This  corresponds  with  the  no-
tice which  Varro  takesa  of  the
tribulum,  and  he  says  that
when  the.  driver  did  not  sit
on  the  machine  a  weight  was
placed  upon  it.  This  very
simple  machine  is  evidently
that  which  Lahorde  saw  ac-
tually in  use  in  Syria,  and  of
which  he  gives  the  representa-
tion which  we  have  copied  in  the  preceding  engravin
than  this,  is  now  generally  used  in  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.

[Threshing  Drag  of  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.]

[Threshing  by  the  Drag.]

$.  A  corn-drag,  somewhat  less  rude
A  figure  of  it,  which  we  have  copied,
is  given  in  the  recent  work  on  that
country  by  Mr.  Fellowes,b  who
describes  it  as  designed  for  the
joint  purpose  of  threshing  and  of
cutting  the  straw.  "  It  is  very
primitive  and.  curious,  consisting
of  a  thick  plank  of  timber,  flat  on
the  ground,  with  another  smaller
one  inclining  upwards,  to  which
the  animal  is  attached  for  the  pur-

pose of  dragging  it  over  the  corn,
which  is  spread  out  on  the  hard  rocky  ground  ;  the  flat  under  side  is  stuck  full  of  flints  or
hard  cutting  stones,  arranged  in  the  form  of  the  palate  or  rough  tongue  of  the  cow.  The
roller  is  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  often  weighed  by  the  driver  riding  on  it.  It  is  dragged  over  the
ground ;  but  does  not  re-
volve." Dr.  Wilde,c  who  tra-
velled in  Palestine  too  early
to  see  the  act  of  threshing,
notices  a  similar  machine
which  he  saw  in  a  vaulted
granary  near  Tyre.  Both
these  travellers  identify  this,
very  rightly,  with  the  thresh-
ing instrument  mentioned  by
Isaiah,  xli.  15,d  and  the  tri-
bulum of  Virgil.e

3.  A  third  mode  of  thresh-
ing was  by  what  is  called  in
Scripture  "  the  wain,"  more
properly  "  the  sledge"  and
which  is  still  employed  in
Egypt  and  some  parts  of
Western  Asia.

This  sledge

[Threshing  by  the  Sledge.]

Lib  1.  cap.  52.  b  <  ,Tonrnai  written  during  an  Excursion  in  Asia  Minor,'  by  Charles  Fellowes,  1838.

c  Wilde's  '  Narrative.'  ii.  123.  See  also  Paxton,  44.  After  describing  it,  he  says,—"  This  is  the  common  threshing  instrument  of
these  countries.    I  sec  it  everywhere;  and  I  see  no  other."

J  "  Behold,  I  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing  instrument  having  teeth  :  thou  shalt.  thresh  the  mountains,  aud  beat  them
smalt,  and  make  the  hills  as  chaff."

e  Georgics  i.  164.

21  2

cclx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

is  fixed  upon  two  or  three  wooden  rollers,  armed  with  several  iron  rings  with  serrated
edges,  so  sharp  as  to  cut  the  straw.  This  machine,  which  is  drawn  hy  oxen,  mules,
or  asses,  is  easily  driven  by  a  man  seated  on  the  sledge,  and  as  it  passes  round  in  a
circle  over  the  corn  spread  beneath,  the  grain  by  repeated  operation  is  trodden  out,  while  the
straw  is  chopped  by  the  iron  rings.  This  corresponds  to  a  variety  of  the  tribulum  mentioned
by  Varro,  and  which  he  described  as  "  a  plank  with  little  rollers  in  place  of  teeth."  He  adds :
"  In  Hither  Spain  (Hispania  Citeriore),  and  other  places,  a  man  sits  upon  this  machine,  and
drives  the  cattle  that  draw  it."a  He  says  this  was  called  the  plostellum  Pcenicum,  or
Carthaginian  wain;  and  as  the  Carthaginians,  doubtless,  derived  it  from  their  Phoenician  or
Canaanitish  ancestors,  a  very  proximate  origin  is  found  for  it.  It  was  undoubtedly  in  use
among  the  Jews.

4.  The  reduction  of  the  straw  to  a  state  which  makes  it  fit  for  the  food  of  cattle,  by  the  same
act  which  separates  the  grains  from  it,  is  an  effect  which  would  recommend  the  above  processes,
even  were  they  more  troublesome  than  other  processes  which  would  separate  the  grain  only
without  breaking  the  straw  in  pieces.  The  flail  therefore  is  and  has  been  only  used  in  ancient
times,  and  still  in  Eastern  parts,  with  grains  of  those  sorts  in  which  the  ears  only  are  reaped,
or  when  the  separation  of  the  grain  from  the  ear  is  the  sole  object  desired.  In  our  own
country,  on  the  other  hand,  where  straw  is  not  used  for  fodder,  and  the  separation  of  the
corn  only  is  desired,  the  use  of  the  flail  is  the  most  natural  and  obvious  process,  and  those
which  have  engaged  our  attention,  would  in  two  ways  be  injurious  : — first,  by  rendering  the
straw  useless  for  the  purposes  to  which  we  apply  it ;  and  then  by  a  waste  of  the  time  and
labour  in  reducing  it  to  that  useless  state.  Correspondingly  is  the  instruction  of  Columella : —
"  When  the  ears  only  are  reaped,  they  may  be  carried  to  the  barn,  and  afterwards,  during  the
winter,  beaten  out  with  flails,  or  trodden  out  by  cattle.  But  if  it  be  found  convenient  to  beat
out  the  corn  in  the  area  (or  open  threshing-floor),  there  is  no  doubt  but  this  work  is  better
performed  by  horses  than  by  oxen,  and  if  there  are  few  of  these,  a  tribula  or  traha  may  be
added,  either  of  which  very  easily  bruise  the  straw.  When  ears  only  are  threshed  this  is  best
done  with  flails. "b

Accordingly  we  find  from  the  Scriptures,0  that  the  flail  was  confined  among  the  ancient
Hebrews  to  the  threshing  of  the  smaller  grains,  such  as  vetches,  dill  or  cummin,  in  which  no
operation  upon  the  stalk  was  desired.

The  passage  of  Scripture  to  which  we  have  just  referred  contains  distinct  allusions  to  all
the  processes  of  threshing  here  which  have  been  described,  and  may  here  be  adduced,  as
given  in  the  improved  translation  of  Bishop  Lowth  : —

"  The  dill  is  not  beaten  out  with  the  corn  drag  ;

Nor  is  the  wheel  uf the  wain  made  to  turn  upon  the  cummin.

But  the  dill  is  beaten  out  with  the  staff;

And  the  cummin  with  the  flail :  but

The  bread-corn  with  the  threshing  wain  :

And  not  for  ever  will  he  continue  thus  to  thresh  it;

Nor  to  vex  it  with  the  wheel  of  his  wain ;

Nor  to  bruise  it  with  the  hoofs  of  his  cattle."

It  is  seen  how  clearly  the  preceding  statements  apply  to  and  illustrate  this  interesting
passage  of  Scripture.

Winnowing. — It  has  already  been  observed  that  the  threshing-floor  was,  and  is,  as  far  as
practicable,  situated  in  such  a  manner  as  to  have  the  benefit  of  any  wind  that  should  blow.
Columella  says  : — "  When  the  corn  is  mixed  with  the  palea,A  these  ought  to  be  separated  in
the  wind  :  for  this  purpose  the  west-wind  is  reckoned  the  best,  which  blows  softly  and  equally
through  the  summer  months.  However,  to  wait  for  this  wind  is  the  sign  of  a  slothful
husbandman ;  for  while  he  is  expecting  it,  he  may  be  overtaken  by  a  severe  storm ;  therefore
in  the  area  the  corn  that  is  threshed  should  be  so  heaped  up,  that  it  may  be  cleaned  with  any
wind ;  but  if  for  many  clays  the  weather  should  continue  quite  calm,  the  corn  must  be  cleaned

a  Var.  lib.  i.  cap.  52.  b  Colum.  lib.  ii.  cap.  21.  c  Isa.  xxviii.  27,  28.

d  Palea,  the  straw  taken  with  the  ears  in  reaping,  as  distinguished  from  that  left  in  the  ground.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  cclxi

by  vans,  lest  after  a  calm  a  severe  tempest  should  destroy  the  labours  of  the  whole  year."a
All  this  applies  equally  to  Syria,  excepting  the  conclusion;  for  in  that  country  the  more
equable  summer  climate  prevented  that  care  which  rendered  the  use  of  the  van  occasionally
necessary  in  more  western  climes.  We  are  sensible  that  the  word  "  fan  "  occurs  as  applied
to  winnowing,  in  the  current  version  of  the  Scriptures ;  but  it  is  agreed  among  critics  that  this
translation  of  the  word  is  incorrect,  as  a  winnowing  van  would  be  too  cumberous  a  machine  to
be  carried  in  the  hand,  as  the  passages  referred  to  describe  ;b  and  that  it  really  means  a
winnowing  shovel,  which,  with  a  pitchfork,  were  the  instruments  employed  for  throwing  the
mixed  mass  across  the  wind,  whereby  the  chaff  wss  blown  off  to  some  distance,  while  the  grain
fell  to  the  ground.  The  chaff  of  the  threshing-floor  is  constantly  alluded  to  as  being  carried
away  by  the  wind.0  No  "  fans"  for  producing  an  artificial  blast  for  winnowing  corn  are  now
or  (that  we  can  discover)  ever  were  employed  in  the  East.  There  is  not,  for  instance,  any
trace  of  such  an  instrument  in  the  paintings  and  sculptures  of  Egypt,  in  which  the  whole
agricultural  processes  of  the  Egyptians  are  clearly  displayed.  A  representation  of  their
process  of  winnowing  is  shown  in  the  cut  at  p.  316.

It  is  probable  that  the  fork  was  used  in  winnowing  corn,  when  the  straw  had  only  been
bruised  by  the  feet  of  the  cattle :  and  the  shovel  when  it  had  been  cut  up  by  the  drag  or  the
sledge.  The  process  of  winnowing  in  Syria,  where  the  drag  and  sledge  are  used  in  threshing,  is
thus  described  by  Russell : — "  The  chaff  and  bruised  spikes  are  now  separated  from  the  grain
by  throwing  the  whole  up  into  the  air  with  wooden  shovels,  when  the  wind  blows  moderately.
The  cleaner  grain  being  deposited  together  with  the  chopped  straw,  in  a  heap  by  itself,  the
spikes  imperfectly  trodden  are  again  submitted  to  the  sledge.  After  some  days,  the  grain
being  more  perfectly  winnowed  and  separated  from  the  straw,  is  thrown  again  into  a  large
heap,  called  the  Bydre,  where  it  remains  to  be  divided  between  the  landlord  and  the
husbandman,  in  the'proportions  established  by  agreement. vd  We  presume  that  the  further
process  of  separation  to  which  he  alludes  includes  the  use  of  the  sieve  ;  although  the  winnow-
ing effectually  separates  the  chaff  from  the  grain,  all  the  earth  and  gravel  which  is  liable  to
mix  with  it  in  their  process  of  threshing  necessarily  falls  with  the  latter  to  the  ground,  and
requires  a  further  and  different  process  of  purification :  this  is  by  the  sieve,  the  use  of  which
among  the  Hebrews  is  evinced  by  Isa.  xxx.  24  : —

"  Then  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  large  pastures.

And  the  oxen  and  the  young  asses  that  till  the  ground

Shall  eat  well-fermented  maslin,

TVinnowed  with  the  van  e  and  the  sieve-" — Lowth.

So  also  Amos  (ix.  9),  "  I  will  sift  the  House  of  Israel  among  all  nations,  like  as  (corn)  is
sifted  in  a  sieve,  yet  shall  not  the  least  grain  fall  upon  the  ground."  That  the  sifting  of  corn
is  here  meant  (although  the  word  is  not  in  the  original)  appears  from  this,  that  in  sifting  meal
or  flour,  these  fall  to  the  ground,  while  the  husk  or  bran  remains  in  the  sieve;  whereas  in  sifting
corn,  the  grain  is  preserved  in  the  sieve,  and  the  dust  and  small  seeds  of  weeds  fall  to  the
ground.  The  same  fact  is  distinctly  intimated  in  our  Saviour's  declaration  to  Peter,  "  Simon,
Simon!  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you  that  he  may  sift  you  as  wheat. "f  Columella s
probably  refers  to  and  explains  this  further  purification  by  the  sieve,  when  he  says:— "If
corn  is  to  be  laid  up  for  years,  it  ought  to  be  again  cleaned;  for  the  cleaner  it  is  the  less
liable  to  be  hurt  by  the  weevil.  But  if  it  be  intended  for  immediate  use,  there  is  no  need  of
this  second  dressing :  it  is  enough  to  have  it  exposed  a  little  in  the  shade,  and  then  laid  up  in
the  granary.''

Granaries. — Some  attention  has  already  been  given  to  this  subject  in  the  notice  and  pic-
torial illustration  of  Egyptian  granaries  at  pp.  122,  123.     We  shall  now  copy  a  passage  in

a  Colum.  lib.  ii.  cap.  21.  b  Matt.  iii.  12;  Luke  Hi.  17-

c  See  Job  xxi.  18  ;  Psalm  i.  4  ;  Isa.  xxix.  5,  and  xxxv.  5  ;  Hos.  xiii.  3.  d  Hist,  of  Aleppo,  i.  76.

e  Although  Lowth  translates  the  word  "  van,"  he  understands,  according  to  his  own  note  on  this,  that  "the  van  of  the  ancients
was  a  large  instrument,  something  like  a  shovel,  with  which  they  tossed  the  corn,  mixed  with  the  chaff  and  chopped  straw."  So
we  have  explained  it  in  the  preceding  statement

f  Luke  xxii.  31.  S  Lib.  ii.  cap.  21.

cclxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

which  Varro  describes  the  granaries  anciently  in  use,  all  of  which  appear  to  have  been  suc-
cessively known  to  the  ancient  Hebrews,  including  those  now  used  in  Syria,  and  which  seem
best  suited  to  the  climate  and  to  the  wants  and  habits  of  the  people.  "  Wheat  ought  to  be
laid  up  in  high  granaries,  exposed  to  the  east  and  north  winds,  upon  which  no  moist  air  from
the  neighbouring  places  blows.  The  walls  and  floors  ought  to  be  well  secured  with  marble
plaster,  at  least  with  plaster  made  of  clay  and  amurca,3-  mixed  with  the  chaff  of  corn.  This
does  not  suffer  either  mouse  or  worm,  and  makes  the  grain  more  firm  and  solid.  .  .  .  Some
have  caves  below  ground  for  granaries,  as  in  Cappadocia  and  Thrace.  Others  have  wells,  as
in  Hither  Spain,  in  the  country  about  Carthaginia  and  Osca:  they  strew  the  floors  of  these  with
palea,  and  are  careful  not  to  allow  any  moisture  to  get  in,  or  even  air,  except  when  they  take
out  the  corn  ;  for  wherever  the  air  does  not  penetrate  no  weevil  is  bred.  Wheat  laid  up  in
this  way  remains  good  even  fifty  years,  millet  more  than  a  hundred.  Some  make  very  high
granaries  in  the  fields,  as  in  Hither  Spain  and  in  Apulia.  And  some  make  them  in  such  a
manner  as  to  be  ventilated  not  only  from  the  sides,  through  the  windows,  but  also  from  below
through  the  floor.'"3

The  subterraneous  granaries  or  wells  mentioned  in  this  extract  may  be  traced  to  Syria  and  the
Phoenicians,  through  the  Carthaginians ;  and  it  is  in  these  that  Varro  describes  the  grain  as  being
so  long  preserved  in  a  sound  condition.  This  could  only  be  the  case  in  dry  climates,  or  where
the  ground  is  not  so  saturated  by  rains  as  to  render  such  depositories  damp.  Accordingly
they  are  confined  to  comparatively  dry  climates,  while  in  those  that  are  moist  granaries  built
above  ground  are  preferred.  The  saturation  of  the  ground,  caused  by  the  inundations  of  the
Nile,  occasioned  built  granaries  to  be  preferred  in  Egypt.  And  although,  from  the  example  of
the  Egyptians  and  the  Romans,  such  also  found  their  way  into  Syria,  the  subterraneous  stores
were  more  native  to  the  country,  and  are  those  which  are  still  in  use.

"  The  grain  is  transported  from  the  threshing-floor  in  sacks  to  the  granaries,  which  are
large  subterraneous  grottoes  or  cellars,  with  one  round  opening  at  top  ;  and  this  being  close
shut,  when  the  magazine  is  full,  is  covered  over  with  earth,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  remain  com-
pletely concealed  from  an  enemy.  These  magazines  are  sometimes  found  in  the  middle  of  a
ploughed  field,  sometimes  on  the  verge,  nay  even  in  the  middle  of  the  highway;  and  as  they
are  often,  when  empty,  left  carelessly  uncovered,  travelling  near  the  deserted  villages,  in  the
night,  becomes  extremely  dangerous.  The  grain,  which  in  general  is  of  excellent  quality,  and
perfectly  dried  before  it  is  laid  up,  is  well  preserved  in  these  granaries.  It  is  not  subject  to
vermin,  except  when  kept  too  long,  which  avarice  is  often  led  to  do  in  expectation  of  a  future
dearth."0

The  advantage  which  such  magazines  afforded,  of  keeping  the  grain  from  the  knowledge  of
an  enemy,  must  at  all  times,  in  countries  so  troubled  by  war,  have  contributed  to  the  prefer-
ence which  has  been  given  to  them.  Such  subterraneous  garners  are  unquestionably  indicated
in  the  passages  of  the  Old  Testament  cited  below  ;d  whereas  one  of  the  very  few  allusions  in
the  New  Testament  undoubtedly  refers  to  a  constructed  edifice  f  while  in  another  the  "  store-
house "  (or  old  subterraneous  garner)  and  the  "  barn  "  are  mentioned  in  opposition,  so  as  to
show  that  the  latter  had  not  superseded  the  former,  but  that  both  were  in  use.f

Now  having  taken  the  corn  from  the  harvest  field  to  the  garner,  we  may  return  to  the  field
to  dispose  of  the  stubble  which  is  left  on  the  ground  when  the  harvest  has  been  gathered  by
the  sickle.  This,  when  perfectly  dry  by  exposure  to  the  heat  of  summer,  is  very  generally
set  on  fire  in  the  ground  for  the  purpose  for  which  the  practice  is  noticed  and  commended  by
the  Roman  writers  on  agriculture,  namely,  the  ashes  affording  a  useful  manure  to  the  ground,
while  the  seeds  of  weeds  are  consumed  in  the  fire.  Pasture  grounds  are  burnt  in  the  same
manner  and  for  the  same  purpose,  that  is,  for  the  benefit  of  the  after  crop.  The  sight  of  a
long  line  of  flame,  marching  slowly  over  a  large  tract  of  open  country,  lingering  here  and

n  Amurca  was  made  with  the  dregs  or  lees  of  oil.    Varro,  lib.  i.  cap.  44.  b  Varro,  lib.  i.  cap.  57,  3.

c  Russell,  i.  77.  d  Jer.  xli.  8  ;  Amos  ix.  G  ;  Joel  i.  17.

e  Luke  xii.  18,—*'  I  will  pull  down  my  bams,  and  build  greater ;  and  there  will  I  bestow  all  my  fruits  and  my  goods."
f  Luke  xii.  24, — "  Consider  the  ravens:  for  they  neither  sow  nor  reap;  which  neither  have  storehouse  nor  barn."

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  cclxiii

there,  and  rising  high,  where  it  finds  matter  on  which  it  can  feed  well,  and  leaving  the  black-
ness of  desolation  behind  it,  is  one  of  the  most  singular  and  imposing  spectacles  which  the
traveller  in  the  East  encounters.  These  fires,  badly  managed  or  incautiously  kindled,  when
the  wind  blows  in  the  direction  of  buildings  or  woods,  are  often  productive  of  much  damage
to  property,  and  sometimes  with  danger  to  life.  This  usage  may  be  recognised  in  the  Bible
in  such  passages  as  those  adduced  below.-'1  It  appears,  however,  that  the  straw  left  standing
in  the  corn-fields  was  often  considered  too  valuable  to  be  burnt.  It  was  then  cut  down  (a
work  which  the  Roman  writers  fix  to  the  time  between  the  dog  days  and  the  autumnal  equi-
nox) ;b  or  else,  if  intended  for  fodder,  the  cattle  were  set  to  feed  upon  it  in  the  field,  to  save
the  expense  of  cutting  it  down.

As  to  the  straw  bruised  in  the  threshing,  it  seems  to  have  been  always  used  for  fodder  in  the
East,  instead  of  hay.  Columella  describes  it  as  being  every  where  used  for  this  purpose  where
hay  was  not  afforded.  And  he  supplies  us  the  valuable  information  that  the  straw  of  millet
was  considered  the  best;  after  that,  the  straw  of  barley;  and  next,  the  straw  of  wheat. c  For
sheep,  however,  he  represents  the  straw  of  pulse  as  the  most  suitable.*1  Pliny  says,  generally,
that  the  straw  of  the  kinds  of  grain  which  have  the  smallest  stalk  are  the  best  for  fodder;  and
that  the  nearer  it  is  reduced  to  dust  the  better ;  and  he  agrees  with  Columella  as  to  the  relative
values  of  the  straw  of  millet,  barley  and  triticum  (wheat),  which  last,  however,  he  regards  as
not  the  worst  for  labouring  cattle?

This  may  seem  a  proper  place  to  notice  the  returns  of  the  harvest  in  Palestine,  as  far  as
information  can  be  obtained.

The  land  cultivated  by  Isaac  yielded  him  a  hundred-fold  ;f  and  our  Saviour,  in  one  of  his
parables,  states  that  when  good  seed  was  sown  upon  good  ground,  it  brought  forth  in  some
places  thirty,  in  others  forty,  in  others  sixty,  and  in  others  even  a  hundred-fold. e  From  this
it  may  be  inferred  that  a  crop  upon  good  land  was  not  considered  at  all  extraordinary  if  it  did
not  produce  thirty-fold ;  for  this  is  the  smallest  crop  mentioned,  which  probably  would  not
have  been  the  case  had  a  lesser  crop  from  such  lands  been  accounted  a  good  one.  Even  more
extraordinary  examples  of  fertility  than  this  are  ascribed  by  ancient  writers  to  Sicily,  Syria,
and  Africa,  and  to  the  banks  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,11  which  may  be  either  referred  to
peculiarly  productive  species  of  grain,  like  that  of  Heshbon,  or  to  the  fact  that  the  seeds  being
put  into  the  soil  at  a  distance  from  each  other,  the  roots  formed  from  them  drew  such  large
nourishment  from  a  good  soil  as  to  send  forth  several  stalks,  each  of  them  laden  with  several
ears  of  corn.1  We  all  know  how  the  strength  and  prolificity  of  various  plants  is  increased  by
such  distant  planting  as  enables  the  root  to  derive  the  largest  portion  of  nourishment  from  the
soil ;  and  there  is  really  scarcely  a  limit  in  the  East  to  the  powers  of  production  wherever  the
elements  of  heat  and  moisture  can  unitedly  operate  upon  a  good  soil.  Many  shrubs  of  Europe
are  large  trees  in  the  East,  and  many  plants  which  are  annual  in  Europe  are  perennial  there.
It  is,  however,  to  be  remembered  that  in  the  Scriptural  instances,  as  well  as  in  the  others
which  we  have  adduced,  are  given  by  their  authors  as  extraordinary  examples  of  fertility,  and
are  not  therefore  to  be  taken  as  tests  of  the  ordinary  and  average  scale  of  production.

After  this  preface  we  may  adduce  the  information  which  can  be  obtained  respecting  the
present  condition  of  the  question.  There  is  little  information  but  that  which  Burckhardtk
affords;  and  this  refers  chiefly  to  the  excellent  corn  districts  of  the  Haouran  and  Djolan,
beyond  Jordan.

In  these  districts  it  is  expected,  after  a  favourable  season  of  rain,  that  the  land  should  yield
twenty-five  times  the  quantity  of  the  seed  sown ;  and  this  is  reckoned  an  excellent  crop.
In  another  place,1  however,  after  stating  that  the  peasants  of  the  Haouran  are  shy  of  speaking

a  "  Therefore,  as  the  fire  devoureth  the  stubble,  and  the  flame  consumeth  the  chaff,  so  their  root  shall  be  as  rottenness." — Isa.  v.
24.  "  And  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  as  fire,  and  the  house  of  Joseph  a  flame,  and  the  house  of  Esau  for  stubble  ;  and  they  shall
kindle  in  them,  and  devour  them,  and  there  shall  not  be  any  of  the  house  of  Esau  remaining." — Obad.  18.

b  Varro,  lib.  i.  cap.  33.  c  Colum.  lib.  vi  cap.  3,  3.  d  Ibid.  vii.  3,  22.

c  '  Nat.  Hist.'  lib.  xviii.  cap.  30.  f  Gen.  xxvi.  12.  6  Matt.  xiii.  8.

J>  See  Herodotus,  i.  193,  ii.  102 ;  Strabo,  783  ;  Diodorus,  i.  19,  34,  57 ;  Theophrastus  (de  Hist-  Plant.),  viii.  7 ;  Pliny,  xvii.  5,  17,
xviii.  1  ;  Varro,  i.  44.

•  Gen.  xli.  5,  47.  k  Syria,  283.  '  Ibid.  296.

cclxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

of  their  land,  from  the  apprehension  that  the  inquiries  of  the  stranger  may  lead  to  new
extortions,  he  declares  that  he  has  reason  to  helieve  that,  in  middling  years,  wheat  yields  twenty-
five  fold;  and  adds  that  in  some  parts  of  the  Haouran  barley  yielded  fifty-five  fold,  and  even
in  some  instances  eighty,  as  in  the  year  1812.  A  Sheikh  inhabiting  a  village  on  the  borders  of
the  Ledja  assured  him  that  from  twenty  mouds  of  wheat  seed  he  once  obtained  twenty
ghararas,  or  one  hundred  and  twenty  fold.  Fields  watered  by  rain  yield  more  in  proportion
to  the  seed  sown  than  those,  which  are  artificially  watered ;  this  is  owing  to  the  seed  being
sown  thinner  in  the  former, — a  confirmation  of  the  suggestion  which  has  already  been
offered.

Where  abundance  of  water  can  be  conducted  into  the  fields  from  neighbouring  springs,  the
soil  is  again  sown,  after  the  grain  harvest,  with  vegetables,  lentils,  pease,  sesamum,  &c.  But
the  lands  which  are  not  capable  of  artificial  irrigation  are  generally  suffered  to  be  fallow  one
year ;  a  part  of  them  is  sometimes  sown  in  spring  with  sesamum,  cucumbers,  melons  and
pulse.

In  abundant  years,  wheat  sells  at  fifty  piastres  the  gharara,  or  about  fifty  shillings  for
fifteen  hundred  weight;  but  in  1811,  a  year  of  scarcity,  the  gharara  rose  as  high  as  one  hundred
and  ninety  piastres.  The  price  of  barley  is  about  half  that  of  wheat.  The  wheat  of  the
Haouran  is  at  this  day  considered  equal,  if  not  superior,  to  any  other  in  Syria.

In  those  districts  the  wealth  of  a  man  is  estimated  by  the  number  of  the  pairs  or  yokes  of
cows  or  oxen  which  he  employs  in  the  cultivation  of  his  fields.  If  it  be  asked  whether  such
a  one  has  piastres  (a  common  phrase  for  expressing  wealth)  it  will  probably  be  answered,  "  a
great  deal ;  he  drives  six  pairs  of  oxen."  There  are  but  few  now,  however,  who  have  as
many  as  six  yokes  of  oxen.  A  man  with  two  or  three  is  esteemed  wealthy  ;  and  such  a  one
has  probably  two  camels,  perhaps  a  mare,  or  at  least  a  gedish  (a  gelding),  or  a  couple  of
asses,  and  forty  or  fifty  sheep  or  goats.  This  still  subsisting  custom  of  the  country  serves  well
to  illustrate  a  mode  of  estimating  property  with  which  the  reader  of  the  Bible  is  familiar.

Esculent  Vegetables. — Kortea  takes  notice  that  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine  still
continue  to  sow  various  garden  vegetables,  part  of  which  are  unknown  to  us,  and  many  of
them,  as  cucumbers,  cauliflowers  and  others,  come  to  maturity  twice  in  the  same  year — in
spring  and  autumn.  Under  April  we  named  the  vegetables  which  come  into  use  that  month
and  the  present,  and  which  continue  through  the  summer.

Plants. — Sage  and  rue  are  displayed  abundantly  on  Mount  Carmel,  and  in  other  congenial
situations.15

Mandrakes,0  which  are  in  great  plenty  in  Galilee,  this  month  yield  ripe  fruit.d  The
name  of  this  plant  occurs  in  our  Bibles  as  a  translation  of  the  Hebrew  D^TH-  dudaim,
which  is  found  in  two  places  of  the  Bible,  one  of  whiche  describes  the  fruit  as  being  ripe  at  the
time  of  wheat  harvest,  and  apparently,  as  being  provocative  of  amorous  desires ;  while  the
other f  assigns  to  it  a  pleasant  smell,  and  names  it  along  with  the  pomegranate.  All  these
characters  apply  to  the  mandrake  in  Palestine,  and  we  are  therefore  inclined  to  agree  in  the
preference  of  our  public  version,  without  concerning  ourselves  with  the  numerous  alternatives
which  have  been  suggested, — the  rather  as  it  is  our  purpose  only  to  deal  with  plants  as  actually
growing  in  Palestine.  From  the  manner  in  which  its  qualities  are  alluded  to  by  sacred  and
other  writers,  a  description  of  the  plant  may  not  be  unacceptable.

The  mandrake  has  a  long  taper  root,  shaped  like  a  parsnip,  and  almost  of  the  same  colour,
but  a  little  darker.  This  root  runs  three  or  four  feet  deep  in  the  ground.  This  is  sometimes
single, but  often  divided  into  two  or  three  branches  (probably  according  to  the  age  of  the  root).
Immediately  from  the  crown  of  this  root  rises  a  circle  of  leaves,  as  in  the  lettuce,  which  indeed
they  greatly  resemble,  except  in  the  colour,  which  is  of  a  darker  green.     This  tuft  of  leaves  is

a  Reise,  187-  b  Egmont  aud  Heyman,  ii.  11.  c  Atropa  mandragora .

<1  Hasselquist,  184;  Schulze,  P.  V.  197.  Mariti,  ii.  275.  c  Gen.  xxx.  14,  15,  16.

f  Sol.  Song,  vii.  13.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  cclxv

at  first  erect,  but  when  they  attain  their  full  growth,  they  spread  open,  and  lie  upon  the  ground.
They  are  more  than  a  foot  in  length,  and  in  the  middle  are  four  inches  broad,  growing  narrow
towards  both  ends.  Among  these  come  out  the  blossoms,  which  are  of  a  purple  colour  in
Palestine,"  but  in  this  country  of  a  greenish  white ;  and  this,  with  other  circumstances,  would
suggest  that  the  plant  is  somewhat  varied  by  the  difference  of  climate,  by  which  in  our
own  it  has  been  divested  of  some  of  the  qualities  which  constituted  its  claim  to  be  regarded
as  the  Hebrew  dudaim.h  The  fruit  when  full  grown  is  not,  in  this  country,  larger  than  a  nut-
meg, of  a  yellowish-green  colour  when  ripe,  and  full  of  pulp.  Here  the  whole  plant  is  fetid,
and  reputed  to  be  poisonous,  although  in  small  doses  it  has  been  used  medicinally,  especially
as  an  opiate.  But  in  Palestine,  the  fruit  attains  the  size,  and  is  of  the  colour  of  a  small  apple,
ruddy,  and  of  a  most  agreeable  odour.  "  Our  guide,"  says  Mariti,  "  thought  us  fools  for
suspecting  it  to  be  unwholesome.  He  ate  of  it  freely  himself,  and  it  is  generally  valued  by
the  inhabitants  as  exhilarating  their  spirits,  and  a  provocative  to  venery."c  When  at  Nazareth,
(May  16th,  n.  s.)  Hasselquist  writes,  "What  I  found  most  remarkable  in  this  village,  was  the
great  quantity  of  mandrakes  that  grew  in  a  vale  below  it.  I  had  not  the  pleasure  to  see  the
plant  in  blossom  ;  the  fruit  now  hanging  ripe  to  the  stem,  which  lay  withered  on  the  ground  ;
but  I  got  several  roots  which  I  found  it  difficult  to  procure  entire,  as  the  inhabitants  had  no
spades,  but  a  kind  of  hoe,  or  ground-axe  ;  with  this  they  cut  up  the  earth,  and  hurt  the  root,
which  in  some  plants  descended  six  or  eight  feet  under  ground.  From  the  season  in  which
this  mandrake  blossoms  and  ripens  its  fruit,  one  might  form  a  conjecture  that  it  is  Rachel's
dudaim.  These  were  brought  her  in  the  wheat  harvest,  which  in  Galilee  is  in  the  month  of  May,
about  this  time,  and  the  mandrake  was  now  in  fruit. "d  He  says  he  had  not  noticed  it  in
Judea;  but  it  was  there  that  Mariti  observed  it.  This  account,  as  far  as  it  goes,  agrees  with
that  of  the  Abbate  ;  but  he  adds  that  the  Arabs  call  it  by  a  name  which  signifies  "  the  Devil's
meat," — perhaps  (but  he  does  not  say)  from  the  character  of  its  stimulating  qualities,  to  which
we  have  already  alluded,  and  for  which  Maundrell  also  states  that  the  chief  priest  of  the
Samaritans  informed  him  the  mandrake  was  still  celebrated.

Notwithstanding  some  difference,  it  would  appear  to  be  the  fruit  of  this  mandrake,  or  of
some  very  similar  plant,  which  Burckhardt  describes  as  a  strange  thing.  Travelling  this
month  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jebel  Heish,  he  states  : — "  The  Arab  who  accompanied  me
presented  me  with  a  fruit  which  grows  wild  in  these  parts,  but  which  is  unknown  in  the
northern  parts  of  Syria,  and  even  at  Damascus.  It  is  of  the  size  of  a  small  egg,  of  the  colour
of  the  tomato  or  love-apple,  of  a  sweet  agreeable  taste,  and  full  of  juice.  It  grows  upon  a
shrub  (?)  about  six  inches  high,  which  I  did  not  see,  but  was  told  that  its  roots  were  three  or
four  feet  in  length,  and  presented  the  figure  of  a  man  in  all  its  parts.  The  Arabs  call  the
fruit  jerabouh."e

B  Mariti.

t>  So  Haller,  in  German;/,  describes  the  flowers  as  having  a  tinge  of  violet.  But  little  stress  is  laid  on  the  colours  of  flowers
which  differ  much  with  difference  of  climate  and  situation.  Even  the  same  plant  will  oiten  change  its  colour  by  a  very  slight
removal,  as  any  reader  may  have  noticed  in  the  case  of  stocks.

c  Mariti,  ii.  195.  d  Hasselquist,  p.  160.

e  '  Syria,'  282.  Since  the  root  of  the  mandrake  has  been  so  much  noticed  in  the  preceding  statement,  it  may  be  as  well  to  men-
tion that  its  supposed  resemblance  to  the  human  figure  has  suggested  a  considerable  number  of  superstitious  and  mure  of  impos-
tures. The  roots  were  not  only  alleged  to  resemble  the  human  form  (and  as  such  are  figured  in  old  herbils),  but  to  be  distinguished
into  the  male,  with  a  long  beard,  and  female  with  a  redundant  head  of  hair.  Mountebank  doctors  used  to  carry  about  fictitious
images,  shaped  from  the  roots  of  briony  and  other  plants,  cut  into  form,  or  forced  to  grow  through  moulds  of  earthenware,  and
offered  them  to  notice  as  mandrake  roots.  They  were  fabled  to  grow  under  the  gallows,  where  the  matter  falling  from  the  dead
body  gave  them  the  human  shape.  It  was  alleged  that  the  root  uttered  terrible  shrieks  or  the  most  appalling  groans  when  dug  up ;
and  it  was  seriously  inculcated  that  he  who  would  take  up  a  mandrake  plant,  ought,  in  common  prudence,  to  tie  a  do;;  to  it  for  that
purpose,  to  avoid  the  fearful  doum  which  would  assuredly  befal  him  if  the  deed  were  done  by  his  own  hand.  In  such  a  case  the
dug  dies  on  the  spot,  when  its  struggles  have  drawn  out  the  root,  and  the  owner  may  take  it  with  impunity.  These  curious  ideas
are  not  European  or  of  modern  date.  These,  and  more  of  the  like  sort,  are  the  notions  which  the  orientals  give  of  the  mandrake  ;
and,  as  to  their  date,  it  is  probable  that  this  plant  is  intended  by  Josephus  in  describing  the  root  baaras,  of  which  he  tells  many
wonderful  things  ;  among  others,  the  mode  of  taking  it  by  the  help  of  a  dog.  It*  use  was,  he  says,  for  the  expulsion  of  evil  spirits,
who  could  not  endure  its  smell.  To  this  baaras  he  also  ascribes  a  luminous  property,  the  colour  of  flame,  and  flashes  like  light-
ning at  night.  Eugene  Roger  has  a  chapter,  '  De  la  prudigieusc  plante  de  Baras,'  in  which  he  speaks  of  a  plant  noticed  by  him
about  a  league  from  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  ou  the  road  to  Damascus.  He  says  they  begin  to  be  noticed  in  the  month  of  May,
when  the  snows  have  disappeared.  Himself,  travelling  with  three  Maronites,  saw  five  or  six  of  these  plants,  which  at  night  shone
with  a  light  like  that  of  a  candle,  but  had  no  luminous  appearance  by  day.  Determined  to  make  an  experiment,  he  and  his
friends  took  three  leaves  lrom  three  different  plants,  and  wrapped  them  up  in  their  pocket  handkerchiefs  :  but  from  the  time  they

vol.  i.  2  m

cclxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

The  culture  of  cotton  receives  considerable  attention  in  Syria  and  Palestine,  if  we  may
judge  from  the  frequent  mention  of  cotton-fields  by  travellers,  who  give  little  other  information
on  the  subject.  Indeed  it  is  not  necessary  to  enter  into  particulars  concerning  the  cotton
culture  of  Palestine,  seeing  that  there  are  other  countries  in  which  it  is  much  more  abundantly
and  conspicuously  produced.

Both  Walch  and  Buhle  experienced  a  difficulty,  not  greatly  to  the  credit  of  their  research,
in  settling  the  time  of  sowing  cotton  in  Palestine ;  and  this  chiefly  because  Korte  affirms  that
the  plant  is  sown  in  autumn,  bears  the  Syrian  winter,  and  in  the  month  of  May  puts  forth  a
yellow  blossom  which  gives  place  to  a  ball  resembling  a  walnut  in  which  the  cotton  is  con-
tained ;a  whereas  Pococke,  Maundrell,  Hasselquist,  and  others,  affirm  that  the  cotton  was  sown
in  April  or  May,  and  in  the  latter  month  notice  extensive  fields  of  the  young  plants.  They
overlook  the  testimony  of  Rauwolff,  who  noticed  cotton-fields  in  October  and  November,b  thus
confirming  a  portion  of  Korte's  testimony ;  and  the  other  portion  is  incidentally  confirmed  by
Elliot,  who,  in  the  early  part  of  May,  at  the  village  of  Nain,  found  a  number  of  persons
engaged  in  clearing  cotton  from  the  pods,  which  must  have  been  the  product  of  an  autumnal
sowing.0  The  explanation  of  these  apparent  contradictions  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  both
are  right;  and  that  there  is,  as  in  the  case  of  corn,  both  an  autumnal  and  spring  sowing,  and
a  spring  and  autumnal  crop.  With  due  regard  to  the  climate  and  to  the  seasons  at  which  the
rains  commence  and  terminate,  it  appears  to  us  that  cotton  might  be  sown  at  any  time  from
August  to  May,  just  as  the  comparison  of  these  statements  would  seem  to  require.  Nothing
can  be  more  different  than  the  periods  of  soAving  in  different  countries,  varying  with
these  circumstances.  All  the  conditions  of  the  question  seem  to  be  illustrated  by  the  following
statement,  which,  although  having  a  primary  reference  to  Africa,  is  obviously  of  general  appli-
cation : — "  In  situations  where  the  rains  are  not  violent,  the  cotton  seed  is  generally  put  into
the  ground  in  the  early  part  of  the  rainy  season.  But  in  places  differently  circumstanced,  the
operation  is  deferred  till  the  rains  are  within  a  month  or  two  of  their  termination,  with  a  view
both  to  guard  against  an  over  luxuriant  vegetation,  whereby  the  plants  might  exhaust  their
strength  in  branches  and  leaves,  and  to  avoid  the  injurious  consequences  of  rain  at  the  times
the  blossoms  are  appearing  and  the  pods  forming.  The  best  time  for  planting  must  be  regu-
lated by  experience,  and  by  the  result  of  experiments  to  be  made  at  all  seasons ;  but  the
earlier  the  seed  can  safely  be  sown  the  better. "d  To  which  we  may  add  the  statement  respect-
ing the  sowing  of  cotton  in  the  Isle  of  Bourbon,  which  is  obviously  applicable  as  a  general
statement,  and  to  Syria  in  particular,  when  allowance  has  been  made  for  the  circumstance  that
the  rainy  season  begins  sooner  and  ends  later  in  that  country  :— "  As  the  rains  commence  in
October  and  November,  these  months  are  generally  chosen  for  planting  cotton.  The  planta-
tions, however,  can  be  formed  as  late  as  January  in  all  parts  of  the  island,  but  must  not  be
delayed  longer  where  the  violence  of  the  rain  ceases  in  March,  because  the  plants  will  not
have  acquired  strength  sufficient  to  support  the  drought  at  the  time  they  set  in.  In  those
districts  where  rain  is  more  frequent,  they  may  plant  at  all  times ;  but  the  seed  sown  in  winter
thrives  more  slowly  and  languishes  till  the  beginning  of  the  heats  and  rain.     It  may  also  be

were  separated  from  the  parent  plant  they  lost  their  luminous  properties.  His  three  friends  then  enclosed  three  of  the  plants  with
the  fillets  of  their  turbans,  intending  to  root  them  up  with  proper  care  in  the  morning ;  but  to  their  infinite  astonishment,  the
plants,  and  even  the  leaves  in  the  handkerchiefs,  had  by  that  time  disappeared.  The  Maronites  referred  the  whole  affair  to  demons
and  magic ;  but  Roger  inclines  more  to  the  opinion  that  the  plant  in  a  certain  stage  of  its  growth  becomes  replete  with  a  bitu-
minous humour,  which  is  inflamed  by  the  antiperistasis  of  the  cold  night  air  of  the  high  mountains,  and  by  which  the  plant  itself
is  consumed.  We  have  great  confidence  in  Roger's  honesty;  and  believe  what  he  tells  about  the  luminous  appearance  of  the
plant  and  its  cessation  in  the  disparted  leaves,  but  are  disposed  to  think  that  their  disappearance  by  the  morning  was  the  result  of
some  mystification  on  the  part  of  his  Maronite  companions,  natives  of  the  mountain.  Calmet,  who  has  a  curious  article  on  the  sub-
ject, thinks  that  the  luminous  apprarance  of  the  plant  may  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  that  glow-worms  find  something  attrac-
tive in  the  plant,  and  love  to  be  about  it.     The  Arabs  call  it  Serag-al-cashrob ,  or  the  Devil's  Candle.

We  have  introduced  these  particulars  here  without  undertaking  to  say  to  what  extent  they  are  applicable  to  the  mandrake  :  but
it  seems  to  us  that  the  baaras  of  Josephus  is  probably  the  plant  mentioned  by  Roger  under  the  same  name  ;  and  that  it  is  a  species
of  the  mandrake,  if  not  the  atropa  mandragora.

a  Reise,576.  b  Rauwolff,  160,  166.  c  Elliot,  ii.  360.

d  '  Directions  for  the  Culture  of  Cotton  in  Africa  (printed  by  the  African  Society  after  Mr.  Hunt's  publication  of  1808),'  given  in
the '  Report  of  the  proceedings  of  the  East  India  Company,  in  regard  to  the  Production  of  Cotton- Wool,'  p.  380.  This  Report  con-
tains a  large  mass  of  valuable  but  undigested  information  on  the  subject  of  which  it  treats.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.  cclxvii

sown  in  dry  weather.  It  remains  in  the  ground,  without  injury  or  annoyance  from  insects,
till  it  begins  to  vegetate  when  the  rains  fall."11

The  proper  Oriental  species  of  cotton,  the  r/ossyphtm  herbaceum,  is  that  which  seems  the
most  generally  cultivated  in  Palestine.  It  is  indeed  the  only  species  in  Strand's  botanical
catalogue;  but  from  the  manner  in  which  the  cotton  plant  is  sometimes  mentioned,  we  more
than  suspect  that  there  is  also  one  of  the  biennial  or  perennial  species, — most  probably  the
gossypium  arboreum,  which  is  cultivated  (as  well  as  the  other)  in  Arabia  and  Egypt.  In  the
latter  country  the  G.  arboreum  is  cultivated  in  Upper  Egypt,  and  is  there  sown  at  two  periods
of  the  year,  the  first  early  in  April,  and  the  other  in  July;  but  the  G.  herbaceum,  which  is
cultivated  in  the  Delta,  is  only  sown  in  April,  just  after  the  corn  harvest;  the  soil  is  then  very
dry,  but  receives  strong  irrigation  both  before  and  after  the  seed  is  committed  to  it.b  But
with  reference  to  a  product  on  which  so  much  depends  on  rain,  little  is  to  be  inferred  from  the
times  of  a  country  so  peculiarly  circumstanced  in  that  respect  as  Egypt.

Monro  c  found  the  less  periwinkle  d  and  the  Italian  squill  e  in  flower  just  below  the  snows
of  Lebanon,  serving  to  show  that  even  in  that  cold  region  the  sun  has  influence.  In  the
valley  of  Baalbec,  he  also  took  notice  of  the  spiked  veronica/  Lord  Lindsays  observes  that  at
this  season  a  flower  resembling  the  hollyhock  "  adorns  every  field  in  Palestine."

Burckhardt,h  travelling  this  month  in  Sinai,  took  notice  of  the  pretty  red  flower  of  the
noman  plant,1  which  abounds  in  all  the  valleys  of  Sinai,  and  is  also  seen  among  the  most
barren  granite  rocks  of  the  mountains.  It  is  indeed  in  such  barren  rocky  places,  and  dry
sandy  soils,  that  most  of  these  succulent  plants  delight.  We  do  not  know  if  this  of  Euphorbia
is  found  in  Palestine — probably  so,  as  it  certainly  has  several  species  of  this  extensive  and
singular  genus  of  plants.     The  known  species  of  Palestine  are  named  below.k

Burckhardt,  when  in  one  of  the  valleys  of  Sinai,  notices  that  many  of  its  herbs  were
odoriferous  "  as  the  Obeytheran,1  the  Sille,m  and  the  Shyh,  or  Artemisia.  The  Bedouins
collect  also  the  herb  Adjrem,  which  they  dry,  break  in  pieces,  and  pound  between  stones,  and
then  use  it  as  a  substitute  for  soap  in  washing  their  linen."  We  much  regret  that  he  does
not  name,  nor  can  we  discover  the  botanical  name  of  the  plant  thus  indicated,  as  some
purifying  or  cleansing  herb  is  undoubtedly  denoted  by  the  Hebrew  word,11  translated  "  soap  "  in
Jer.  ii.  22,  and  Mai.  iii.  2,  and  it  is  therefore  desirable  that  we  should  be  well  acquainted  with
the  plants  which  are  applied  to  such  uses  at  present.  This  reminds  us  to  mention  that  after
the  last  rains  (in  May)  the  heath  is  cut  at  Joppa  and  burnt,  and  the  ashes  used  in  the  manu-
facture of  soap.0  It  is  remarkable  that  the  deserts  produce  in  the  greatest  abundance  the
sorts  of  plants,  the  ashes  of  which  afford  the  vegetable  alkali  required  for  this  purpose.  At
Aleppo  the  ashes  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  soap  are  brought  from  the  desert  by  the
Arabs.?

The  botanical  observations  of  Hasselquist  in  Palestine  were  all  made  in  the  months  of  April
and  May.  And  it  has  occurred  to  us  as  the  best  course  to  follow  him  throughout,  and  report
in  one  connected  statement  such  of  his  remarks  as  have  not  been  incorporated  in  the  pre-
ceding pages  of  this  chapter,  or  which  it  may  not  seem  desirable  to  reserve  for  future  use.
We  occasionally  add,  from  other  sources,  such  observations  as  seem  required  when  subjects  are
mentioned  to  which  we  do  not  propose  to  give  any  further  attention.

He  landed  at  Jaffa  on  the  first  of  April.  Here  he  noticed  fig-trees,  as  beautiful  as  any  he
had  seen  in  the  Levant,  likewise  several  sycamores,  which  became  scarcer  as  he  advanced  into

a  '  Remarks  on  the  Culture  of  Cotton  in  the  Island  of  Bourbon,'  in  the  East  India  Company's  '  Report,'  p.  394.  See  also  the  in-
structive Article  on  Cotton  in  Mr.  Porter's  '  Tropical  Agriculturist.'

b  Girard,  '  Memoire  sur  V Agriculture  de  l'Egypte,'  in  '  Descript.  de  l'Egypte,  tome  xvii.  p.  104,  106.'

c  Vol.  ii.  pp.  89  and  102.  d  Vinca  inor.  e  Scillu  Italica.

f  Veronica  spicata.  S  Vol.  ii.  p.  85.

1'  'Syria,' 571.  >  Euphorbia  retusa  of  Forskal.

k  Euphorbia  viminalis  ;  E.  r.hamcesyce ;  E.peplus;  E.thymifolia;  E.portlandica;  E.serrata.  There  are  probably  more  for
Russell's  list  Cor  Aleppo  contains  fourteen  species.

1  Santolinafragrantissima.  m  He  says,  "  Perhaps  the  Zilla  Myagrum  of  Forskal.''

n  JV"^,  borith.  °  Korte,  199.  P  Russell,  i.  79.

2  m  2

cclxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

the  country.  In  the  gardens  the  terebinth  tree,  the  orange  and  the  peach  tree  also  attracted
his  notice.  In  the  gardens  a  small  quantity  of  hempa  was  also  cultivated.  The  Moslems
reduce  the  leaves  to  powder,  and  make  with  it  a  narcotic  confection  which  has  the  same  effect
upon  them  as  opium.  For  the  same  purpose  the  leaf  is  also  smoked  by  itself  or  with  tobacco. b
The  other  plants  which  he  noticed  in  that  vicinity  are,  golden  henbane  ;c  pellitory  ;d  boxthorn  ;e
with  which  the  Latin  monks  believe  the  thorny  crown  of  Christ  to  have  been  made ;  a  species
of  spurge  f  in  the  hedges  ;  poppy  ;S  and  mallow. h

Between  Jaffa  and  Rama  entire  plains  were  covered  with  ox-eye,1  with  oblong  dentated
leaves ;  which  made  them  much  yellower  than  the  plains  of  Sweden  are  in  May  from  marsh-
marigold  and  crowsfoot  (or  caltha  palustris  and  ranunculus).  In  other  places  the  fields  were
white  with  a  sort  of  matricaria,  or  feverfew.  The  thistle k  and  tower  mustard  were  also
noticed.

At  Jerusalem  the  following  plants  were  noticed  by  him  in  April : — fescue  grass,1  growing  in
the  dry  grounds  around  the  town,  and  seeming  very  grateful  to  the  sheep  and  goats ;  water-
cresses  ;  two  species  of  geranium  ;m  hound's  tongue ;  great  goose  grass ;  archangel  ;n  and  the
Roman  nettle.0

On  Mount  Sion,  ranunculus ;  betony;  horehound;  pale-flowered  garlic  ;r  buckler  mustard;
trefoil  ;i  but  as  this  grows  very  small,  Hasselquist  says  we  may  safely  conclude  the  soil
barren;  treacle  mustard;  whitlow  grass;  camomile;  hawk's-weed;  ox-eye;  and  shrubby
horsetail/  which  we  should  hardly  expect  to  find  in  so  dry  a  situation.

On  the  11th  of  April  our  botanist  went  to  Jericho.  Near  Jerusalem  he  found  the  carob
tree,  the  myrtle,  and  the  terebinth  tree  growing  on  the  hills ;  but  further  on  the  hills  became
bare.  The  valleys,  like  the  hills,  are  deserted  and  uncultivated,  but  contain  a  good  red  mould
which  would  well  repay  the  care  of  the  husbandman.  On  the  way,  he  botanised  on  the
Mount  Quarantania8 — the  Mount  of  Temptation — and  found : — the  mountain  onion ;'  the  castor-
oil  tree  ;u  buckthorn  ;v  chaste-tree;  wild  olive;  the  fig-tree;  spurge;  ranunculus;  mallow;"
ox-eye  ;x  goose-foot  ;y  porcupine.2

Among  the  plants  just  named  there  are  only  two  on  which  we  shall  detain  the  reader.  The
further  mention  of  the  mallow  reminds  us  that  this  plant  is  once  named  in  our  translation  of
the  Bible.  In  Job  xxx.  4,  the  poor,  in  times  of  scarcity,  are  described  as  cutting  up  "  mallows"
for  their  food.  It  is  much  doubted  that  any  species  of  mallow  is  really  intended ;  but  it  is
nevertheless  true  that  mallows  are  used  for  food  by  poor  people  in  Palestine.  "  Master  Wil-
liam Biddulph,"  travelling  from  Aleppo  to  Jerusalem  (in  March,  1600),  halted  at  a  village
called  Lacmine,  and  "  after  the  showre,  while  our  horses  were  preparing,  we  walked  into  the
fields  neere  unto  the  church,  and  saw  many  poore  people  gathering  ?nallows  and  three-leafed
grasse,  and  asked  them  what  they  did  with  it ;  and  they  answered  that  it  was  all  their  food,
and  that  they  boyled  it,  and  did  eate  it.  Then  we  took  pitie  on  them,  and  gave  them  bread,
which  they  received  very  joyfully,  and  blessed  God  that  there  was  bread  in  the  world,  and  said
they  had  not  seen  bread  the  space  of  many  moneths."aa

The  other  is  the  goose-foot,  or  chenopodium,  of  which  several  species  were  observed  by  Hassel-
quist himself,  and  others,  in  Palestine.  First  there  is  the  green  goose- foot,bb  which  is  probably
no  more  than  a  variety  of  the  common  or  white  goose-foot,  so  abundant  in  England.  Then  there
is  the  species  called  "  the  oak  of  Jerusalem,"  valued  for  the  ambrosial  scent  of  the  leaves  when
bruised,  although  the  flowers  have  no  beauty.     Palestine  also  possesses  the  very  beautiful  flax-

a  Cannabis  vulgaris.  b  Buvckhardt,  €03.  c  Hyoscyamus  aureus.

d  Parietaria  uffiiin-  e  Lyc.ium  spinosum.

t  Not  named,  described — "  Euphorbia/oZiVs  ohlongis  lanceolatis  verticil  latis,  hei'baeea,  inermis,  pedalis."

8  Papaver  rkoeas.  h  Malva  vulgaris.  >  "  Buphthalum  fuliis  obhmgis  dentatis."

t  Cnicus  tumentosw.  '  Festucafusia  ?  Two  other  species  were  noticed  by  him  in  Palestine — W.  myuros  and  F.  reptatrix.

m  Geranium  rotvndifolium  ;  G.columbinum.  n  I.amium  album.  °    Urticn  pilttlifira.

P  Allium  pallens.  1  Trifotium  glubusum ;  T.  tomentosum ;  T.  resupinatum.  r  Ephedra  distachia.

s  See  the  account  of  this  mountain  at  p.  xl.  '  Cepa  montana.  "  Rir.inui  palma  Christi.

v  Rhamnus  spina  Christi.  w  Ma'va  ruderum.  x  Buphthalmum  commune.

y  Chenopodium  ruderum.  z  Ilystrix  cristata.

aa  '  Letter  of  Master  William  Biddulph  from  Jerusalem,'  in  Purchas,  p.  13M.  bb  Chenopodium  viride.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— MAY.

cclxix

leaved  goose-foot,a  otherwise  belvidere,
or  summer  cypress,  so  called  from  the
resemblance  of  its  figure  to  that  of  the
cypress-tree,  although  its  leaves  are  of
a  bright  green.  There  is  also  the  sea
goose-foot,b  which,  notwithstanding  its
name,  grows  also  abundantly  on  the
banks  of  the  larger  rivers  of  Western
Asia.  It  varies  in  appearance  with
its  situation.  On  the  banks  of  the
Tigris  and  Euphrates  it  is  an  erect
and  woody  shrub,  while  in  many  places
it  is  a  small  and  decumbent  plant,  es-
teemed as  an  excellent  pot-herb.  It
is  also    abundant  on  the  borders  of

[Sea  Goose-foot.    Chenopodium  Maritimum.]

the  Red  Sea ;  and  although  found  beside  rivers,  its  favourite  situation  is  certainly  on  the
sea-shore  or  on  the  borders  of  salt  marshes.  The  other  Palestine  species  is  the  chenopodium
fruticosum.

The  most  remarkable  plants  which  Hasselquist  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jericho  were
"  the  famous  asclepias  gigantea  (gigantic  swallow-wort)  of  Judea,  and  a  tree  whose  flowers
resemble  a  honeysuckle,  and  that  has  thick  leaves."

On  the  banks  of  the  Jordan  he  noticed  rhamnus  {spina  Christi  ?),  the  chaste-tree,  and
willows,  of  which  the  pilgrims  cut  staves.

Returning  from  the  head  of  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  encampment  near  Jericho,  our  botanist
notes: — "  A  lichen  covered  in  several  places  the  clay  ground  in  this  large  plain,  which  was
somewhat  strange  in  an  open  desert.  There  grew  in  several  places  of  this  desert  the  tamarisk-
tree  ;  Remauria  ;  a  kind  of  the  Arabian  kali  ;c  and  a  labiated  flower  of  Linnaeus,  class  didy-
namia,  which  had  a  fetid  smell,  and  is  called  by  the  Arabs  basel,  which  signifies  a  leek.d  I
found  but  one  shrub  of  the  mimosa  nilotica,  or  true  acacia."e  In  a  separate  list  he  adds  a
species  of  nightshade f  and  of  heath  &  to  those  which  have  been  named.

When  he  returned  to  Jerusalem  he  found  occa-
sion to  notice  in  the  court  of  a  mosque  the  Florence
iris,h  the  common  yellow  jasmine,  the  almond-tree,
and  the  elm-leaved  sumach.1  In  the  court  of  the
church  of  St.  Mary's  Sepulchre  he  noticed  a  bird
cherry,  or  cherry-laurel  tree,k  three  fathoms  round.
Besides  the  species  of  jasmine  just  named,1  Pa-
lestine also  possesses  the  Arabian™  and  Spanish"
jasmines.  The  very  beautiful  Arabian  species,
which,  wherever  it  will  grow,  is  so  much  esteemed
for  its  highly  odoriferous  flowers,  which  it  con-
tinues to  produce  during  the  greater  part  of  the
year,  is  an  object  of  culture  in  Arabia,  Egypt,  and
Palestine,  as  well  as  in  more  eastern  countries.
With  this,  and  with  the  species  indicated  by
Hasselquist,  as  well  as  with  the  vine,  the  towns-
people of  Palestine  delight  the  alleys  and  arbours
in  their  gardens ;°  and  there  are  few  products  of
nature  more  suitable  or  pleasant  for  this  use.    We

[Arabian  Jasmine.     Jasmimum  Sambac]

a  Chenopodium  scoparia.  b  Chenopjdium  maritimum.  c  Kali fruticosum  (Salsola  fruticosaf)  glasswort.

  Irisflmentina.  '  Rhus  coriaria.  k  Prunus  padus.  '  Jasmimum  fruticans.

m  J.  sambac.  "  J.  grandiflorum.  °  D'Arvienx,  ii.  58.

cclxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

more  than  expected  to  find  in  Palestine  the  common  white  jasmine,a  which  Parkinson  supposes
to  have  been  originally  brought  from  Syria  into  Spain,  whence  we  obtained  it ;  but  not  finding
it  named  by  any  of  our  authorities,  we  dare  not  set  it  down.  The  straight  branches  of  the
jasmine  and  the  cherry  tree  are  much  preferred  by  the  Western  Asiatics  for  the  long  stems  of
their  tobacco  pipes.

Hasselquist  took  a  journey  to  Bethlehem  on  the  19th  April,  and  returned  the  next  day.
Near  the  "fountains  of  Solomon"  on  that  road,  he  found  maiden-hair  ;b  and  water-cresses;0
stinking-bean  trefoil,  upon  the  neighbouring  hills ;  wild  marjoram,  and  the  common  sweet

basil.

Afterwards  our  botanist  went  from  Jerusalem  to  Jaffa,  and  then  to  Acre,  whence  he  made
an  excursion  into  Galilee  and  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  which,  with  his  return  and  further  journey
to  Sidon,  occupied  him  one  month,  from  the  21st  April  to  21st  May.  At  Rama,  and  in  the
way  between  it  and  Jerusalem,  he  noticed  terebinth-trees,  the  chaste-tree ;  the  tamarisk  ;  the
carob-tree  ;  one  sycamore  at  Rama  ;  artichoke  ;d  hemlock  ;e  and  six  species  of  thistles.1

At  Acre  he  noticed  the  viscous  campion,  the  plantain^  lion's-tail  grass,  winter-cherry ,h
and  lavender  cotton-leaved  milfoil.1

Leaving  Acre  on  May  2nd  for  Nazareth,  he  passed  by  fields  of  newly  sown  cotton,  and  saw
the  peasantry  busied  in  the  barley  harvest.  In  the  plain  of  Zebulon  he  saw  some  beech-treesk
in  a  grove  composed  chiefly  of  oaks.

Mount  Tabor  offered  a  rich  harvest  of  botanical  observations,  the  results  of  which  are
offered  in  the  following  list: — hound's-tongue  ;l  stinking  rest-harrow  ;m  poppy,  two  species;11
ox-eye j°  artichoke;  rue;  laser-wort ;?  burnt  saxifrage ;1  trefoil ;r  oak;8  carob-tree;  various
species  of  sage  ;'  wormwood  ;u  holly,  in  the  valleys  ;  terebinth,  on  the  rocks ;  myrtle  ;  viper-
o-rass  ;v  succory  ;w  ivy;  mountain-onion;  and  oats  (wild).

After  returning  to  Acre  (on  May  14th)  and  staying  there  several  days,  Hasselquist  proceeded
to  Sidon,  along  the  shore.  For  the  first  two  leagues,  a  fine  country  producing  the  common
plants  and  the  Egyptian  willow,"  which  he  had  not  before  seen  in  Palestine,  that  which  grows
beside  the  Jordan  being  the  common  weeping  willow  ;y  there  were  also  incredible  quantities
of  wormwood.  Further  on,  beyond  the  White  Cape,  the  botanist  rested  under  "  a  green  bav
tree," l  of  which  tree  he  had  not  met  with  any  specimens  in  Judea  or  Galilee.  A.  rubus
(bramble)  which  he  had  not  seen  before,  grew  among  the  ruins  of  Scanderetta.  About  the
so-called  Pools  of  Solomon,  near  Tyre,aa  our  traveller  notes  the  names  of  several  plants,  but  none
which  he  had  not  seen  elsewhere,  except  a  species  of  convolvulus  ;bb  another  of  nightshade ;  and
the  annual  mercury  .cc     At  Sidon,  he  writes  : — "  Cordia  sebesten,  which  is  a  rare  tree  in  Egypt,

a  Jasmimum  officin.  b  Adianthum  capillus.  c  Nasturtium  aquaticum  Sisymbrium.

<1  Cynara  cardunculus.  e  Cicuta  virosa.  f  Cnrdui  and  Cnici.

S  He  does  not  name  the  species.  There  are  three  in  Palestine, — Plantago  major;  P.  lagopus;  and  P.  cynops,  of  which  the  last  is
found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem.

1)  Physalis  alkekengi.  '  Achillea  santolina.  k  Fagus  syhatica.

1  Cynoglossum  hispidum  m  Ononis  foetida  n  Papaver  rhoeu: ;  and  another  described  as  P  ■  Jlore  Jlavescente  pano .

°  Buphthahum  dentatum.  P  Laserpitium  latifolium.  1  Pimpenel/a  qfficin.

r  He  does  not  name  the  species.  It  may  be  well  to  enumerate  those  which  grow  in  Palestine : — Trefolium  Ale.randricum ;  T.
stellalum  ;  T.  uuyus'ifotiu/n ;  T.  incarnatum;  T.globosum;  T.  procumbens;  T.tomentosum;  T.  rewspinatum.  All  these  are  on  the
authority  of  Pococke  and  Hasselquist.

s  Quercus  foliis  dentato-aculeatis.

t  Palestine  affords  the  following  species  of  Salvia  : — S.pomifera;  S.Syriaca;  S.norminum;  S.  verticillatum;  S.verbenaca;  and
two  others  not  named.

a  Absinthium  romanum.  v  Scorzonera.  w  Cichorum  intybus.

x  Saiix  Egyptiaca  vel  S  safsaf.  7  Salix  Babylonica.  z  Psalm  xxxvii.  25,  26.

Ba  Noticed  before  at  p.  cxcix.

t>b  The  species  of  convolvulus  are  numerous  in  Palestine: — C.  scammona,  or  Syrian  bindweed,  or  scammony.  The  species
noticed  here  by  Hasselquist  is,  doubtless,  the  same  to  which  he  refers  in  the  following  passage  of  his  '  Materia  Medica  :' — "  The  best
scammony  in  the  world  is  brought  from  Marasch,  the  residence  of  a  pasha,  about  four  days' journey  from  Aleppo,  near  the  confines
of  Armenia.  It  is  thence  brought  to  Aleppo  in  small  skins,  and  by  the  merchants  sent  to  London  and  Marseilles.  It  was  formerly
to  be  had  very  good  from  Mount  Carmel,  near  Acre ;  but  at  present  scarcely  any  comes  from  that  place,  as  the  Arabian  inhabitants
of  the  mountain  have  neglected  to  gather  it.  I  have  seen  the  convolvulus  from  which  it  is  taken  grow  wild  in  the  vales  between
Nazareth  and  Mount  Carmel."  Martinelli,  an  apothecary  of  Venice,  travelled  into  Syria  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  the  true
scammony,  and  sent  over  a  quantity  of  the  seed,  which  was  sown  and  throve  well  at  Padua  and  Antwerp.  C.  batatus,  not  only  the
roots  of  which,  but  the  young  and  tender  shoots,  are  boiled  and  eaten  ;  C.  hederaceus;  C.  cneorum ;  C.  darycnum ;  C.  althceoides  ;
C.  siculum;  C.cairicum.

cc  Mtrcuralis  annua.

Chap.  VII]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JUNE.  cclxxi

and  is  not  seen  in  Natolia,  grows  wild  in  Palestine.  It  is  so  common  in  the  gardens  of  Seide
that  the  bird-lime  which  is  made  of  its  fruit,  is  one  of  the  principal  articles  of  trade  in  the  town.
Rhus  sumach,  and  a  three-leaved  bramble  (rubus)  grow  spontaneously  here.  Some  authors
reckon  the  tamarind  among  the  trees  of  Seide  ;  but  I  know  not  what  tree  they  mistook  for  it,
as  it  grows  not  near  this  place,  and  not  wild  even  in  Egypt."

Having  thus  followed  Hasselquist  through  Palestine,  and  carefully  noted  down  the  plants
of  which  he  speaks,a  we  must  now  guard  the  reader  from  entertaining  the  notion  that  he  is
now  acquainted  with  the  amount  of  this  traveller's  services  in  illustrating  the  botany  of  Pales-
tine. This  is  very  far  from  being  the  case ;  for  Hasselquist  collected  a  vast  number  of  plants,
of  which  he  takes  no  notice  in  his  letters  and  journals  ;  and  these  being,  on  their  arrival  in
Sweden,  duly  classed  and  named  by  his  illustrious  master  (Linnaeus),  renders  him  the  prin-
cipal contributor  to  the  '  Flora  Palcestina,'  in  which  they  appear  with  his  initial.  In  fact,
this  catalogue  is  almost  entirely  formed  from  the  materials  collected  by  Rauwolff,  Pococke,
and  Hasselquist,  the  value  of  whose  contributions  may  be  estimated  in  the  reverse  order  to
that  in  which  their  names  are  given.

JUNE.

Weather. — In  his  valuable  chapter  '  Of  the  Seasons,'  Dr.  Russell  has  a  statement  respect-
ing the  three  summer  months  of  June,  July,  and  August,  which  we  must  introduce  in  this
place.

"  The  transition  to  the  summer,  though  it  may  be  marked  in  its  gradations,  is  still  abrupt.
Some  showers  commonly  fall  in  the  first  fortnight  of  June  ;  but  from  that  time  to  the  middle
of  September,  it  is  extraordinary  to  see  any  rain.  The  sky,  of  a  fine  pale  blue,  is  constantly
serene,  a  few  white  fleecy  clouds  excepted,  which  sometimes  appear  about  noon,  and  trans-
iently intercept  the  sun's  rays.  The  heat  increasing  gradually  in  June,  continues  nearly  at
the  same  degree  throughout  July  and  part  of  August,  and  would  be  much  more  harassing
were  it  not  mitigated  by  the  westerly  breezes,  which,  in  the  day  time,  may  be  constantly  ex-
pected. When  the  breezes  fail,  the  weather  becomes  extremely  hot,  but  by  no  means  so
oppressive  as  when  the  wind  blows  from  the  north,  the  north-west,  the  east,  the  north-east  or
south-east.

"  From  the  points  now  mentioned  light  airs  are  not  uncommon  in  the  summer,  rendering  the
weather  more  disagreeably  sultry  than  when  an  absolute  calm  prevails ;  but,  when  keeping  in
the  same  quarters,  they  rise  into  brisk  gales,  especially  from  the  east  or  south-east,  they  are
then  felt  dry  and  ardent,  like  air  issuing  from  an  oven ;  they  parch  the  eyes,  the  lips,  and
nostrils,  and  produce  a  lassitude,  joined  with  a  certain  ineffable  oppression  at  the  breast,  to
which  the  natives  are  not  less  sensible  than  the  Europeans.  Within  doors,  the  locks,  with
the  metal  utensils  of  all  kinds,  become  nearly  as  hot  as  if  exposed  to  the  direct  rays  of  the
sun."  He  proceeds  to  observe  that  these  remarkable  hot  winds  do  not  visit  Aleppo  every
year;  many  summers  are  altogether  without  them,  and  more  than  five  or  six  such  days
are  never  observed  in  the  same  season.  It  is  usual,  while  they  last,  to  shut  the  doors  and
windows,  to  exclude  as  much  as  possible  of  their  influence :  for  although  they  are  not  attended
by  such  fatal  effects  as  the  desert- wind  called  samiel,  they  are  extremely  oppressive.  The
samiel  itself,  we  are  informed,  never  reaches  to  Aleppo,  nor  is  very  common  in  the  desert
between  that  city  and  Bussorah.  With  respect  to  these  winds,  we  may  refer  the  reader  to
what  has  already  been  stated  at  p.  cxliii,  and  need  not  here  enlarge  on  the  subject.

From  all  that  Ave  can  collect  from  the  information  offered  by  actual  travellers  in  Palestine,
this  view  of  the  summer  months  applies  with  sufficient  exactness  to  that  part  of  Syria.  The
chief  differences  seem  to  be  that  rain  is  even  more  rare  than  at  Aleppo,  that  the  sky  is  even
more  permanently  clear,  that  the  heat  in  parts  of  the  land  is  rather  greater,  and  that  the  hot
winds  are  experienced  more  frequently  and  in  greater  force.

a  We  have  in  many  instances  sought  to  discover  the  specific  name  assigne  1  by  Linuanis  to  plants  not  named,  and  only  slightly
indicated  by  Hasselquist.     We  have  often  (though  less  often  than  we  could  wish)  succeeded  in  this  troublesome  task.

cclxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

Of  the  month  of  June,  in  particular,  Dr.  Russell  reports, — that  the  morning  station  of  the
mercury  is  76°  or  80°,  as  in  the  preceding  month  ;  the  difference  of  afternoon  height  varies  from
8°  to  12°.  The  reports  of  travellers  in  Palestine  show  this  statement  to  be  so  applicable  to
that  country,  that  little  addition  to  it  appears  necessary,  unless  that  rain  is  even  more  rare  in
Palestine,  and  the  extreme  heat  some  degrees  greater  in  the  warmer  parts,  particularly  in  the
great  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes,  where  it  is  so  great  as  might  enable  the  inhabitants
to  grow  almost  any  tropical  product.  The  following  are  the  only  further  observations  which
we  think  it  worth  while  to  introduce.  The  extreme  heat  by  day  is  attested  by  various  travel-
lers.1 It  is  warm  even  upon  the  secondary  mountains  ;  and  the  nights  are  no  longer  chill :
even  the  silk -worms,  which  cannot  endure  cold,  now  remain  all  night  upon  the  trees  ;b  and
travellers  sleep  in  the  open  air  without  the  least  inconvenience.  Burckhardt,  whose  company
is  always  valuable,  was  travelling  this  month  in  the  Sinai  peninsula ;  and  although  therefore
his  observations  are  not  strictly  applicable  to  Palestine,  the  proximate  information  which  they
afford  is  too  good  to  be  overlooked.  We  find  him  on  the  very  first  day  of  the  month  com-
plaining, "  The  heat  was  so  oppressive  during  the  whole  day,  that  I  felt  it  even  on  the  summit
of  the  mountains  :  the  air  was  motionless,  and  a  thin  mist  pervaded  the  whole  atmosphere,  as
always  occurs  in  these  climates  ivhen  the  air  is  much  heated."0  On  the  2nd  a  slight  shower,
instead  of  cooling  the  air,  made  it  more  oppressive.*1  The  simoom  occurs  with  more  intense
power  than  the  last  month  both  in  Palestine  and  Sinai.  In  the  latter  Burckhardt  notes  (on  the
4th)  : — "  This  evening  and  night  we  had  a  violent  simoom.  The  air  was  so  hot,  that  when  I
found  the  current,  the  sensation  was  like  that  of  sitting  close  to  a  large  fire.  The  hot  wind
was  accompanied  at  intervals  with  gusts  of  cooler  air  ;  and  I  did  not  find  my  respiration  im-
peded for  a  moment  during  the  continuance  of  the  hot  blast. "e  This  last  mitigation  was  pro-
bably owing  to  his  being  then  on  the  sea-shore.  On  the  5th,  Burckhardt  found  the  thermo-
meter at  107°,  under  the  shade  of  a  rock  in  the  lower  regions  of  the  Sinai  peninsula.

As  a  rule,  with  the  rarest  possible  exceptions,  it  may  be  said  that  rain  has  entirely  ceased  to
fall  in  Palestine,  and  that  no  more  falls  until  autumn ;  although  it  must  have  been  a  season  of
extraordinary  autumnal  drought  which  enabled  Incherius/  who  left  Venice  on  the  10th  of
June,  and  travelled  in  Palestine  to  the  latter  end  of  November,  to  state  that  in  all  that  time  it
never  rained.

The  snows  remain  perpetually  on  the  higher  summits  of  Lebanon  ;  but  they  have  not  yet
disappeared  up  to  the  limit  of  perpetual  congelation. e  From  this  cause,  or  rather  from  the
elevation,  the  cold  is  still  sharper  on  the  higher  Lebanon.  D'Arvieux,  who  visited  Lebanon
in  this  month,  was  counselled,  when  he  left  Tripoli,  to  take  with  him  his  winter  robes  of  fur;
and  by  the  time  he  reached  the  cedars,  he  found  cause  to  felicitate  himself  on  having  received
and  followed  this  advice,  the  air  being  very  keen  in  the  plains  enclosed  by  the  snow-topped
mountains.11  The  same  traveller  informs  us  that  in  those  higher  regions  the  night  air  is  so
severely  cold  as  to  render  sleeping  under  a  tent  impracticable,  much  more  in  the  open  air.1
He  also  states  that  when  standing  on  the  mountain -tops,  he  found  the  sky  quite  clear  above
him ;  but  below  there  were  heavy  clouds  rolling  down  into  the  valleys,  where  they  caused
rains.k

Trees  and  Shrubs. — Pococke1  ate  new  olives  on  the  24th,  being  the  only  traveller  by
whom  the  fruit  is  mentioned  so  early  in  the  year.  Prince  Radzivil  found  many  rosemary
bushes  growing  together  in  Galilee.m  Almonds  ripen  in  June.  Troilo,"  about  the  middle  of
this  month,  describes  himself  as  subsisting  almost  entirely  on  figs,  almonds,  and  the  fruit  of
the  Lebanon  cedar.  When  Pococke  was  at  Sidon  (on  the  9th)  early  apples  were  shaken  ripe
from  the  tree;  and  a  few  days  later  (14th)  he  found  apples,  together  with  apricots,  and  white
and  red  mulberries  at  Baalbec.0     The  apples  throughout  Syria  are  poor  and  small,  with  an

a  Radzivil,  26,  27.     Pococke,  ii.  144.     La  Roque,  ii.  8.  b  Cotovic,  308.  c  *  Syria,'  609.

d  W.  611.  e  <  Syria,'  625 ;  see  also  Thevenot,  ii.  89.  f  Reise,  part  i.  p.  1.

e  Pococke,  i.  153.    June  23  N.  s. ;  Radzivil,  27 ;   Beauveau,  162,  &c.  h  *  Memoires,'  ii.  432.

>  '  Memoires,'  ii.  40".  k  id.  408.  1  Peregrin.  41.

m  'Travels.'  ii.  152.  165.  «  Page  66.  "  '  Travels,'  ii.  152.  165.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JUNE.  cclxxiii

insipid  sweetness.  And  it  has  been  within  some  extensive  observation  of  our  own  that  good
apples  are  never  to  be  found  in  countries  warm  enough  or  too  warm  to  produce  the  grape  in
perfection.  Hasselquist,  speaking  of  dates,  and  of  the  value  set  upon  them  in  Europe  as  a
foreign  luxury,  says,  "  I  confess  they  are  good  to  taste  once  or  twice ;  but  though  I  have  got
over  the  age  when  such  things  please  most,  yet  I  would  gladly  give  two  bushels  of  dates  for
half  a  bushel  of  good  Swedish  apples,  and  am  persuaded  that  I  could  find  thousands  in  Egypt
ready  to  make  the  same  exchange."  Comparing  the  fruits  as  luxuries,  the  present  writer,  with
equally  ample  opportunities  of  acquaintance  with  the  date,  has  been  disposed  to  echo  this
sentiment.  But  it  is  as  a  substantial  article  of  food,  to  the  people  in  whose  countries  it  grows,
that  the  date  obtains  a  relative  value  which  the  apple  cannot  acquire.  Hasselquist  further
observes  that  apples  are  very  scarce  in  Egypt,  and  that  the  only  good  ones  are  brought
from  Sinai,  where  the  Greek  monks  have  delightful  orchards,  full  of  the  finest  apple  and  pear-
trees.*  This  is  confirmed  by  Burckhardt  and  others.  The  superiority  of  the  apples  of  Sinai
is  owing  to  the  comparative  coolness  of  that  mountainous  district ;  and,  for  the  like  reason,
the  apples  of  Lebanon  are  the  best  that  can  be  obtained  in  Palestine.

The  famous  balm-trees  of  Jericho  began  in  this  month  to  yield  "  their  medicinal  gum,"
and  continued  to  afford  it  in  July  and  August.  This  was  perhaps  the  most  renowned  and
peculiar  of  all  the  vegetable  productions  of  Palestine.  By  Josephus,  it  is  first  mentioned  in
connection  with  the  visit  of  the  queen  of  Sheba  to  Solomon ;  for  in  mentioning  the  presents
brought  by  her  to  that  splendid  monarch,  he  says  that  popular  tradition  ascribed  to  her  gift
the  root  of  that  precious  balsam  which  the  country  still  enjoyed.b

And  on  occasion  of  Pompey's  encamping  for  one  night  in  the  plain  of  Jericho,  the  historian
takes  occasion  to  describe  it  as  the  most  fruitful  country  of  Judea,  "  which  bears  a  vast
number  of  palm-trees,  and  also  the  balsam-tree,  whose  sprouts  they  cut  with  sharp  stones,
and  at  the  incisions  they  gather  the  juice,  which  drops  down  like  tears.  "c

This  district  was  (probably  on  account  of  its  fertility,  if  not  for  the  sake  of  these  very  trees)
given  by  Mark  Antony  to  Cleopatra,  and  afterwards  farmed  for  her  by  Herod ;  in  relating
which  the  historian  remarks  "  that  the  balsam-tree  was  the  most  precious  thing  there,  and
that  it  grew  nowhere  else."d

By  this  he  must  mean  that  it  grew  nowhere  else  in  Syria ;  for  his  own  account  derives  it
from  the  country  of  the  queen  of  Sheba.  Indeed  the  mere  fact  that  it  would  only  grow  in  the
almost  tropical  climate  of  Jericho,  evinces  that  it  was  the  native  of  a  warmer  climate  than  that
of  Syria.  And  if,  as  is  not  unlikely,  its  product  was  the  same  as  the  "  balm,"  which  Jacob
sent  by  the  hands  of  his  sons  to  the  governor  of  Egypt/  it  must  have  been  introduced  into
Palestine  at  a  very  early  date  indeed.  At  a  much  later  period  the  sacred  books  name  the
balm  as  a  precious  object  in  the  traffic  of  the  Israelites.4'  In  fact,  the  numerous  valuable
properties  which  the  ancients  ascribed  to  balsamic  substances  ultimately  caused  a  very  high
value  to  be  assigned  to  this,  which  was  accounted  the  most  perfect  of  them  all.  Unacquainted
with  the  fact  that  it  was  the  native  product  of  a  more  southern  clime,  and  regardless  of  the
inferences  which  were  opened  by  the  fact  that  the  very  warm  plain  of  Jericho  was  the
only  part  of  the  country  in  which  it  would  grow,  the  ancients  rested  in  the  conclusion  that
Judea  was  the  native  seat  of  this  precious  tree,  and  refer  to  it  as  one  of  the  peculiar  wonders
of  that  land.  It  appears  that  in  the  plain  of  Jericho  the  balsam-trees  were  confined  to  two
enclosed  plantations  or  gardens  of  no  great  extent,  and  one  of  them  much  smaller  than  the
other.  The  produce  was  but  scanty.  PlinyS  states  that  during  Alexander's  wars  in  Palestine,
the  quantity  of  balm  that  could  be  collected  in  a  summer's  day  was  not  more  than  could
be  contained  in  a  (oyster)  shell ;  and  even  in  his  own  time,  the  annual  produce  from  both
plantations  did  not  in  the  most  favourable  years  exceed  about  six  gallons.11  It  was  then  sold
at  the  rate  of  twice  its  weight  in  silver;  but  in  the  time  of  Theophrastus,  although  the

a  '  Letters,'  p.  424.  b  <  Antiq.  xv  4.  2.  c  De  Bcllo,  i.  7-  6.

'l  Antiq.  xv.  4.  2.  e  Gen.  xliii.  11.  f  Ezek.  xxvii.  17  ;  Jer.  xlvi.  11.

S  '  Nat  Hist.'  xii.  25,  apparently  copying  from  Theophrastus,  ix.  6.

li  "Omni  vero  fbecunditate  e  majore   horto  congijs  senos,  minore  siugulos. "      Dioscoridcs  has  the  tame  statement.      The
congius  is  reckoned  at  rather  more  than  seven  English  pints.

vol.  i.  2  n

cclxxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

quantity  produced  was  then  less,  it  sold  weight  for  weight  with  that  metal.  The  reputation  of
the  balsam-trees  had  been  so  great,  that  they  engaged  much  of  the  notice  of  the  Romans  when
they  became  lords  of  the  country,  the  peculiar  and  distinguished  product  of  which  was  so
much  considered,  that  young  trees  were  carried  to  Rome  to  adorn  the  triumph  of  Vespasian
and  Titus  for  their  victories  over  the  Jews.  They  were  thus  made  symbolical  of  the  subjection
and  bondage  to  which  the  country  in  which  they  grew  and  the  people  to  whom  they  belonged
were  reduced.  One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Romans  had  been  to  exact  as  tribute  a  certain
quantity  of  the  balm.  In  the  last  war,  the  Jews  attempted  to  destroy  the  trees  in  which  the
Romans  took  so  much  interest ;  and  the  latter  were  obliged  to  protect  them  by  force  of  arms.
After  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  balsam-trees  were  annexed  to  the  domain  of  the  state,
and  much  attention  was  paid  to  their  culture  and  propagation,  so  that  their  number  was  greatly
increased.  The  climate  of  Egypt  was  deemed  the  most  suitable  for  them ;  and  they  were
introduced  into  that  country,  and  cultivated  chiefly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Egyptian
Babylon.  Strabo  describes  it  as  growing  on  the  Lake  Tiberias ;  and  in  the  time  of  Galen  the
balsam -tree  was  cultivated  in  some  other  parts  of  Palestine  besides  Jericho, — doubtless  in
some  other  parts  of  the  great  valley  of  the  Jordan ;  but  it  has  now  long  been  lost  to  that
country,  as  well  as  to  Egypt ;  although  its  existence  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  can  be  traced  to
a  comparatively  recent  date.  The  Abbate  Mariti  indeed  describes  the  balsam-tree  as  if  he
had  actually  seen  it  in  Jericho ;  but  the  critical  reader  may  find  ground  to  suspect  that  his
account  is  made  up  from  the  descriptions  given  by  Pliny  and  others.  Burckhardt  was  told
that  the  tree  which  produced  the  balm  of  Mecca  still  grew  on  the  borders  of  Lake  Tiberias;
but  the  hearsay  description  which  he  gives  differs  much  from  all  accounts  of  the  true  balsam-
tree.

The  balsam-tree  was  not  forgotten  by  the  old  Jewish  casuists  in  their  decisions  :  but  their
counsels  with  reference  to  it  were  much  divided.  One  party  alleged  that  the  collection  of  the
balm  ought  to  be  suspended  in  the  seventh  or  sabbatic  year  ;  but  this  was  opposed  by  others
on  the  ground  that  the  produce  of  the  tree  was  not  a  fruit,  and  the  law  spoke  only  of  the  fruits
of  the  earth  as  being  subject  to  the  regulations  of  the  sabbatic  year.a

Statements  with  respect  to  this  tree  might  be  cited  largely  from  ancient  writers.  Pliny  has
embodied  in  one  long  chapter  (but  with  his  usual  lack  of  discrimination)  all  that  was  known
or  said  on  the  subject  before  his  own  time.  His  account  is  curious,  and  some  particulars
have  been  adduced  in  the  preceding  statement ;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  he  or  any  other
old  writer  on  the  subject  had  ever  seen  the  tree  itself;  and  while  this  explains  the  contra-
dictions between  their  accounts,  it  suggests  that  the  better  course  is  to  notice  it  as  now  actually
existing  in  Arabia.

That  the  tree  was  a  native  of  that  quarter  may  seem  to  be  intimated  in  the  fact  that  "  balm"
was  one  of  the  commodities  which  the  Arabian  merchants  were  conveying  into  Egypt  in  the
time  of  Jacob.b  But  Strabo  seems  to  be  the  only  old  writer  to  whom  this  was  known.  "  Near
to  this,"  he  writes,  "  is  the  most  happy  land  of  the  Sabeans ;  and  they  are  a  very  great  people.
Among  them,  frankincense,  myrrh,  and  cinnamon  grow;  and  on  the  coast  that  is  about  Saba
the  balsam  also."  Bruce  identifies  this  Saba  with  that  part  of  Abyssinia,  on  the  coast,  near  the
Straits  of  Babelmandel,  which  now  bears  the  name  of  Azab,  in  which  it  is  possible  that  the
opposite  coast  of  Arabia  also  partook.  It  is  curious  that  the  Jewish  tradition  mentioned  by
Josephus  ascribes  the  same  origin  to  the  tree.  And  at  the  present  day  among  the  myrrh-trees
behind  Azab,  all  along  the  coast  to  Babelmandel,  is  the  native  country  of  the  tree  which  pro-
duces what  is  now  called  the  Balm  of  Mecca,  the  only  existing  product  which  can  be  identified
with  the  balm  of  Jericho.  "  We  need  not  doubt,"  says  Bruce,c  "  that  it  was  early  transplanted
into  Arabia,  that  is,  into  the  south  part  of  Arabia-Felix,  immediately  fronting  Azab,  the  high
country  of  Arabia  being  too  cold  for  it,  being  all  mountainous,  and  water  freezing  there.  The
first  plantation  that  succeeded  seems  to  have  been  at  Petra,  the  ancient  metropolis  of  Arabia,
now  called  Beder  or  Beder  Hunein.    Afterwards,  being  transplanted  into  Palestine,  it  acquired

a  Mislma,  tit.  Slieviih,  sivc  de  jure  anni  sept.  c.  vii.  sect.  C>.  l>  Gen.  xxxvii.  25.

c  In  an  Appendix  on  the  Balsam,  accompanied  by  figures,  at  the  end  of  his  '  Travels.'

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JUNE.  cclxxv

the  name  of  balsamum  jiulaicvm,  and  '  balm  of  Gilead,'  and  became  an  article  of  commerce
there."  In  Azab  it  grows  to  the  height  of  fourteen  feet,  spontaneously,  and  without  culture,
like  the  myrrh,  the  coffee,  aud  the  frankincense-tree.  The  are  all  equally  the  wood  of  the
country,  and  are  occasionally  cut  down  and  used  for  fuel.  The  engraving  in  Bruce  is  made
from  a  specimen  which  was  five  feet  two  inches  high  from  where  the  red  root  begins,  or  which
was  buried  in  the  earth,  to  where  it  first  divides  into  branches.  The  trunk  at  thickest  was
about  five  inches  in  diameter,  the  wood  light  and  open,  and  incapable  of  being  polished,
covered  with  a  smooth  bark  of  bluish  white,  like  a  standard  cherry-tree  in  good  health,  which
has  not  above  half  that  diameter.  It  flattens  at  top,  like  trees  that  are  exposed  to  snow,  blasts,
or  sea  air,  which  gives  it  a  stunted  appearance.  The  leaves  are  rather  scanty.  The  flowers
are  like  those  of  the  acacia-tree,  white  and  round,  only  that  three  hang  upon  three  filaments
or  stalks,  where  the  acacia  has  but  one.  Two  or  three  flowers  fall  and  leave  a  single  fruit.
The  branches  that  bear  this  are  the  shoots  of  the  present  year.  These  are  now  as  formerly
cut  off  and  packed  in  bundles.  And  the  essential  matter  they  contain  renders  them  an  inferior
substitute  for  the  proper  balm.  This  was  the  xylobalsamum,  or  balsam  wooda  of  the  ancients,
and  still  employed  for  the  same  purposes  for  which  it  was  used  by  the  ancient  apothecaries.

Beder  Hunein,  whence  Bruce  got  his  specimen,  is  a  village  between  Mecca  and  Medina,  in  a
sandy,  rocky  soil,  where  the  trees  are  confined  to  a  tract  about  a  mile  in  length.  In  the
beginning  of  April  the  trees  drop  their  juice  from  gashes  which  are  made  in  the  smaller
branches,  into  vessels  set  under  them  to  receive  it.  A  gash  does  not  yield  above  three  or  four
drops  in  a  day,  weighing  about  a  drachm,  nor  will  even  the  best  trees  yield  more,  upon  the
whole,  in  a  season  than  from  twelve  to  fifteen  drachms.  It  is,  for  the  most  part,  adulterated
on  the  spot,  so  as  to  render  it  a  matter  of  great  difficulty  to  procure  it  in  a  pure  state.  An
inferior  sort  is  made  by  boiling  the  young  twigs  and  leaves  over  a  gentle  fire.  The  balsamic
matter  rises  to  the  surface  and  is  skimmed  off.  After  they  have  thus  procured  all  they  can,  it
is  said  that  the  fire  is  increased,  when  a  thicker  balsam,  like  turpentine,  rises,  which  is  pre-
served by  itself,  and  is  that  principally  which  finds  its  way  into  Europe.  The  other  can  only
be  obtained  by  presents ;  and  as  for  that  which  distils  naturally  from  the  trees,  it  barely  suf-
fices for  the  use  of  the  court  at  Constantinople,  to  which  it  is  or  was  all  sent.

Hasselquist  describes  the  true  balsam  of  Mecca  as  being  yellow  and  pellucid,  with  a  most
fragrant,  resinous,  and  balsamic  smell.  It  is  very  tenacious,  or  glutinous,  sticking  to  the  fingers,
and  may  be  drawn  out  in  very  long  threads.  He  saw  it  at  a  Turkish  surgeon's,  who  had  it  imme-
diately from  Mecca,  and  who  informed  him  that  it  is  the  best  stomachic  they  know,  taken  in
the  quantity  of  about  three  grains ;  and  that  it  is  a  most  excellent  remedy  for  wounds,  a  few
drops  of  it  applied  to  a  fresh  wound,  heals  it  in  a  very  short  time.  Its  purity  is  tested  by  letting
a  drop  fall  into  a  glass  of  clear  spring  water ;  if  this  drop  remains  in  one  place  on  the  surface
of  the  water,  it  is  of  little  value ;  but  if  it  spreads  over  the  whole  surface  in  a  thin  pellicle,
which,  with  a  hair,  thread,  or  silk,  may  be  taken  off  the  water,  which  remains  as  clear  as  at
first,  then  it  is  known  to  be  of  the  best  kind,  and  not  adulterated.  But  the  Turks  confess  it
is  rare  to  find  any  that  will  abide  this  test.

We  should  mention  that  the  tree  in  question  is  the  Amyris  opobalsamum  of  Linnaeus.

Our  attention  is  next  drawn  to  the  tamarisk,  with  which  some  interesting  inquiries  are
connected,  to  which  there  has  been  some  reference  in  the  historical  portion  of  the  present
work.b  These,  as  the  reader  knows,  arise  from  the  attempt  to  find  in  the  product  of  a  species
of  tamarisk,  growing  in  the  Sinai  peninsula,  the  manna  with  which  the  Israelites  were  fed  in
that  wilderness.  In  bringing  this  tree  under  the  notice  of  our  readers,  we  avail  ourselves  of
the  account  which  Lieut.  Wellsted  has  rendered.0

"  At  a  distance  of  fifteen  miles  from,  and  at  an  elevation  of  about  two  thousand  feet  above
the  level  of  the  sea,  I  first  saw  the  tree  which  produces  the  manna.      This   remarkable

a  Pliny,  xii.  25.

t>  See  the  History,  pp.  211—213.  c  Travels  in  Arabia;  by  Lieut.  J. It.  Wellsted,  I.N.,  1838.

2n  2

cclxxvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

[Tamarisk

Tamarix  Octllica.']

substance  is  secreted  by  several
trees,  and  in  various  countries
in  the  East.     In  some  parts  of
Persia  it  is  believed  to  be  an  in-
sect secretion,  and  is  collected
from  a  shrub  called  gavan,  about
two  feet  high,  bearing  a  strik-
ing resemblance  to  the  broom.
In  the  hilly  district  of  Looristan,
as  in  Mesopotamia,  we  find  it
on  several  tTees  of  the  oak  spe-
cies, which  there,  however,  are
of  more   stunted    growth   than
those  of  England.     From  these
the  manna  is  collected  on  cloths
spread  beneath  them  at  night,
and  it  then  bears  the  form  of
large  crystal  drops  of  dew,  such  as
we  see  on  plants  in  England  in  the  early  part  of  morning.  Burckhardt  observes,  that  at  Erzroum
a  substance  resembling  manna  in  taste  and  consistence  distils  from  the  tree  which  bears  galls,
and  with  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  forms  one  of  the  principal  articles  of  their  food.
These  would  appear  to  be  different  from  the  Sicilian  manna  used  for  medicinal  purposes,  and
which  botanists  have  considered  as  a  vegetable  gum,  procured  in  Calabria  and  Sicily,  and  to
be  exuded  from  the  Fraxinus  ornus,  or  flowering  ash.     A  supposition  has,  however,  been
started,  that  this  might  be  also  the  production  of  the  aphes  tribe.

"  In  the  Red  Sea,  on  my  route  to  England,  I  met  with  a  learned  Jewish  Rabbi,  who  had
traversed  much  of  the  East,  and  whose  Travels  had  been  recently  published  in  India.  From
him  I  learned  that  on  his  journey  through  the  Desert  contiguous  to  Damascus,  far  removed
from  trees  or  vegetation  of  any  kind,  a  substance  was  deposited,  which  from  his  description  in
appearance,  size,  and  flavour,  accurately  resembled  the  manna  of  Scripture.  This  was  firmly
believed  by  him  and  the  people  of  the  country  to  have  fallen  there  as  a  dew  from  heaven.

"  I  should,  however,  have  scarcely  ventured  on  his  single  evidence  to  narrate  a  story,  in
appearance  little  worthy  of  attention  or  credence,  had  not  several  Bedouins  of  the  country,
with  whom  I  have  conversed,  bore  testimony  to  the  same  effect :  and,  as  being  likely  to  lead
to  the  knowledge  of  some  substance  with  which  we  are  at  present  unacquainted,  it  may  not  be
considered  unworthy  the  inquiry  and  investigation  of  future  travellers.  But  a  manna,  differing
in  some  respects  from  all  those  which  I  have  specified,  is  found  near  to  Mount  Sinai,  and  has
been  regarded  with  peculiar  interest,  in  consequence  of  its  connection  with  one  of  the  most
striking  events  recorded  in  Scripture  history.  The  tree  which  produces  it  here  is  the  Tamarix
Mannifera  of  Ehrenberg,  a  species  differing  from  that  found  on  the  sea-coast,  and  nearly
related  to  the  Tamarix  Gallica,  but  from  which,  beyond  obtaining  a  greater  height,  and  being
somewhat  more  bushy  in  its  foliage,  it  has  little  otherwise  of  importance  to  distinguish  it.
The  substance  produced  by  these  trees,  to  which  the  designation  of  manna  has  been  given  in
Europe,  retain  in  Mun,  among  the  Arabs,  the  name  bestowed  on  this  food  of  the  wilderness
by  their  collateral  ancestors  the  Hebrews.

"  It  is  found  collected  in  small  globules  on  the  branches  of  the  trees,  and  falls  during  the
heat  of  the  day  beneath  them.  Whether  the  Sinai  manna  be  an  animal  or  vegetable  substance,
it  is  hoped  will  no  longer  be  an  undecided  question,  since  there  is  not  only  ample  proof  that
the  exudation  is  occasioned  by  the  puncture  of  a  small  species  of  coccus,  named  by  Ehrenberg
the  Coccus  Mannifera,  which,  together  with  the  peculiar  mode  in  which  its  labours  are
conducted,  is  figured  in  his  work  ;  but  at  the  period  of  my  visit  in  September,  although,  after
the  minutest  inspection,  no  insects  were  visible,  yet  the  extremities  of  the  twigs  and  branches,

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JUNE.  cclxxvii

where  they  are  commonly  found,  retained  that  peculiar  sweetness   and    flavour  which  charac-
terises the  manna.

"  The  Bedouins  collect  it  early  in  the  morning,  and  after  straining  it  through  cloths,  place  it  in
either  skins  or  gourds.  A  considerable  quantity  is  consumed  by  themselves,  a  portion  is  sent  to
Cairo,  and  some  is  also  disposed  of  to  the  monks  at  Mount  Sinai.  The  latter  retail  it  to  the
Russian  pilgrims,  who  receive  it  with  much  reverence,  as  an  incontestable  proof  of  the  event
to  which  it  refers.  The  Bedouins  assured  me,  that  the  whole  quantity  collected  throughout  the
peninsula,  in  the  most  fruitful  seasons,  did  not  exceed  one  hundred  and  fifty  wogas  (about
seven  hundred  pounds)  ;  and  that  it  was  usually  disposed  of  at  the  rate  of  sixty  dollars  the
woga.  They  regard  it  as  a  luxury,  and  use  it  for  all  the  purposes  of  honey ;  but  if  taken  in  any
large  quantity,  it  is  said  to  prove  a  mild  laxative.  In  this  respect,  therefore,  it  bears  a  resem-
blance to  the  manna  of  commerce ;  but  here  it  is  only  collected  in  seasons  after  heavy  rains,  and
has  sometimes  been  withheld  for  a  period  of  seven  years.  From  its  having  retained  the  name,
and  being  found  in  such  a  locality,  the  thoughts  naturally  wander  to  the  event  recorded  in  Holy
Writ ;  and,  though  well  pleased,  could  we  establish  a  further  identity  with  the  substance  there
described,  yet,  when  we  are  told  that  the  latter  rained  from  heaven,  was  collected  during  six
days  only,  and  would  not  keep  more  than  one,  we  are  compelled,  however  reluctantly,  to  abandon
further  expectation  of  doing  so."

For  our  own  part  we  abandon  this  expectation  without  the  least  reluctance.  Either  the
Israelites  did  as  the  Scriptures  affirm,  or  they  did  not  eat  "  bread  from  heaven"  in  the  wil-
derness. We  can  conceive  no  middle  alternative ;  and  it  is,  to  our  notions,  anything  but  con-
sistent with  sound  judgment  to  expect  to  find  in  the  manna-bearing  tamarisk,  or  in  that  of  any
other  tree  which  could  grow  in  the  wilderness,  the  substance  which  afforded  food  for  forty
years  to  the  millions  of  Israel.  It  is  easier  to  conceive  how  the  produce  of  this  and  other  trees
acquired  the  name  of  mun  or  man,  from  its  real  or  supposed  resemblance  to  the  substance
which  nourishes  the  Israelites,  than  to  imagine  the  mighty  forests  of  tamarisks,  which,  accord-
ing to  the  usual  rate  of  production,  would  have  been  needed  to  afford  the  Hebrews  subsistence
for  a  single  week  ;  or  how  such  supplies  could  be  obtained  throughout  the  year,  and  one  year
after  another,  from  a  shrub  that  only  yields  its  product  in  the  month  of  June ;  and  this
besides  the  very  satisfactory  reasons  given  by  Mr.  Wellsted  himself.  Let  us  receive  the
downright  miracle  as  the  lesser  difficulty.

Regarding  this,  therefore,  simply  as  a  curious  natural  product,  we  return  to  the  tamarisk
to  afford  some  further  information  not  contained  in  the  preceding  extract.

Mr.  Wellsted  states  that  the  trees  grow  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  in  height.  Our  further
information  is  collected  from  Burckhardt.

The  "  manna,"  as  it  is  called,  is  found  only  in  years  when  copious  rains  have  fallen.  Then,
in  the  month  of  June,  it  drops  from  the  thorns  of  the  tamarisk  upon  the  fallen  twigs,  leaves,
and  thorns,  which  always  cover  the  ground  beneath  the  tree  in  its  natural  state.  It  is  always
collected  before  sunrise,  when  it  is  coagulated ;  but  it  dissolves  as  soon  as  the  sun  shines  upon
it.  The  Arabs  clear  away  the  leaves,  dust,  etc.,  boil  it,  strain  it  through  a  piece  of  coarse
cloth,  and  put  it  into  leathern  skins.  In  this  way  they  preserve  it  till  the  following  year,a
and  use  it  as  they  do  honey,  to  pour  over  their  unleavened  bread,  or  to  dip  their  bread  into.
Burckhardt  obtained  a  specimen  of  the  preceding  year's  produce  at  the  convent  of  St.  Cathe-
rine, where,  having  been  kept  in  the  cool  shade  and  moderate  temperature,  it  had  become  quite
solid,  and  formed  a  small  cake.  It  became  soft  if  kept  some  time  in  the  hand  ;  if  placed  in
the  sun  for  five  minutes,  it  dissolved ;  but  when  restored  to  a  cool  place,  it  became  again  solid
in  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  In  the  season  at  which  it  is  gathered  by  the  Arabs  it  never  acquires
that  state  of  hardness  which  will  allow  of  its  being  pounded,  as  the  Israelites  did  with  their
manna.b  Its  colour  is  a  dirty  yellow;  its  taste  is  agreeable,  somewhat  aromatic,  and  as  sweet
as  honey.     If  eaten  in  any  considerable  quantity,  it  is  said  to  be  slightly  purgative.

The  quantity  of  manna  collected  at  present  in  seasons  when  the  copious  rains  fall  does  not

a  The  Scriptural  manna  could  not  be  preserved  from  one  day  to  another,  except  by  a  special  providence,  as  on  the  seventh  day.
b  Num.  xi.  8.

cclxxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

amount  to  more  than  500  or  600  pounds.  It  is  entirely  consumed  among  the  Bedouins,  who
consider  it  the  greatest  dainty  which  their  country  affords.  The  harvest  is  usually  in  June,
and  lasts  for  about  six  weeks,  but  sometimes  it  begins  in  May.

The  tamarix  mannifera  is  confined  to  a  few  localities  in  Sinai ;  but  the  closely  allied  species,
the  tamarix  gallica,  of  which  the  other  seems  merely  a  variety,  abounds  throughout  the  penin-
sula, as  well  as  in  the  land  of  Edom  and  in  Palestine.

Before  leaving  this  subject  we  wish  to  advert  to  the  wonderful  statement  which  Lieutenant
Wellsted  informs  us  he  received  from  a  learned  and  travelled  Rabbi.  This  is  doubtless  the
Rabbi  David  D'Beth  Hillel,  a  copy  of  whose  book  of  Travels,-"1  printed  in  India,  has  fallen  into
our  hands.  We  find  that  the  account  he  there  gives  refers  not  to  the  neighbourhood  of
Damascus,  but  to  that  of  Sulimaniah,  the  capital  of  lower  Koordistan.  He  says,  "  There  is
to  be  found  here,  in  summer,  manna  which  comes  every  morning  by  the  dew.  That  which
falls  on  the  rock  is  as  white  as  snow  ;  but  it  is  very  scarce  to  get,  because  it  is  taken  for  the
governor  and  the  nobles :  that  which  falls  on  trees  or  grass  is  white  and  green,  because  it
becomes  united  with  the  leaves  and  the  grass.  This  is  found  in  great  abundance.  They  sell
it  made  up  into  balls.  That  which  remains  in  the  fields  at  the  rising  of  the  sun  becomes  as
water.  I  have  eaten  it  myself:  it  is  sweet,  and  of  a  pleasant  taste,  and  is  used  by  the  people
as  a  medicine.  The  name  of  it  in  the  native  language  and  in  Arabic  is  Mann  Shemma,  which
means  '  heavenly  manna.'  "

We  have  thought  it  right  to  adduce  this  statement ;  but  we  shall  offer  no  remarks  upon
what  as  yet  rests  only  on  the  authority  of  so  very  credulous  a  person  as  the  Rabbi  Hillel's
book  evinces  him  to  be.  That  he  ate  the  substance  he  describes,  and  that  it  was  called  manna,
we  doubt  not ;  nor  do  we  question  that  he  was  told  what  he  reports  as  to  the  mode  of  its  pro-
duction. But  from  this  report  we  must  withhold,  or  rather  suspend,  our  belief,  on  the  grounds,
— that  the  thing  is  physically  improbable  in  itself,  and  therefore  needs  strong  evidence;  that  the
two  accounts  given  by  the  same  person  are  contradictory  in  place  and  circumstances ;  and  that
travellers  and  residents  much  better  acquainted  than  Rabbi  Hillel  with  the  respective  neigh-
bourhoods of  Damascus  and  Sulimaniah,  take  no  notice  of  any  such  phenomenon  or  product
as  he  describes.  If  produced  near  Damascus,  so  remarkable  a  fact  could  not  have  escaped  the
curious  research  of  Burckhardt,  who  travelled  to  and  from  that  city  at  all  seasons  and  in
various  directions.  And  as  to  Sulimaniah,  we  can  say,  that  nothing  of  the  kind  occurred  to  our
own  knowledge,  while  in  that  place  or  travelling  in  its  neighbourhood  ;  and,  which  is  much
more  important,  Mr.  Rich,  who  spent  a  summer  there,  and  was  curious  in  all  matters  of  the
sort,  has  not  a  word  respecting  any  such  phenomenon,  of  which,  if  exhibited,  it  seems  impos-
sible that  he  should  not  have  been  informed.b  Sir  John  Macdonald  (Kinneir)  who  was
intimately  acquainted  with  the  country  and  neighbourhood,  is  also  quite  silent  on  the  subject.
The  weight  of  this  negative  testimony  seems  to  us  to  overweigh  the  affirmative  of  Rabbi  Hillel.
That  affirmative  derives  little  weight  from  the  corroborating  testimony  which  Mr.  Wellsted
obtained  from  the  Bedouins,  as,  besides  being  adepts  at  what  is  vulgarly  called  "  hoaxing,"
they  will  tell  a  traveller  anything  which  (from  the  hints  offered  by  his  questions)  they  judge
calculated  to  please  him,  or  likely  to  meet  his  views.

AVe  know  that  the  plantain-tree  c  exists  in  Palestine ;  but  we  have  been  able  to  find  no  in-
formation of  its  condition  there.  It  is  probably,  therefore,  not  common.  We  notice  it  now
because  it  begins  this  month  to  afford  its  excellent  fruit,  and  continues  to  do  so  until  the  latter
end  of  October.  This  fruit  is  sweet,  rather  hard,  or  between  a  pear  and  a  date,  a  little  viscid
and  mealy,  melting  in  the  mouth  without  being  chewed.  It  soon  turns  sour,  and  cannot,  in
Egypt,  be  kept  five  days  after  being  separated  from  the  tree.  This  is  the  fruit  which  Rauwolff,
Russell,  and  others,  mention  under  the  name  of  "  Adam's  apple;"  which  name  was  employed
by  the  older  naturalists  and  travellers  under  the  notion  that  it  was  the  forbidden  fruit ;  while
others  found  in  it  the  grapes  which  the  spies  brought  to  Moses  out  of  the  Promised  Land.

a  'The  Travels  of  Rabbi  David  D'Beth  Hillel;    from   Jerusalem,   through  Arabia,   Koordistan,  part  of  Persia  and  India,  to
Madras.'     Madras,  1832.
b  See  the  *  Narrative  of  a  Residence  in  Koordistan,'  by  J.  C.  Rich,  Esq.  1936.  c  Musa  paradisaica.

Chap.  VII]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JUNE.  cclxxix

Besides  these  honours,  Hasselquist  calls  the  tree  "  the  queen  of  plants,"  and  Dampier  desig-
nates the  fruit  as  "  the  king  of  fruits,"  which  sufficiently  indicates  the  estimation  in  which  it
has  been  held.  The  plantain  perfects  its  fruit  at  Aleppo,  and  also  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Rosetta  in  Egypt,  and  we  may  therefore  safely  conclude  that  it  is  not  barren  in  Palestine.

The  banana,a  the  near  congener  of  the  plantain,  is  also  found  in  the  country,  chiefly  on  the
coast,  under  Lebanon.  Volney  b  says  that  the  bananas  of  Beirout  are  not  inferior  to  those  of
St.  Domingo.  The  fruit  of  the  banana,  although  less  luscious  than  that  of  its  congener,  the
plantain,  is  of  a  more  delicate  taste.

Captain  Mangles  took  notice,  early  in  this  month,  of  a  white-flowered  variety  of  oleander
growing  in  Wady  Wale,  beyond  Jordan.0  This  is  vary  rare.  Seeing  that  the  oleander  is  so
constantly  found  by  the  waters  of  Palestine,  there  is  some  interest  in  the  question  proposed  by
Hasselquist,  who,  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Linnaeus,  writes  : — "  I  request  you  will  please  to  ask
Dr.  Celsius  d  whether  the  writers  on  Scripture  plants  have  ever  thought  what  vegetable  David
refers  to  in  Psalm  i.  3,  under  the  name  of  the  Tree  of  the  Righteous.  David  attributes  quali-
ties to  the  tree  which  plainly  show  that  he  has  in  view  some  particular  vegetable.  And  these
qualities  are  such  that  they  cannot  be  attributed  to  any  but  the  nerium  (oleander)  which
grows  in  abundance  in  this  country."

The  shrub  gharkad  is  often  named  by  Burckhardt.  This  is  the  peganum  retusnm  of
Forskal,  with  spinous  downy  branches,  and  somewhat  fleshy  leaves.  We  know  not  if  it  grows
in  Palestine,  seeing  that  we  find  only  the  peganum  harmala,  of  Syrian  rue,  named  by  travellers
in  that  country.  This  also  is,  however,  probably  there,  seeing  it  is  found  abundantly  in  the
Sinai  peninsula,  as  well  as  among  the  sands  of  the  Egyptian  Delta.  Its  small  red  berry,  of
the  size  of  a  grain  of  a  pomegranate,  is  very  juicy  and  refreshing,  much  resembling  a  ripe
gooseberry  in  taste,  but  not  so  sweet.  The  Arabs  are  very  fond  of  it ;  and  Burckhardt  was
told  that  when  the  shrub  produces  large  crops,  they  make  a  conserve  of  the  berries.  The
gharkad  delights  in  a  dry  sandy  soil,  and  reaches  its  maturity  in  the  height  of  summer,  when
the  ground  is  dried  up,  exciting  an  agreeable  surprise  in  the  traveller  at  finding  so  juicy  a
berry  produced  in  the  driest  soil  and  season. e

A  gum  or  resin,  called  by  the  druggists  cedrum  or  cedria,  is,  during  the  summer,  obtained
from  the  cedar.  It  distils  spontaneously  from  the  bark  under  the  summer  heat,  without  any
incision  being  made,  although  this  is  done  when  a  greater  quantity  is  desired  than  the  natural
distillation  will  afford.  It  hardens  into  a  clear  white  resin,  to  which  great  medicinal  virtues
are  ascribed/

The  early  Jigs,  both  black  and  white,  ripen  in  the  month  of  June.  They  fall  off,  however,
as  soon  as  they  are  ripe;  or,  according  to  the  allusion  of  the  prophet  Nahum,  (iii.  12),  "  fall
into  the  mouth  of  the  eater  upon  being  shaken."  It  is  when  this  boccore,  or  early  fig,  draws  nigh
to  perfection,  that  the  kermouse,  which  is  the  summer-fig,  or  proper  carica,  begins  to  be  formed,
although  it  rarely  ripens  before  Augusts  To  prevent  this  from  falling  off  and  degenerating,
the  process  of  caprijication  is  performed,  or  else  one  of  the  male  trees  is  placed  among  the
females ;  the  former  course  is  taken  in  Barbary,  where  one  male  tree  is  found  to  suffice  for
fifty  females ;  but  the  latter  is  preferred  in  Egypt,  where  the  male  trees  are  more  numerous.1'
As  this  is  but  a  poor  account  of  the  matter,  and  a  fuller  explanation  would  run  much  into
detail,  we  have  introduced  a  further  account  of  the  operation  in  a  note  below.1

a  Musa  sapientum.  b  Voyage,  i. 296.

c  '  Travels,'  462.  d  The  celebrated  author  of  the  '  Hierobotanicon.'

e  Burckhardt,  474.  He  asks,  "  Might  not  the  berry  of  this  shrub  have  been  used  by  Moses  to  sweeten  tlie  waters  of  Marah  ?"
Exod.  xv.  25.

f  D'Arvieux,  ii.  413,  414.  S  Shaw.i.  264  ;  ii.  149.  h  Hasselquist.  414.

>  The  best  account  of  the  process  of  Caprification  is  perhaps  that  furnished  by  Tournefort.  The  process  described  by  him
is  indeed  that  followed  in  Greece,  but  all  the  particulars  are  equally  applicable  to  Palestine.  The  following  is  the  substance  of
his  account : —

"  Of  the  thirty  species  or  varieties  of  the  domestic  fig-tree  which  are  cultivated  in  France,  Spain,  and  Italy,  there  are  but  two
cultivated  in  the  Archipelago.  The  first  species  is  called  ornos,  from  the  old  Greek  erinos,  which  answers  to  caprijicus  in  Latin,
and  signifies  a  wild  fig-tree.     The  second  is  the  domestic  or  garden  lig-troc.     The  former  bears  successively,  in  the  same  year,

cclxxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

Captain  Mangles,  when  near  the  hot-springs  of  Calirrhoe,  beyond  the  Dead  Sea,  writes  : —
"  A  very  singular  plant  grows  near  the  hot  sources,  of  the  bulk  and  stature  of  a  tree.  Its
foliage  does  not  seem  to  differ  from  that  of  the  common  broom.  It  bears  a  pod  hanging  down
from  it,  about  fourteen  inches  in  length,  fluted  with  convex  ribs  from  the  end  to  the  point.
We  never  met  with  this  before."  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  Captain  Mangles,  who
appears  to  have  seen  more  nondescript  plants  than  any  other  traveller  in  Palestine,  had  not
before  his  journey  in  that  country  acquired  that  love  for,  and  acquaintance  with,  plants,  by
which  he  has  since  so  honourably  distinguished  himself,  and  to  which  this  country  has  become
indebted  for  some  of  the  most  beautiful  foreign  plants  which  it  possesses.

The  Vine. — Numbers  of  grapes  ripen  in  this  month ;  but  the  proper  grape  season  is  not
yet.     Troiloa  ate  fresh  grapes  in  Lebanon  towards  the  end  of  this  month.

Grain. — The  operations  of  the  harvest  continue  during  at  least  the  early  part  of  this  month
in  full  vigour.     Of  these  we  have  sufficiently  treated  under  May.

Esculent  Vegetables. — Melons  become  ripe  and  fit  for  use  at  the  latter  end  of  June  in
the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  particularly  on  the  borders  of  the  Lake  Tiberias.  Burckhardt  being
there  on  the  23rd,  writes  :  — "  The  heat  of  the  climate  would  enable  them  to  grow  almost  any
tropical  product ;  but  the  only  produce  of  their  fields  are  wheat,  barley,  dhourra,  tobacco,
melons,  grapes,  and  a  few  vegetables.  The  melons  are  of  the  finest  quality,  and  are  in  great
demand  at  Akka  (Acre)  and  Damascus,  where  that  fruit  is  a  month  later  in  ripening.
Knowing  how  fond  the  Syrians  in  general  are  of  the  early  fruits,  I  sent  to  my  friends  at
Damascus  a  mule's  load  of  these  melons,  which,  according  to  eastern  fashion,  is  a  very  accept-
able and  polite  present.  About  350  pounds,  English  weight,  of  melons,  sell  at  Tabaria  (Tiberias)
for  about  eight  shillings.b  The  musk-melonc  is  probably  intended,  as  it  appears  about  a  month
earlier  than  the  water-melon.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  melon  is  ripe  at  Aleppo  in  June,
although  this  was  regarded  by  Burckhardt  as  extraordinarily  early  in  Palestine.

To  the  same  season  with  the  musk-melon,  Russell  informs  us,  belong  also  the  adder-
three  different  sorts  of  fruit,  called/urnifes,  cratitires,  and  orni;  which,  though  not  good  to  eat,  are  found  absolutely  necessary
towards  ripening  those  of  the  garden-fig.  These  fruits  have  a  sleek  even  skin,  are  of  a  deep  green  colour,  and  contain  in  their
dry  and  mealy  inside  several  male  and  female  flowers  placed  upon  distinct  foot  stalks,  the  former  above  the  latter.  The  fornites
appear  in  August,  and  continue  to  November  without  ripening ;  in  these  are  bred  small  worms,  which  turn  to  a  sort  of  gnat  no-
where to  be  seen  but  about  these  trees.  In  October  and  November,  these  gnats  of  themselves'  make  a  puncture  into  the  second
fruit,  which  is  called  cratitires.  These  do  not  show  themselves  till  towards  the  end  of  September.  The  l'ornites  gradually  fall
away  after  the  gnats  are  gone  ;  the  cratitires,  on  the  contrary,  remain  on  the  tree  till  May,  and  inclose  the  eggs  deposited  by  the
gnats  when  they  pricked  them.  In  May,  the  third  sort  of  fruit,  called  orni,  begins  to  be  produced  by  the  wild  fig-trees.  This  is
much  bigger  than  the  other  two,  and  when  it  grows  to  a  certain  size,  and  its  bud  begins  to  open,  it  is  pricked  in  that  part  by  the
gnats  of  the  cratitires,  which  are  strong  enough  to  go  from  one  fruit  to  auother  to  deposit  their  eggs.  It  sometimes  happens  that
the  gnats  of  the  cratitires  are  slow  to  come  forth  in  certain  parts,  while  the  orni  in  those  very  parts  are  disposed  to  receive  them.,
In  this  case  the  husbandman  is  obliged  to  look  for  cratitires  in  another  part,  and  fix  them  at  the  ends  of  the  branches  of  those  fig-
trees  whose  orni  are  in  a  fit  disposition  to  be  pricked  by  the  gnats.  If  they  miss  the  opportunity,  the  orni  fall,  and  the  gnats  of
the  cratitires  fly  away.  None  but  those  that  were  well  acquainted  with  the  culture  know  the  critical  moment  of  doing  this;  and
in  order  to  know  it,  their  eye  is  perpetually  fixed  on  the  bud  of  the  fig ;  for  that  part  not  only  indicates  the  time  that  the  prickers
are  to  issue  forth,  but  also  when  the  fig  is  to  be  successfully  pricked :  if  the  bud  is  too  hard  and  compact,  the  gnat  cannot  lay  its
eggs ;  and  the  fig  drops  when  the  bud  is  too  open.

"  The  use  of  all  these  sorts  of  fruit  is  to  ripen  the  fruit  of  the  garden  fig-tree  in  the  following  manner  : — During  the  months  of
June  and  July  the  peasants  take  the  orni,  at  the  time  the  gnats  are  ready  to  break  out,  and  carry  them  to  the  garden  fig-trees ;  if
they  do  not  nick  the  moment,  the  orni  fall ;  and  the  fruit  of  the  domestic  fig-tree,  not  ripening,  will  in  a  very  little  time  fall  in
like  manner.  The  peasants  are  so  well  acquainted  with  these  precious  moments,  that  every  morning,  in  making  their  inspection,
they  only  transfer  to  their  garden  fig-trees  such  orni  as  are  well  conditioned,  otherwise  they  loose  their  crop.  In  this  case,  how-
ever, they  have  one  remedy,  though  an  indifferent  one,  which  is  to  strew  over  the  garden  fig-trees  the  ascolimbros,  a  very  common
plant  there,  and  in  whose  fruit  there  is  a  sort  of  gnat  proper  for  piercing ;  perhaps  they  are  the  gnats  of  the  orni,  which  are  used
to  hover  about  and  plunder  the  flowers  of  this  plant.  In  short  the  peasants  so  well  order  the  orni,  that  their  gnats  cause  the
fruit  of  the  garden  tig-tree  to  ripen  in  forty  days."

That  this  operation  is  attended  with  beneficial  effects  is  scarcely  denied  by  any  naturalist ;  but  the  mode  in  which  it  acts  has
been  very  much  disputed,  particularly  as  to  the  part  which  the  gnats  take  in  it.  But  this  is  a  question  for  which  we  cannot  find
room.  The  account  which  we  have  given  from  Toumefort  embodies  the  practice  and  belief  of  the  Orientals  in  the  matter  ;  and
this  is  all  we  desired  to  state.

a  Keise,  66.  b  •  Syria,'  323.  c  Cucumis  meh.

Chap.  VII]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JUNE.  cclxxxi

cucumber,a  kidney-bean,  Jew's  mallow,b  esculent  mallow,  orange-shaped  pumpion,  and  several
varieties  of  gourd.

The  same  author  gives  a  further  statement  respecting  esculent  vegetables,  which,  although
seemingly  referring  to  the  whole  summer  period,  may  very  suitably  be  introduced  here.
According  to  this,  the  pot-herbs  cultivated  in  the  gardens  are, — "  coriander,  fennel,  garlic,
onions,  leeks,  parsley,  celery,  carraway,  cress,  fcenu-greek,c  mint,  and  fennel  flower.  But
besides  the  vegetables  produced  by  culture,  the  fields  afford  capers,  borage,  common  mallow,
sorrel,  dandelion,  water-cress,  and  truffles.  Savory,  wild  as  well  as  garden,  is  much  used  by
the  natives  to  give  a  relish  to  bread.  They  pound  it  when  dry,  then  mix  a  certain  proportion
of  salt,  and  dip  their  bread  in  it  at  breakfast  or  after  meals.  Mustard*1  is  little  used  except  by
Franks :  it  is  found  in  abundance  growing  wild,  but  is  not  cultivated.  The  shikakool,e  or
Syrian  hartwort,  grows  plentifully  in  the  fields.  It  is  sometimes  confected  in  the  manner  of
eringo-root,  but  is  not  much  in  use.  Liquorice  grows  in  great  abundance  towards  the  desert ;
and  vast  quantities  of  it  are  consumed  in  making  a  decoction  which  is  drank  cold,  in  the
manner  of  sherbet,  in  the  summer.

All  this  appears  to  apply  equally  to  Palestine,  where  all  the  plants  enumerated  are  found.
Few  of  them  require  further  remark  than  is  connected  with  them  in  this  statement.  In  Pales-
tine, liquorice  is  chiefly  cultivated  along  the  coast  towards  and  under  the  Lebanon  mountains.
The  mention  of  "  truffles  "  reminds  us  to  turn  to  a  passage  in  Burckhardt's  '  Notes  on  the
Bedouins,'  where  he  writes  of  a  kind  of  truffle  (much  resembling  the  true  truffle  in  shape  and
appearance)  which  grows  in  the  desert  without  any  appearance  of  either  root  or  seeds.  It  is
called  kernmdye,  or  kemmd  (or,  in  the  Bedouin  dialect,  jeme).  There  are  three  varieties  of
it,  the  red  (khelasy),  the  black  (Jebafi),  and  the  white  (zebeidy).  If  the  rain  has  been  abun-
dant during  winter,  the  jemes  are  found  at  the  end  of  March.  They  lie  about  four  inches
under  the  ground.  The  place  where  they  grow  is  known  by  a  slight  rising  of  the  ground  over
them.  If  the  fruit  is  left  to  attain  full  maturity,  it  raises  about  half  its  volume  above  the
earth.  It  forms  a  favourite  d-ish  of  the  Arabs,  and  is  therefore  much  sought  after  by  them.
The  children  and  servants  dig  it  up  with  short  sticks.  They  are  sometimes  so  numerous  in
the  plain,  that  the  camels  stumble  over  them.  Each  family  then  gathers  four  or  five  camels'
loads ;  and  while  this  stock  lasts,  they  live  exclusively  on  kernmdye.  These  truffles  are  boiled
in  water  or  milk  till  they  form  a  paste ;  but  they  are  sometimes  roasted,  and  eaten  with  melted
butter.  If  they  have  been  very  abundant,  they  are  dried  in  the  sun,  and  afterwards  dressed
for  use  like  fresh  ones.  Great  quantities  are  consumed  by  the  people  of  Damascus  and  the
peasants  of  eastern  Syria.  In  general  they  are  worth,  in  Damascus,  about  a  halfpenny  the
pound.  They  are  brought  to  that  city  from  the  district  on  the  eastern  limits  of  the  Lake
Merdj.  To  Aleppo  they  are  brought  from  the  great  plain  adjoining  Jebel  el  Hass.  Camels
do  not  eat  kernmdye.  The  great  desert  or  plain  between  Damascus,  Bagdad,  and  Basrah,
abounds  with  it.  Of  this  production  a  similar  account  is  given  by  Mr.  Addison,f  who  speaks
of  it  as  "  a  kind  of  mushroom  ;"  and  as  "  a  wonderful  and  bountiful  provision  of  nature  for
supplying  food  to  the  Bedouin  Arabs  in  the  spring."

The  tomato,  or  love-apple,  is  mentioned  by  Dr.  Russell,  who  states  that  at  Aleppo  it  used
only  to  be  raised  in  pots  like  other  flowering  plants.  But  in  his  time  it  had  lately  come  into
cultivation,  and  was  brought  to  the  bazaars.  The  use  of  it  was  introduced  among  the  Franks
at  Aleppo  by  an  English  gentleman  who  had  resided  long  in  Spain  and  Portugal.  This  fruit
is  hence  by  the  natives  called  Frank  bandijan.     It  is  the  solarium  lycopersicum.

Another  species  of  solanum  is  named  by  Russell  as  a  principal  article  in  the  diet  of  the
people.  This  is  "  the  mad-apple, "s  as  he  calls  it ;  but  better  known  now  as  "  the  egg-plant."
There  are  three  varieties  of  it,  all  of  which  make  their  appearance  in  June;  but  one  most
abundant  in  the  four  succeeding  months  ;  and  are  in  general  request  at  the  tables  of  every
class  of  the  people.     They  are  even  dried,  or  preserved  in  salt,  so  as  to  furnish  an  occasional

a  Cucumisjle.vuosus.  b  Corchorus  olitarius.  c  T-irjunc/lafcrnutn-gracum.

<•  Sinapis  orientals.     See  before,  p.  ccliii.  e  Tordylinm  Syriacum.

f  '  Journey  to  the  East,'  il.  350.  8  Sulanum  melongenn,  Linn.

VOL.   I.  2  o

cclxxxii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

dish  during  the  winter.  The  use  of  this  species  of  solanum  is  not  at  all  peculiar  to  Syria;
for  both  this  and  the  preceding  are  cultivated  in  the  south  of  Europe,  for  the  sake  of  the  fruits,
which  are  used  to  impart  an  agreeable  acid  flavour  to  soups  and  sauces.

The  other  species  of  solanum  that  grow  in  Palestine  are  the  Solarium  sodomeum,  the  S.  inca-

num,  S.  nigra,  and  the  S.furiosum.
So  badly  are  the  names  and  syno-
nymes  of  this  numerous  genus  dis-
tinguished, that  we  are  not  sure  the
last  named  may  not  be  identical
with  the  first ;  or  that  S.  sodomeum
itself  may  not,  as  Hasselquist  seems
to  state,a  be  identical  with  the  S.
melongena.  However,  taking  them
to  be  different,  we  observe  that,  as
the  name  expresses,  the  S.  sodo-
meum, is  so  called  from  its  being
one  of  the  plants  found  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Asphaltic
its  identity  with  the  famous  "apples
We   have,    therefore,  judged   that  the

[Solanum  Sodomeum]

Lake,  the  qualities  of  whose  fruit  has  suggested
of  Sodom  "  of  which  so  much  has  been  said,
figure  of  it  which  we  have  introduced  may  be  acceptable  to  the  reader.  Of  the  "  apples  of
Sodom,"  we  shall  very  soon  have  some  inquiries  to  make.  Another  of  the  species  named  (if
it  be  another)  solatium  furiosum  is  called  defle  by  the  Arabians.  It  grows  abundantly  beside
the  waters  of  Israel  and  Edom,  often  along  with  the  willow  and  tamarisk.  It  is  found  on  the
borders  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  and  beside  the  streams  which  fall  from  the  East  into  the
great  valley  of  the  Ghor,b  and  appears  to  attain  a  considerable  size.  In  one  place  Burckhardt
calls  it  a  tree ;  but  that  term,  as  well  as  "  shrub, "  is  used  by  him  in  a  very  loose  manner.

Plants. — The  celebrated  hennah  plant c  comes  into  flower  in  May  or  June,  and  sometimes
continues  to  produce  its  rich  blossoms  until
August.  This  plant,  which  is  most  abun-
dant in  Egypt  and  Arabia,  and  is  not  want-
ing in  Palestine,  grows  in  a  shrubby  stalk
to  the  height  of  eight  or  ten  feet,  under
favourable  circumstances.  The  first  good
figure  and  clear  account  of  this  plant  was
given  by  Sonnini  ;d  and,  omitting  his  tech-
nical details,  we  may  follow  him  in  repre-
senting the  henna  as  a  plant  most  grateful
to  the  eye  and  smell.  The  dark  colour  of
its  bark,  the  light  green  of  its  foliage,  the
softened  mixture  of  white  and  yellow,  with
which  the  flowers,  collected  into  long  clus-
ters like  the  lilac,  are  coloured ;  the  red
tint  of  the  ramifications  which  support
them,  form  a  combination,  the  effect  of
which  is  highly  agreeable.  The  flowers,
whose  shades  are  so  delicate,  diffuse  around
the  most  grateful  odours,  and  embalm  with
their  strong  fragrance  the  gardens  in  which
they  grow  and  the  apartments  which  they

[Lawsmia  inerrnis  ]

*  Enumerating  what  he  found  on  the  borders   of  the  Dead  Sea,  lie  has :— "  Forma   sodmnitica,  mad  apples  are  the  fruit  of
Solomum  melongena."

b  See  Burckhardt,  320,  369,  370,  373,  401 .  °  I.aivsonia  inermis.  d  '  Voyage  dans  la  Haute  et  Basse  Egypte,'  17  9.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JUNE.  cclxxxiii

adorn.  The  women  take  pleasure  in  decking  their  persons  and  apartments  with  these  delightful
blossoms ;  although  it  is  said  that  the  odour  of  the  dried  flowers  is  intolerable  to  a  woman  who
has  conceived.*1  But  it  is  not  the  flower,  however  fragrant,  which  constitutes  the  chief  value  of
this  plant  to  the  women  (and  even,  in  some  degree,  to  the  men)  of  the  East.  The  leaves  of  the
plant  are  dried  and  pulverised,  and  then  made  up  into  a  kind  of  paste,  which  is  a  powerful
astringent  dye,  and  is  applied  to  desiccate  and  discolour  the  palms  of  the  hands,  the  soles  of  the
feet,  and  the  nails  of  both.  It  gives  to  these  parts  the  colour  of  iron  rust ;  and  however  fre-
quently the  hands  and  feet  may  be  washed  over  with  water  and  soap,  the  dye  remains  for  two
or  three  weeks  before  it  requires  to  be  renewed.  Most  travellers  deride  this  usage  as  purely
whimsical  or  ridiculous.  But,  on  our  old  travelling  principle,  that  there  is  no  custom,  how-
ever it  may  strike  a  stranger,  so  gratuitously  absurd,  as  not  to  possess  some  original  or  latent
show  of  reason  for  its  commencement  and  continuance,  we  made  inquiries  on  the  subject,  and
found  that,  besides  the  mere  fashion  of  the  thing,  this  astringent  dye,  by  closing  the  pores,
checked  the  perspiration  of  the  parts  to  which  it  was  applied ;  and  in  climates  so  warm  as  to
keep  persons  almost  constantly  in  a  state  of  sensible  perspiration,  it  is  found  a  great  comfort
to  have  the  palms  of  the  hand  and  the  soles  of  the  feet  in  a  -comparatively  dry  state ;  particularly
as  to  the  hands,  which  would  otherwise  moisten  whatever  they  handled.

The  application  of  another  paste,  composed  of  wheat  flower  and  water  with  a  small  quantity
of  sal  ammoniac  and  quicklime,  upon  the  parts  which  have  been  coloured  by  the  henna  dye,
changes  them  to  a  dark  greenish-blue  colour,  which  soon  darken  into  a  deep  black.  Singular
as  it  may  seem,  the  Syrian  ladies  choose  to  make  this  further  application  to  their  persons  in
order  to  produce  contrasted  rings  of  black  and  white  (if  we  may  so  call  the  colour  of  the  skin)
and  figures  of  stars,  roses,  and  other  flowers ;  but  instead  of  being  a  habitual  practice,  as
Sonnini  seems  to  report,  it  is  only,  as  Russell  alleges,  resorted  to  on  festival  occasions.  The
further  application  to  turn  the  dusky  yellow  of  the  henna  dye  into  black  is  however  much
used  (particularly  in  Persia)  by  the  men  to  give  a  black  dye  to  the  hair  of  their  heads  and
beards.  Hence  the  deep  glossy  black  universally  displayed  by  the  Persians  in  their  beards
and  locks  of  hair.  It  requires  to  be  renewed  every  fortnight  or  three  weeks.  In  Syria  and
Egypt  men  are  not  so  much  as  in  Persia  addicted  to  this  practice.  Some  men  and  women  are
satisfied  with  the  effect  which  the  henna  dye  alone  produces  in  their  hair  ;  but  this  effect  is
unpleasant  on  a  European,  who  cannot  identify  it  with  any  natural  shade  of  red  or  yellow  hair
to  which  in  his  own  country  he  may  have  been  accustomed.  There  is  also  a  singular  fancy
for  applying  this  dye  to  the  tails  and  manes,  and  to  describe  lines  and  figures  with  it  upon
the  hides,  of  white  horses  and  asses.

The  custom  of  dyeing,  at  least  the  nails,  with  this  drug  is  of  a  very  ancient  date,  for  those  of
the  old  Egyptian  mummies  are  most  commonly  of  a  reddish  hue.  Whether  the  Jews
employed  the  dye  in  any  way  to  their  persons,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing.  That,  like  the
Egyptians,  they  used  it  to  colour  their  nails,  may  perhaps  be  collected  from  Deut.  xxi.  12;
which  instead  of  "pare  her  nails,"  might  very  well  be  understood  "  adorn  her  nails."  But  it
was  used  as  a  dye  for  ordinary  purposes  ;b  and  the  flowers  were  used  in  their  perfumes  ;  for
which  last  purpose  the  flowers  of  the  plants  which  grew  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ascalon  were
preferred  to  those  of  Egypt. c  This,  however,  assumes  that  the  plant  is  the  copher  (133)  of
the  Hebrews,  and  the  kupros  of  the  Greeks,  which  is  a  point  very  little  doubted.  In  that  case
it  is  the  "camphire"  in  our  version  of  the  Canticles  (c.  14;  iv.  13.),  in  which  there  is  a
beautiful  allusion  to  the  clustering  flowers,  and  to  the  practice,  still  subsisting  among  the
ladies  of  Egypt,  of  wearing  them  in  their  bosoms.

Perhaps  this  month  is  as  proper  as  any  for  the  mention  of  the  roses  of  Palestine.     The
principal  species  in  that  country  are  the  white  garden  rose,d  the  hundred-leavede  (or  damaskf)

a  Hasselquist,  246.  b  Mishna,  tit.  Sheviit,  sive  dejure  anni  sept.  c.  vii,  sect.  6.

c  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  1.  xii.  c.  61.  d  Rjsa  alba.  e  R-  centifuiia.

f  Rosa  Damascena.  These  two  species  (R.  ccntifjlia  and  R.  Damascemi),  are  not  well  distinguished.  Some  regard  the  first
merely  as  the  Linnasan  name  of  the  Damask  ruse,  while  others  regarded  them  as  applied  to  different  species.  This  is  a  question
with  which  we  have  no  desire  to  interfere.  But  we  are  on  all  occasions  averse  to  the  erection  of  more  varieties  into  distinct.
species.

2o2

cclxxxiv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

rose,  the  yellow  rose,a  and  the  evergreen  rose.b  The  Syrian  origin  of  the  damask  rose  is
indicated  by  its  name,  which  refers  it  to  Damascus.  In  the  gardens  of  that  city  roses  are
still  much  cultivated.  Monro  says  that  in  size  they  are  inferior  to  our  damask  rose,  and  less
perfect  in  form  ;  but  that  the  colour  and  odour  are  far  more  rich.  The  only  variety  which
exists  in  Damascus  is  a  white  rose,  which  appears  to  belong  to  the  same  species,  differing  only
in  colour.  The  same  traveller  c  found,  in  the  valley  of  Baalbaec,  a  creeping  rose  of  a  bright
yellow  colour  in  full  bloom  about  the  end  of  May.  About  the  same  time,  on  advancing
towards  Rama  and  Joppa  from  Jerusalem,  the  hills  are  found  to  be  to  a  considerable  extent
covered  with  white  and  pink  roses.d  The  gardens  of  Rama  itself  abound  in  roses  of  a
powerful  fragrance/  Burckhardt  was  struck  by  the  number  of  rose-trees  which  he  found
growing  wild  among  the  ruins  of  Boszra  beyond  Jordan  ;f  and  the  same  traveller  informs  us
that  roses  are  cultivated  with  much  success  in  the  gardens  of  Mount  Sinai.?

According  to  the  Rabbinical  authorities,  no  gardens  were  allowed  within  the  walls  of
Jerusalem — seeing  that  the  gardens  would  require  the  soil  to  be  manured,  whereby  the  holy
city  would  have  been  polluted.  A  few  rose  gardens  only  (which  had  existed  from  the  days
of  the  prophets)  were  allowed.11  At  present  the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem  does  not  appear  very
congenial  to  the  rose.

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  ancient  Jews  knew  how  to  obtain,  or  rather,  were  in  the  habit  of
extracting  essential  oil  (or  attar)  of  roses  ;  or  even  that  they  cultivated  roses  for  the  manufacture
of  rose-water.  We  do  not  suppose  that  the  means  were  unknown  to  them  of  extracting,  in  some
form  or  other,  this  most  exquisite  of  perfumes ;  but  they  probably  found  it  cheaper  to  purchase
it  from  countries  more  favourable  to  the  culture, — perhaps  from  Egypt,  where,  at  the  present
day,  large  tracts  of  land  in  the  province  of  Faioum  are  planted  with  roses,  solely  for  the
manufacture  of  rose-water.  The  white  rose,  or  a  variety  of  it,  is  that  which  is  cultivated
for  this  purpose.  It  is  not  quite  white,  but  a  very  pale  bluish  colour.  It  is  double,  and  often  as
large  as  a  man's  fist.  Hasselquist  says  that  these  roses  emit  the  most  fragrant  odour  he  ever
knew.  This  species  is  preferred  in  other  parts  for  the  same  use.  It  is  long  lived,  but  its  full
productive  vigour  is  from  the  second  to  the  fifth  year  (both  inclusive),  in  consequence  of  which,
after  the  latte   year,  new  plants  are  substituted.1

"  The  rose  of  Jericho"^  although  no  rose,  may  very  suitably  be  noticed  under  this  month,  as

it  is  now  in  blossom.  It  grows  spontaneously  in
Palestine,  particularly  near  the  Dead  Sea  and  the
Jordan,  and  is  also  found  on  the  borders  of  the
Red  Sea,  and  near  Cairo  in  Egypt,  delighting
in  sandy  places.  Although  an  annual  plant,  the
stalk  is  ligneous,  rising  to  the  height  of  five
or  six  inches,  dividing  into  several  irregular
branches.  The  flowers  are  small  and  white,  and
possess  but  little  beauty.  They  are  succeeded
by  short  prickly  pods  containing  the  seeds.  Its
chief  ground  of  notice  is  the  remarkable  cir-
cumstance that,  although  an  annual,  it  may  be
long  preserved,  if  taken  up  entire  before  it  be-
gins to  wither,  and  kept  in  a  dry  room.  After
it  has  been  many  years  in  such  a  situation,  if
the  root  be  placed  for  a  few  hours  in  a  glass  of
water,  the  buds  of  flowers  will  swell,  open,  and
appear  as  if  but  newly  taken  out  of  the  ground.
D'Arvieux1  says  he  sought  for  these  plants  in

[Ruse  of  Jericho.     Anastatica  hierochuntica.]  ,  J  °  x

"  Rosasempervirens.  b  <  Ramble,'  li.  67.  c  Vol.  ii.  p.  90  <*  Elliot,  ii.  508.

=  D'Arvieux,  ii.  24.  f  '  Syria,'  23G.  e  Id.  583.  h  Lightfoot,  Exercit.  upon  Matt.  xxvi.  36.

>  See  more  in  Hasselquist,  248,  aud  Giraud's  Ayricult.  de  I'Egypte,  in  Descript.  de  l'Egypte,  tome  xvii.  p.  117-
k  Anastatica  hieruchunticu.  1  Tomeii.  p.  189.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JULY.

cclxxxv

vain  near  Jericho,  from  which  they  derive  their  name ;  and  he  is  equally  perplexed  to  know
why  it  is  called  a  rose  at  all,  and  why  the  rose  of  Jericho.  He  expressively  enough  calls
these  plants  "  higrometres  naturels."  The  probability  is,  that,  being  an  annual,  it  had  not
grown  up  at  the  time  of  his  visit  (April),  and  it  certainly  could  not  then  be  in  blossom ;  but
that  it  is  found  in  the  neighbourhood  is  distinctly  affirmed  by  various  travellers,11  some  of  the
more  devout  of  whom  find  matter  for  edification  in  the  contrast  between  its  humble  and  unat-
tractive appearance  and  the  "  immortality"  of  its  nature.

JULY.

Weather. — There  is  little  difference  between  the  weather  of  this  month  aud  the  preceding,
except  that  the  heat  is  rather  increased,  and  that  the  sky  remains  almost  invariably  serene.

The  westerly  winds  blow  fresh,  and  when  they  fail,  the  weather  becomes  excessively  hot.

The  greatest  height  registered  by  Dr.  Russell's  thermometer  at  Aleppo  was  101°;  and
although  he  explains  in  a  note  that  the  mercury  seldom  rose  so  high,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that
his  instrument  was  kept  in  a  station  somewhat  cooler  in  summer  than  the  external  air.  The
lowest  point  was  77°  ;  and  the  greatest  variation  in  any  one  day  18°.  The  morning  station  of
the  mercury  at  the  beginning  of  the  month  was  80°,  and  towards  the  end  85°  or  86° ;  the
difference  between  the  morning  and  afternoon  was  generally  from  8°  to  10°.

In  a  portion  of  July  and  a  few  of  the  last  days  of  June  we  enjoy  the  advantage  of  the  ther-
mometrical  observations  of  Dr.  Clarke,  who  travelled  this  month  in  Palestine,  which  will  be
found  to  agree  closely  with  the  results  obtained  by  Dr.  Russell  at  Aleppo  : —

Observations

on  the  Scale  of

Fahrenheit.

Where  Made.

When  Made.

At  London  on
the  same  Days.

81
81
86
83
80
82
85
100
94
96
93
98
87
90
87
88
86*
85
83

Off  Cape  Carrael

Bay  of  Acre  .      .

Bay  of  Acre  .     .

Bay  of  Acre  .

Bay  of  Acre

Bay  of  Acre

Nazareth

In  a  cave  near  Turaub

Lubi

Arab  Tent  in  the  Plain  of  Esdraelon
Napolose,  in  the  olive-ground      .

Bethel

Jerusalem  (Convent  of  St.  Salvador)
Jerusalem  (Convent  of  St.  Salvador)
Jerusalem  (Convent  of  St.  Salvador)

Bethlehem

Rama

Jaffa

Off  the  coast  of  Cssarea      ....

July

June  28
,.  29
..  30
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

78
80

70

68
70
64
70
70
69
73

70

66
66
67
66

70

73
68
60

The  reader  may  be  much  instructed  by  noting  the  differences  produced  by  change  of  situa-
tion in  the  same  country.  We  see  that  when  the  traveller  remained  several  days  in  one
place,  the  temperature  is  nearly  equal ;  but  great  differences  appear  when  he  moves  from  the
coast  to  the  interior,  from  the  hills  to  the  plains  and  valleys,  and  from  them  back  again  to  the
hills.  The  travellers  who  have  recorded  their  observations  on  this  month  are  remarkably  few;
probably  from  the  inconvenience  of  journeying  in  weather  so  very  warm.     Clarke  is  the  chief

a  See  Cotovic,  213  ;  Nau,  351  ;  Morison,  517  ;  Mariti,  319.

b  Turan  is  three  miles  beyond  Cana,  towards  the  Lake  Tiberias.     Luter  in  the  day  (twelve  miles  north-east  of  Mount  Tabor)
the  thermometer,  in  the  most  shady  situation  that  could  be  found,  indicated  102$°.

cclxxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

July  traveller,  and  he  says,  "  All  the  pleasure  of  travelling  at  this  season  of  the  year  in  the
Holy  Land  is  done  away  by  the  excessive  heat  of  the  sun."a

The  following  observations  on  the  weather  of  the  month  are  from  Paxton,  the  recent
American  traveller.  The  reader  of  course  will  make  some  allowances  (with  respect  to  the
clouds  chiefly)  from  the  fact  that  they  were  made  at  Beirout,  on  the  sea-shore,  and  under  the
Lebanon  mountains.

He  observes  that  nearly  two  months  had  passed  since  his  arrival,  and  during  all  that  time
not  a  drop  of  rain  had  fallen.  There  had  been  scarcely  any  weather  that  could  be  called
cloudy.  It  is  true  that  some  clouds  do  at  times  collect  over  the  sea,  and  at  times  they  rest  on
the  mountains ;  but  they  are  clouds  without  rain.  They  very  seldom  spread  over  the  face  of
the  heavens,  so  as  to  withhold  the  light  of  the  sun.  They  are  mostly  confined  to  one  part,  and
leave  the  remainder  in  its  usual  clearness.  "  I  have  again  and  again,"  adds  the  traveller,
"  been  reminded  of  the  fact  that  one  day  is  almost  precisely  as  another.  They  have  no  oppor-
tunity to  say,  '  This  is  a  fine  day  :'  all  are  fine.

Trees  and  Shrubs. — Various  fruits  may  be  obtained  in  July ;  but  there  are  none  which
can  be  said  to  be  this  month  properly  and  distinctively  in  season.  Apples,  pears,  plums,
peaches,  dates,  may  all  now  be  had.  We  have  already  noticed  the  poorness  of  the  apples ;
and  it  maybe  noticed  that  the  fruits  which  are  the  best  in  England  are  the  worst  there;  while
those  that  are  indifferent  here,  there  attain  their  perfection.  Thus  apples  are  bad;  pears
better,  but  rather  indifferent,  except  in  a  few  favourable  situations ;  but  the  plums,  peaches,
nectarines,  and  grapes,  are  very  far  superior  to  any  which  this  country  affords,  and  cannot
anywhere  be  excelled.  Monro,b  at  Damascus,  writes  : — "  The  peaches,  nectarines,  and  apri-
cots, hang  clustering  from  trees  of  timber.  The  plums,  which  are  the  old  stock,  whence  come
our  damascenes — and  which,  by  the  way,  are  well  spoken  of  by  Pliny — are  more  than  double
the  size  of  those  in  England.  There  is  also  another  plum,  not  known  with  us,  round  and
very  full  of  juice,  containing  a  stone  resembling  that  of  a  cherry."  Dates  become  ripe  early
in  July  in  the  great  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and  on  the  borders  of  its  lakes ;  later  elsewhere,
even  in  Egypt.  The  palm-trees  which  are  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  seldom
mature  their  fruit.0     The  fruit  of  the  olive-tree  is  ripe  in  July  and  August.

Burckhardt  this  month  takes  notice  of  "  the  Beyrouk  honey,"  or,  as  the  Arabs  call  it,  Assal
Beyraut,  as  one  of  the  most  interesting  productions  of  the  great  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  its
lakes.  He  never  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  it  himself ;  but  it  was  described  to  him  as  a
juice  dropping  from  the  leaves  and  twigs  of  a  tree  called  gharrab,  of  the  size  of  an  olive-tree,
with  leaves  like  those  of  the  poplar,  but  somewhat  broader.  The  "  honey  "  collects  upon  the
leaves  like  dew,  and  is  gathered  from  them,  or  from  the  ground  under  the  tree,  which  is  often
found  completely  covered  with  it.  According  to  some  its  colour  is  brownish  ;  others  said  it
was  of  a  grayish  hue  :  it  is  very  sweet  when  fresh,  but  turns  sour  after  being  kept  two  days.
The  Arabs  eat  it  like  honey,  with  butter  ;d  they  also  put  it  in  their  gruel,  and  use  it  in  rubbing
their  water-skins  to  exclude  the  air.  The  Beyrouk  "honey"  is  collected  only  in  May,  June,
and  the  beginning  of  July.  Some  persons  assured  Burckhardt  that  the  same  substance  was
likewise  produced  by  the  thorny  tree  tereshresh,  and  collected  at  the  same  time  as  that  from
the  gharrab.

We  feel  much  interest  in  this  statement,  as  it  occurs  to  us  as  not  by  any  means  unlikely
that  the  Scriptural  description  of  Palestine  as  "  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,"  may
have  included  a  reference  to  such  trees,  although  certainly  not  designed  to  apply  exclusively
to  them.  We  feel  more  assured  that  the  adventure  of  Jonathan  with  the  honey  which  lay  on
the  ground,  having  dropped  from  the  trees  in  the  wood,  must  apply  to  such  productions,  and
probably  to  that  which  comes  from  this  very  tree.b

Another  tree,  growing  in  the  mountains  of  Seir,  is  mentioned  by  the  same  traveller,  as  pro-

«  •  Travels,-  iv.  235.  b  Vol.  ii.  p.  67.  c  Radzivil,  97  ;  Shaw,  ii.  152.

ll  "  Dvitter  and  honey  shall  lie  oat."     Isa.  vii.  15.  e  1  Sam.  xiv.  26,  27.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JULY.  cclxxxvii

ducing  a  fruit  from  which  an  extremely  nutritive  juice  is  extracted  by  the  Arabs.  It  is  called
arar.3-

In  different  parts  of  the  Ghor,  and  to  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  occurs  the  doom  or  theder-
tree.  This,  notwithstanding  the  similarity  of  the  name,  is  very  different  from  the  dowm-palm.
"  It  bears  a  small  yellow  fruit,  like  the  zaarour"  is  Burckhardt's  account,  which  will  be
better  understood  by  Captain  Mangles'  explanation,  that  the  tree  "  bears  a  small  stone  fruit,
resembling  in  taste  a  dried  apple."  In  fact,  it  was  dry,  we  presume,  as  Mariti  states  that  it
is  never  eaten  fresh,  on  account  of  its  strongly  aperient  qualities  in  that  state.  The  tree  is
small,  with  a  very  hard  wood,  and  its  bark  like  that  of  the  lemon-tree.

Captain  Mangles  writes  of  a  shrub  which  he  found  beside  the  brook  Dara,  which  falls  into
the  Dead  Sea.  Its  branches  have  an  inclination  inward,  and  are  of  a  dull  green,  with  little  or
no  foliage.  It  bears  a  fruit  about  the  size  of  an  almond  in  its  green  husk,  and  not  very  dis-
similar in  colour,  but  having  several  seams  or  ribs,  like  those  on  the  fruit  of  the  green  pippin.
When  it  ripens,  the  skin  retains  its  roughness  without,  but  becomes  soft  and  juicy  like  a
green-gage,  and  has  a  sort  of  sweetness  mixed  with  a  strong  bitter.  "  By  culture  it  might
perhaps  be  improved  to  a  pleasant  fruit.  Some  said  it  was  eatable,  but  others  asserted  that
it  was  poison,  and  that  children  were  frequently  disordered,  or  even  died,  after  eating  it.  There
is  a  stone  within  it,  and  the  smell  is  sickly  and  disagreeable. "b

The  Vine. — Grapes  are  now,  to  a  considerable  extent,  ripe,  although  the  vintage  is  not
until  September.  Breydenbach  ate  fully  ripe  grapes  at  Jaffa  about  the  middle  (beginning
o.s.)  of  July;  and  Kortec  informs  us  that  this  occurs  in  many  parts  of  Palestine;  while  in
others  they  remain  on  the  vine  till  November  or  even  December,  after  which  they  can  be  kept
for  one  or  two  months.

Grain. — From  the  statement  in  preceding  pages  the  reader  will  be  aware  that  the  opera-
tions of  harvest  are  still  continued  in  particular  parts  of  the  country,  although,  generally
speaking,  the  harvest,  both  of  barley  and  wheat,  may  be  described  as  over  in  June.  Crops  of
other  grain  are,  however,  still  standing,  and  will  engage  our  notice  in  subsequent  months.

Esculent  Vegetables. — Melons,  pumpkins,  and  cucumbers  are  now  seen  ripening  abun-
dantly on  the  ground.  The  water-melons  do  not  appear  in  the  markets  until  July,  and  being  pre-
served in  grottos  or  cool  cellars,  vast  quantities  are  consumed  in  summer  and  autumn.  Some
even  preserve  them  throughout  the  winter,  accounting  it  a  high  luxury  to  eat  them  in  the  bath.d
In  Scripture  the  name  of  the  melon  only  once  occurs,e  as  that  of  an  Egyptian  fruit  for  which  the
Israelites  longed  in  the  wilderness  ;  and  the  extent  to  which  it  is  still  made  to  minister  to  the
enjoyment  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  country  throw  much  light  upon  their  feelings  and  com-
plaints. "  The  water-melon,"  Hasselquist  writes,  "  serves  the  Egyptians  for  meat,  drink,
and  physic.  It  is  eaten  in  abundance  during  the  season,  even  by  the  richer  sort  of  people ;
but  the  common  people,  on  whom  Providence  has  bestowed  nothing  but  poverty  and  patience,
scarcely  eat  anything  else,  and  account  this  the  best  time  of  the  year,  as  they  are  obliged  to
put  up  with  worse  fare  at  other  seasons.  They  eat  them  with  bread,  and  scarcely  ever  taste
them  ripe.  This  fruit  likewise  serves  them  for  drink,  the  juice  being  most  refreshing  to  these
poor  creatures ;  and  they  have  less  need  of  water  than  if  they  lived  on  more  substantial  food
in  this  burning  climate.  This  fruit  also  affords  physic ;  but  it  is  not  every  kind  of  melon
that  answers  this  end.  There  is  a  variety  softer  and  more  pulpy  than  the  common  sort,  and
not  so  plentiful.  When  this  is  very  ripe  and  almost  putrid,  they  hollow  out  part  of  it,  gather
the  juice  there  collected,  and  mixing  it  with  rose-water  and  a  little  sugar,  administer  it  in
burning  fevers,  being  the  only  medicine  the  common  people  use  in  such  distempers."

We  are  acquainted  with  no  author  who  mentions  a  very  common  use  to  which  the  large  flat

a  We  regret  our  inability  to  identify  this  and  the  preceding  (Gharrab)  with  any  known  plant.    Neither  of  the  names  occur  in  our
extensive  list  of  Arabic  names  of  plants,  which  (as  occasion  offered)  we  have  compiled  for  our  own  use.

b  Mangles,  4^3.  c  Reise,  435.  a  Russell,  ii.  92.  c  Num  xi  3.

cclxxxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

seeds  of  the  water-melon  are  applied.  The  are  salted  and  roasted  dry,  in  which  shape  they
are  sold  in  the  bazaars,  and  form  a  strong,  but  not  very  delicate,  relish,  of  which  some  people
are  very  fond.  In  Palestine  melons  are  cultivated  in  the  low  plains  of  the  coast  and  of  the
Ghor :  nor  are  they  neglected  even  in  the  comparatively  high  plains  of  the  Haouran.  The
best,  however,  are  those  produced  in  the  plains  about  the  base  of  Mount  Carmel ;  and  Volney
affirms  that  the  water-melons  of  Jaffa  are  superior  to  the  best  of  Egypt,  which  are  those
grown  at  Burlos.

The  other  species  of  cucurbita  which  grow  in  Palestine  are,  1 .  The  bottle-gourd*  so  called
from  the  shape  of  the  fruit,  as  also,  probably,  from  the  extensive  use  of  its  shell  as  a  water-
vessel  among  the  poor  people  of  various  eastern  countries.  It  is  grown  with  great  freedom  in
those  parts  of  Syria,  Egypt,  and  Arabia,  where  the  hills  are  covered  with  a  rich  soil.  The
Arabs  call  it  charrah.  It  is  eaten  boiled,  and  seasoned  with  vinegar.  It  is  also  much  used
as  stuffed  with  rice  and  chopped  meat,  and  so  boiled  as  a  kind  of  pudding.  The  enveloping
pumpkin  thus  forms  a  vegetable  to  eat  with  its  contents,  and  taken  together,  forms  a  mess  of
which  we  have  often  partaken  with  much  satisfaction  while  on  a  journey,  whatever  we  might
have  thought  of  it  at  home.

2.  The  common  pumpkin,h  which  is  too  well  known  in  this  country  to  need  particular
notice.  But  we  may  mention  that  in  the  East  it  is  esteemed  the  most  wholesome  of  all  the
cucurbita,  and  is  given  to  sick  persons  as  being  cooling  and  diuretic.  In  England,  pumpkins
(properly  pompions)  were  formerly  called  melons,  and  thus  then  the  true  melon  was  distin-
guished as  the  musk-melon,  a  name  which  it  still  retains  with  us.

"  Cucumbers"  occur  in  the  same  passage  of  Scripture,  and  with  the  same  reference  to
Egypt  as  "  melons,"  and  only  once  besides, — in  that  passage  which  alludes  to  "  a  lodge  in  a
garden  of  cucumbers. "c  They  are  cultivated  abundantly,  in  the  same  situations  as  the  melon.
In  the  great  valley  of  the  Jordan  they  are  first  ripe  in  June,  three  weeks  sooner  than  at
Damascus ;  in  consequence  of  which  the  peasants  who  cultivated  them  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  Lake  Houle  find  it  worth  their  while  to  take  them  all  the  way  to  that  city  for  sale.d
Burckhardt,  travelling  this  month  in  Gilead,  passed  among  fields  of  cucumbers,  more  than  a
quintal  of  which  were  carried  off  by  his  (native)  companions,  when  they  observed  no  keepers.6
This  illustrates  the  allusion  of  the  prophet  just  quoted  ;  and,  in  fact,  in  most  extensive  fields  of
melons  or  cucumbers  a  man  is  stationed  when  the  fruit  becomes  fit  to  eat,  to  prevent  quantities
from  being  thus  carried  off.     It  will  be  remembered  that  such  fields  are  unenclosed.

We  may  as  well  take  the  occasion  of  noticing  the  other  species  of  cucumis  which  grow  in
Palestine.  1.  The  cucumis  chate,  or  hairy  cucumber,  which  also  enjoys  the  synonymes  of  the
Egyptian  Melon,  and  the  Queen  of  Cucumbers,  ripens  with  the  water  melons.  Hasselquist
writes : — "  This  fruit  is  a  little  watery  ;  the  flesh  is  almost  of  the  same  substance  as  the  melons ;
it  tastes  somewhat  sweet  and  cool,  but  is  far  from  being  as  cool  as  the  water  melons.  This,
the  grandees  and  Europeans  in  Egypt  eat  as  the  most  pleasant  fruit  they  find,  and  that  from
which  they  have  the  least  to  apprehend.  It  is  the  most  excellent  fruit  of  this  tribe  of  any  yet
known.  The  princes  and  grandees  of  Europe  might  well  wish  to  have  it  in  their  gardens,  for
it  is  most  worthy  of  a  place  at  their  tables."  In  England,  it  has  not  been  brought  to  the
degree  of  excellence  which  is  here  ascribed  to  it.

2.  The  snake  cucumber,1  which  came  to  us  from  the  East  Indies,  offers  equally  to  Syria  and
to  Egypt  its  smooth  and  delicious  fruit,  which  is  of  an  oblong  cylindrical  form,  and  about  the
size  of  a  large  pear.

3.  The  name  of  cucumis  dudaim  must  have  been  bestowed  upon  the  apple-shaped  cucumber,
under  the  impression  that  it  was  to  be  identified  with  the  fruit  to  which  the  Hebrew  Scriptures
give  the  name  of  dudaim,  which  name  we  have,  with  most  writers,  rather  chosen  to  refer  to  the
mandrake.  This  also  is  found  in  our  greenhovises.  The  fruit  is  about  the  size  and  shape  of  an
orange,  and  has  a  vinous  musky  smell,  with  a  whitish  insipid  pulp.

*  Cucurbita  lar/erwrin.  b  Cucurbita  pepn.  c  Isa.  i.  8.  <>   Burckhardt,  316.

•  Burckhardt,  348.  f  Cucumis Jlewuosus.

Chap.  VII  ]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JULY.

cclxxxix

4.  The  coloquintida,  or  bitter  cucumber,a  is  better  known  by  the  appearance  it  makes  in
the  windows  of  our  druggists  than  from  the  fact  of  its  growth  in  our  greenhouses,  where,

[Coloquintida.]

indeed,  ull  the  species  which  grow  in  Syria  may  be  found.  The  very  nauseous  taste  as  well  as
the  valuable  medicinal  properties  of  this  gourd,  are  too  familiar  to  need  description.  It  is
essentially  a  desert  plant :  and  in  the  desert  parts  of  Syria,  Egypt,  and  Arabia,  and  on  the
banks  of  the  rivers  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  its  tendrils  run  over  vast  tracts  of  ground,  offering  a
prodigious  number  of  gourds,  which  are  crushed  under  foot  by  camels,  horses,  and  men.  In
winter  we  have  seen  the  extent  of  many  miles  covered  with  the  connecting  tendrils  and  dry
gourds  of  the  preceding  season,  the  latter  making  precisely  the  same  appearance  as  in  our
shops,  and  when  crushed,  with  a  crackling  noise,  beneath  the  foot,  discharging,  in  the  form
of  a  light  powder,  the  valuable  drug  which  it  contains.  It  is  found  in  the  plain  of  Jericho,
whence  some  have  sought  to  identify  it  with  the  famous  "  apples  of  Sodom,"  fair  to  the  eye,
but  within  dust  and  corruption.  This  distinction  has  been  competed  by  other  plants,  and
among  them  by

5.  The  globe  cucumber,  which,  however,  derives  its  specific  name,  cue  ttinis  prop  hetarum,  from

Van  -

ft

~J       '<

fCucumii  Prophetarum.]
a  Cucumis  colocynthis.

VOL.    I.

2p

ccxc  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [@hap.  YII.

the  notion  that  it  afforded  the  gourd  which  "  the  sons  of  the  prophets  "  shred  by  mistake  into
their  pottage,  and  which  made  them  declare,  when  they  came  to  taste  it,  that  there  was  "  death
in  the  pot !"  This  plant  is  smaller  in  every  part  than  the  common  melon,  and  has  a  nauseous
odour,  while  the  fruit  is  to  the  full  as  bitter  as  the  coloquintida.  This  fruit  has  a  rather  sin-
gular appearance,  from  the  manner  in  which  its  surface  is  armed  with  prickles,  which  are,
however,  soft  and  harmless.

With  regard  to  the  "  apples  of  Sodom,"  to  which  we  have  now  and  before  had  occasion  to
allude,  we  will  take  this  opportunity  of  making  a  further  statement  on  the  subject.  It  is  by
the  peculiar  appropriateness  of  this  fruit  to  the  associations  connected  with  the  Asphaltic  Lake
that  the  fancy  is  gratified  or  interested.  Yet  it  so  happens  that  all  the  fruits  in  which  the
apples  of  Sodom  have  been  sought,  are  such  as  are  more  or  less  common  in  other  quarters ;
and  by  this  the  whole  illusion  is  destroyed.  If,  therefore,  any  of  these  plants  offer  the  "apples
of  Sodom,"  we  are  to  conclude  that  the  accounts  which  report  these  fruits  as  strange  and  won-
derful things,  originated  with  persons,  whether  natives  or  travellers  from  the  east  or  west,
who  did  not  know  that  the  same  existed  in  the  regions  beyond.  And  this  is  most  probably
the  truth.  Our  opinion  is  that  the  story  is  "  founded  on  facts,"  or,  that  there  does  exist  on  the
shores  of  the  Dead  Sea  a  fruit  offering  the  described  appearance  and  illusion  ;  and  that  this
plant  finds  the  soil  and  climate  of  the  Dead  Sea  (or,  perhaps,  more  largely,  of  the  Jordan
valley)  so  congenial  to  its  nature,  that  it  is  not  found  in  other  parts  of  Palestine,  although  it
may  exist  in  other  countries.  In  the  belief,  therefore,  that  it  is  not  necessary  or  probable  that
any  such  plant  should  be  peculiar  to  the  Dead  Sea,  we  see  no  objection  to  any  of  the  plants
which  have  been  named,  on  the  mere  ground  that  they  are  found  in  other  quarters.  The  only
question  is,  which  of  them,  without  being  common  in  other  parts  of  Palestine  itself,  best
meets  the  conditions  imposed  by  the  descriptions  which  have  come  down  to  us.  The  respective
claims  of  "  the  mad  apple,"  the  coloquintida,  and  the  globe  cucumber,  have  been  already
stated ;  and  we  will  now  furnish  the  reader  with  such  other  information  as  we  have  obtained
respecting  these  mysterious  "  apples."

This  was  one  of  the  matters  on  which  the  Jesuit  Nau  sought  for  information  from  Father
Daniel,  the  superior  of  the  convent  of  Santa  Saba,  the  trustworthiness  of  whose  information  is
evinced  (as  before  mentioned")  by  the  particulars  he  furnished  respecting  the  southern  termi-
nation of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  have  lately  been  verified  by  actual  observation.  He  stated  that
he  had  seen,  on  the  western  border  of  the  lake,  about  a  day's  journey  below  the  embouchure  of
the  Jordan,  some  of  the  trees  of  Sodom  of  which  the  ancients  had  spoken.  In  height,  wood,
and  manner  of  growth,  it  resembled  the  fig-tree,  and  the  colour  and  shape  of  its  leaf  ap-
proached to  that  of  the  walnut-tree.  The  fruit  had  great  resemblance,  in  both  form  and  colour,
to  the  lemon,  but  it  had  no  solidity  or  use.  Its  outward  beauty  attracted  the  eye  and  tempted
the  hand ;  but  it  yielded  to  the  pressure  of  the  hand  which  grasped  it,  and  appeared  a  mere
emptines,  or  rather  like  a  sponge  filled  with  air.  In  the  time  of  the  crusaders  Fulk  of  Chartres
saw  it  in  the  same  quarter,  and  describes  it  in  similar  terms  ;b  and,  in  more  precise  language,
speaks  of  it  as  spongy,  Totten,  and  void  within.

It  would  appear  that  the  reports  of  the  Arabs,  who  alone  are  well  acquainted  with  the  shores
of  the  lake,  coincide  very  well  with  this  account.  An  acute  Arab,  who  was  the  sheik  of
Bethlehem,  assured  Mr.  Elliot  that  on  the  western  shore  of  the  lake  trees  are  seen  producing
a  fruit  which,  when  open,  exhibits  nothing  but  smoke  or  dust.  "  The  description,"  observes
the  traveller,  "  corresponded  in  some  degree  to  that  we  found  near  Thyatira  in  Asia  Minor,c
as  likewise  to  the  diseased  excrescence  from  maples  and  similar  trees.  So  many  theories
have  been  stated  as  to  the  apples  of  Sodom  that  conjectures  would  now  be  superfluous.    Among

a  See  p.  clxxx.  b  Gestu  per  Reg.  Franc.  An.  1100.

c  "In  the  woods  (near  Thyatira)  we  picked  up  a  fruit  answering  in  some  respects  to  the  description.  It  grows  on  short  bushes,
and  is  enclosed  in  a  green  shell  like  that  of  a  horse  chestnut,  which  it  resembles  in  shape,  size,  and  colour  ;  it  has  thorns  on  its
surface,  and  when  out  open,  the  inside  looks  like  mould."  Vol.  ii.  121.  As  we  have  no  doubt  that  his  "  acute  Arab  "  intended
to  describe  the  same  fruit  which  was  noticed  by  Fulk  and  Father  Daniel,  Elliot  must  have  understood  him  very  imperfectly  to
suppose  that  the  account  was  applicable  to  the  fruit  he  had  seen  near  Thyatira.  That  his  mind  was  preoccupied  by  his  previous
conjecture,  accounts  for  this.

Chai>.  VII  ]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS- JULY.  ccxci

the  various  fruits  which  have  been  so  miscalled,  is  one  that  grows  in  great  abundance  on  low
bushes  in  the  vicinity  of  Elisha's  fountain  at'  Jericho.  It  is  of  a  yellow  colour,  beautiful  to
the  eye,  but  exceedingly  unpalatable,  and  reputed  to  be  poisonous.  The  appearance  of  the
interior  does  not,  however,  correspond  to  that  of  the  fruit  in  question.  That  which  does  so,
more  than  any  known  vegetable,  is  the  solarium  melongena,  or  mad-apple  :;i  when  this  is
attacked  by  a  certain  insect,  the  skin  is  pierced  with  a  hole  scarcely  perceptible,  and  remains
apparently  perfect,  and  of  a  beautiful  colour,  while  the  inside  is  converted  into  a  powder  like
dust."b

Burckhardt  states  that  the  Arabs  speak  of  a  spurious  pomegranate-tree,  producing  a  fruit
exactly  like  that  of  the  pomegranate,  but  which,  on  being  opened,  is  found  to  contain  nothing
but  a  dusty  powder.  He  adds,  however,  that  other  persons  deny  its  existence.0  By  some  pro-
cess or  other  his  mind  is  led  from  this  to  the  Asheyr-tree,d  which  he  proceeds  to  describe.
He  says  it  is  very  common  in  the  Ghor.  It  bears  a  fruit  of  a  reddish  yellow  colour,  about
three  inches  in  diameter,  which  contains  a  white  substance  resembling  the  finest  silk,  and
enveloping  some  seeds.  The  Arabs  collect  this  "  silk,"  and  twist  it  into  matches  for  their
firelocks,  preferring  it  to  the  common  match,  because  it  ignites  more  readily.  More  than
twenty  camels'  loads  might  be  annually  procured,  and  it  might  perhaps  be  found  useful  in  the
silk  and  cotton  manufactures  of  Europe.  At  present  the  greater  part  of  the  fruit  rots  on  the
trees.  On  making  an  incision  into  the  thick  branches  of  the  asheyr,  a  white  juice  exudes,
which  is  collected  by  putting  a  hollow  reed  into  the  incision.  The  Arabs  sell  this  juice  to
the  druggists  at  Jerusalem,  who  are  said  to  use  it  in  medicine  as  a  strong  cathartic.  This  is
the  same  tree  which  is  mentioned  (in  the  same  locality)  by  Captain  Mangles  under  the  name  of
oshar.  The  connection  in  which  Burckhardt  describes  it  is  rendered  remarkable  only  by  the  fact
that  Seetzen,  on  hearing  the  same  account,  in  the  same  place,  of  the  spurious  pomegranate,  was
led  to  conclude  that  this  very  asheyr-tree  was  really  intended.  His  words  are :  "  While  I  was
at  Kerek,  at  a  house  of  the  Greek  curate  of  the  town,  I  saw  a  sort  of  cotton  resembling  silk,
which  he  used  for  tinder  for  his  matchlock.  He  told  me  that  it  grew  in  the  plains  of  El  Ghor,
to  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  on  a  tree  like  the  fig-tree,  called  aaeschaer.e  The  cotton  is  con-
tained in  a  fruit  resembling  the  pomegranate:  and  by  making  incisions  at  the  root  of  the  tree,1'
a  sort  of  milk  is  procured  which  is  recommended  to  barren  women,  and  is  called  lebban
aaeschaer.  It  has  struck  me  that  these  fruits,  being,  as  they  are,  without  pulp,  and  which
are  unknown  throughout  the  rest  of  Palestine,  might  be  the  famous  apples  of  Sodom.  I  sup-
pose likewise  that  the  tree  which  produces  it  is  a  sort  of  fromager  (Bombax,  Linn.),  which
can  only  flourish  under  the  excessive  heat  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  in  no  other  district  of
Palestine."?

Plants. — We  have,  already  intimated  that  Dr.  Clarke  is  the  great  traveller  of  this  month.
He  was  well  versed  in  botany,  and  has  consequently  noticed  a  large  number  of  plants,  many
of  which  he  knew  to  be  nondescripts.     As  he  is  almost  our  sole  remaining  companion  for  this

a  That  is  a  matter  of  opinion.     It  seems  however  to  have  been  also  the  opinion  of  Hasselqnist.     See  before  p.  cclxxxii.

b  Elliot,  ii.  486.  c  '  Syria,'  392.

<1  It  is  the  same  plant  called  oshour  by  the  people  of  Upper  Egypt  and  Nubia.  Haden,  who  gives  a  drawing  of  it  as  found  by
him  near  the  first  cataract  of  the  Nile,  improperly  denominates  it  oshar.

c  Same  as  axheyr. — Aaeschaer — asheyr — oshar — oshour : — What  differences  in  spelling  the  same  Arabic  word  !

f  Burckhardt  derives  it  from  the  "  thick  branches."

e  Seetzen,  p.  45.  The  editor  or  translator  has  a  note  to  this,  which  is  well  worth  transcribing.  He  says  it  is  "  a  species  of
asclepias,  probably  gigantea  [it  is  A.  procera].  The  remark  of  Mr.  Seetzen  is  corroborated  by  a  traveller  [Sonnini,  of  course],  who
passed  a  long  time  in  situations  where  this  plant  is  very  abundant.  The  same  idea  occurred  to  him  when  he  first  saw  it  in  1792,
although  he  did  not  then  know  that  it  existed  near  the  Lake  Asphaltites.  The  umbella,  somewhat  like  a  bladder,  containing  from
half  a  pint  to  a  pint,  is  of  the  same  colour  with  the  leaves,  a  bright  green,  and  may  be  mistaken  for  an  inviting  fruit  without  much
stretch  of  imagination.  That,  as  well  as  the  other  parts,  when  green,  being  cut  or  pressed,  yields  a  milky  juice,  of  a  very  acrid
taste.  But  in  winter  it  contains  a  yellowish  dust,  in  appearance  resembling  certain  fungi,  common  in  South  Britain,  but  of
pungent  quality,  and  said  to  be  particularly  injurious  to  the  eyes.  The  whole  so  nearly  corresponds  with  the  description  given  by
Solinus  (Polyhistor),  Josephus,  and  others  of  the  Poma  Sodomae,  allowance  being  made  for  their  extravagant  exaggerations,  as  to
leave  little  doubt  on  the  subject.

"  The  same  plant  is  to  be  seen  on  the  sandy  borders  of  the  Nile,  above  the  first  cataracts.  It  is  about  three  feet  (only  ?)  in
height,  the  fruit  exactly  answering  the  above  description,  &c.  The  downy  substance  found  within  is  of  too  short  staple,  probably
for  any  manufacture,  for  which  its  delicate  silky  texture  and  clear  whiteness  might  otherwise  be  suitable."

2p  2

ccxcii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

month,  it  may  be  most  pleasant  to  go  unreservedly  with  him,  reporting,  with  such  remarks  as
may  occur  to  us,  the  observations  made  by  him  in  the  successive  steps  of  his  progress.  In
May  we  did  this  for  Hasselquist.

Dr.  Clarke  landed  at  Acre  on  the  29th  of  June,  and  remained  there  until  the  3rd  of  July,
when  he  left  for  Nazareth.  Approaching  the  hills  which  bound  the  plain,  "  the  land  was
much  covered  with  a  plant  exhibiting  large  blossoms  of  aggregated  white  flowers,  resembling
those  of  the  wild-parsley."  He  believed  it  to  be  the  cachrys  libanotis.  Of  all  the  plants  noticed
in  the  journey,  this  is  the  only  one  the  Doctor  neglected  to  add  to  his  herbarium,  from  an
absurd  notion  that  what  appeared  so  common  might  be  had  anywhere  and  at  any  time.  But
it  disappeared  when  the  distance  from  the  sea  had  much  increased.  The  Indian  fig  a  has
already  been  noticed  in  this  work  ;  but  we  may  add  Clarke's  statement,  that  it  grows  to  a
prodigious  size  in  the  Holy  Land,  as  in  Egypt,  where  it  is  used  as  a  fence  for  the  hedges  of
enclosures.  It  sprouted  luxuriantly  among  the  rocks,  displaying  its  gaudy  yellow  blossoms
amidst  thorns,  defying  all  human  approach.  He  afterwards  saw  this  plant  as  thick  as  the
mainmast  of  a  frigate.  It  produces  a  delicious  cooling  fruit,  which  becomes  ripe  towards
the  end  of  July,  and  is  then  sold  in  all  the  markets  of  the  country.

Between  Sepphoris  and  Nazareth  the  journey  led  over  a  hilly  and  stony  tract  of  land,
having  no  resemblance  to  the  deep  and  rich  soil  which  had  before  been  passed.  Hasselquist
regarded  it  as  a  continuation  of  the  species  of  territory  which  is  peculiar  to  the  same  meri-
dian through  several  countries.  He  found  here  the  same  plants  which  he  had  seen  in  Judea ;
and  these,  he  says,  are  not  common  elsewhere.  Notice  was  also  taken  of  the  Psoralea
Palcestina  of  Linnaeus,  and  of  a  new  species  of  pink,  to  which,  from  the  interesting  circum-
stances of  its  locality,  the  name  of  Dianthus  Nazaroeus  (Nazarene  Pink)  was  given.  In  this
journey,  between  Acre  and  Nazareth,  three  new  species  of  plants  were  discovered  by  an
accomplished  traveller,  and  are  described  in  tbe  note  below.b

The  plants  near  the  town  of  Nazareth  were  found  to  be  all  withered  under  the  heat  and
drought  of  summer.  Only  four  were  found,  of  which  tolerable  specimens  could  be  selected.
These  were  the  new  species  of  Dianthus,  or  pink,  just  mentioned ;  the  Syrian  Pink,  or  Dian-
thus Monadelfhus  ;  the  Ammi  Copticnm  ;  and  the  Anethumgraveoleus :  these  the  traveller
carefully  placed  in  his  herbary,  as  memorials  of  the  interesting  spot  in  which  they  were
collected.

Travelling  from  Nazareth  to  Tiberias,  Dr.  Clarke  found  occasion  to  notice  the  thistles,  as
quoted  in  a  former  page ;  and  a  plant,  which  he  mistook  for  the  Jerusalem  artichoke,  was  also
seen  everywhere,  with  a  purple  head,  rising  to  the  height  of  five  or  six  feet.  "  The  scorching
rays  of  the  sun,"  continues  the  traveller,  "  put  it  out  of  our  power  to  collect  specimens  of  all
these ;  no  one  of  the  party  having  sufficient  resolution  to  descend  from  his  horse  and  abandon
his  umbrella,  even  for  an  instant.  We  distinctly  perceived  that  several  of  these  plants  had
not  been  described  by  any  traveller.

"  In  the  examination  of  the  scanty  but  interesting  selection  which,  with  excessive  fatigue
and  difficulty,  we  made  in  this  route,  not  less  than  six  new  species  were  discovered.0  Of  these,
the  new  globe-thistle,  which   we  have  named  Echinops  grandiflora,  made  a  most  superb

a  Cactus  Ficais  Indicus.

b  1.  A  nondescript  species  of  Wild  Bugloss  (Lycopsis,  Linn.)  with  lanceolate  blunt  leaves,  from  two  to  three  inches  in  length,
and  the  flowers  sessile,  pointing  to  one  side,  in  curved  close  racemes  at  the  ends  of  the  brandies;  the  bracts  linear  larger  than
the  blossoms,  and  as  well  as  every  part  of  the  plant  except  the  blossoms  and  roots,  hispid,  with  strong  pungent  bristles.  Named
by  the  discoverer  of  it  Lycopsis  confertijlora.

2.  The  new  pink,  mentioned  above,  with  sleuder  stems,  a  foot  or  more  in  height,  and  very  narrow  three-nerved  leaves  about  an
inch  and  a  half  long,  the  flowers  solitary,  embraced  at  the  base  by  six  ovate  sharp-pointed  bracts,  the  petals  unequally  six-toothed
at  the  end.     Named,  Dianthas  Nazarcsus.

3.  A  curious  nondescript  species  of  Stone  Crop  (Sedum.  Linn.),  with  lanceolate  fleshy  leaves,  the  flowering  stems  nearly  erect,
from  about  fourteen  to  eighteen  inches  or  more  in  height,  and  often  leafless.  The  flowers  yellow,  in  a  sort  of  umbel,  composed  of
close,  unequal  racemes  ;  the  petals  six ,  lanceolate  and  acute,  with  the  same  number  of  capules  and  twelve  stameus.  This  was
named  Sedum  altum.

c  These  are: — 1.  A  new  species  of  Heliotrope,  found  near  Cana,  to  which  the  name  of  Heliotropium  hirsutum  was  given.  2.  A
nondescript  species  ot  Larkspur,  found  near  the  same  place,  and  named  Delphinuim  incanum.  3.  A  cottony  species  of  Origanum,
also  near  Cana,  which  received  the  name  Origanum  vestitium.  4.  A  shrubby  nondescript  species  of  Globe  Thistle,  named
Echinops  grandiflora.  5.  A  nondescript  species  of  Aria,  denominated  Aria  triaristata.  6.  A  nondescript  shrubby  species  of
Cistus,  on  which  the  names  of  Cistus  oliguphyllus  was  bestowed.

Chap.  VII  ]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JULY.  ccxciii

appearance.  It  grew  to  such  a  size,  that  some  of  its  blossoms  were  near  three  inches  in  dia-
meter, forming  a  sphere,  equal  in  bulk  to  the  largest  fruit  of  the  pomegranate.  Its  leaves
and  stem,  while  living,  exhibited  a  dark  but  vivid  sky-blue  colour.  The  Persian  manna  plant,
or  Hedysarum  alhagi,  which  we  had  collected  between  Acre  and  Nazareth,  also  flourished
here  abundantly.  This  thorny  vegetable  is  said  to  bea  the  favourite  food  of  the  camel.  It  is
found  wild  in  Syria,  Palestine,  Persia,  Egypt,  Mesopotamia,  Armenia,  Georgia,  and  in  the
islands  of  Tenos,  Syra,  and  Cyprus.  Rauwolff,  who  discovered  it  in  1537,  in  the  vicinity  of
Aleppo  and  in  Persia,  often  mentions  it  in  his  '  Travels.' "

Approaching  nearer  to  the  Lake  Tiberias,  not  only  the  thistles  but  the  "tall  herbage"  again
attracted  the  notice  of  our  traveller.  Descending  to  the  town  over  the  slopes  cultivated  by  the
inhabitants,  some  plantations  of  tobacco  were  observed,  being  at  this  time  in  bloom ;  also  of
Indian  corn,  and  of  millet,  which  was  still  green.

From  Tiberias  the  traveller  proceeded  in  the  direction  of  Nablous,  the  ancient  Shechem,
and  from  thence  to  Jerusalem.  On  this  latter  portion  of  his  journey  he  remarks  : — "  The  road
was  mountainous,  rocky,  and  full  of  loose  stones  ;  yet  the  cultivation  was  everywhere  marvel-
lous :  it  afforded  one  of  the  most  striking  pictures  of  human  industry  which  it  is  possible  to
behold.  The  limestone  rocks  and  stony  valleys  of  Judea  were  entirely  covered  with  planta-
tions of  figs,  vines,  and  olive-trees ;  not  a  single  spot  seemed  to  be  neglected.  The  hills,
from  their  bases  to  their  upmost  summits  were  even  spread  with  gardens,  all  of  which  were
free  from  weeds,  and  in  the  highest  state  of  cultivation.  Even  the  sides  of  the  most  barren
mountains  had  been  rendered  fertile  by  being  divided  into  terraces,b  like  steps,  rising  one
above  the  other,  upon  which  soil  had  been  accumulated  with  astonishing  labour.  Among  the
standing  crops  we  noticed  millet,  cotton,  linseed,  and  tobacco,  and  occasionally  small  fields  of
barley.  A  sight  of  this  territory  can  alone  convey  an  idea  of  its  surprising  produce.  It  is
truly  the  Eden  of  the  East,  rejoicing  in  the  abundance  of  its  wealth.  Under  a  wise  and  beni-
ficent  government,  the  produce  of  the  Holy  Land  would  exceed  all  calculation.  Its  perennial
harvest, — the  salubrity  of  its  air, — its  limpid  springs, — its  rivers,  lakes,  and  matchless  plains, —
all  these,  added  to  the  serenity  of  its  climate,  prove  this  land  to  be  indeed  '  a  field  which  the
Lord  hath  blessed.0  God  hath  given  it  the  dew  of  heaven  and  the  fatness  of  the  earth,  and
plenty  of  corn  and  wine.'  "

At  Jerusalem  Dr.  Clarke  appears  to  have  been  too  much  engaged  in  local  criticisms  and
descriptions — in  upsetting  old  traditions  and  setting  up  new  theories — to  heed  the  plants  which
its  neighbourhood  offers.  Travelling  from  it  on  the  road  to  Rama  and  Jaffa,  he  observes  that
the  hills  were  for  the  most  part  barren,  but  the  valleys  remarkably  fertile.  The  latter  (it  was
now  the  middle  of  July)  were  covered  with  crops  of  tobacco,  wheat,  barley,  Indian  millet,
melons,  vines,  pumpkins,  and  cucumbers.  "  The  gourd  or  pumpkin,"  he  notes,  "  seems  to
be  a  favourite  vegetable  in  the  East,  and  many  varieties  of  it  are  cultivated."

At  Jaffa,  notwithstanding  the  then  desolate  appearance  of  the  town,  the  market  surprised  the
traveller  by  the  beauty  and  variety  of  the  vegetables  it  exhibited.  In  accordance  with  what
we  have  lately  stated,  he  remarks  : — "  Melons  of  every  sort  and  quality  were  sold  in  such
numbers,  that  boats  from  all  the  coast  of  Syria  came  to  be  freighted  with  them.  Among  these
the  water-melons  were  in  such  perfection,  that  after  tasting  them  at  Jaffa,  those  of  any  other
country  do  not  seem  like  the  same  fruit."

In  this  neighbourhood  were  found  four  undescribed  plants,  with  several  others  that  were
rare,  especially  the  Anabatis  spinosissima  of  Willdenow.  The  new  species  were : — A  non-
descript species  of  Plantago,  to  which  the  name  of  P.  setosa  was  given  ;  a  very  small  non-
descript prostrate  species  of  St.  John's  Wort,  which  received  the  name  of  Hypericum  tenellvm  ;
a  minute,  nearly  stemless  umbelliferous  plant,  which  was  added  to  the  genus  Bvplevrum  by
the  name  of  B.  minimum  ;  and  a  small  downy  annual  species  of  Scabious,  which  was  named
Scabiosa  divaricata.

Irrigation.  The  drought  of  the  season  to  which  we  are  now  advanced  calls  into  operation
all  the  modes  of  artificial  irrigation  which  the  country  possesses,  and  of  which  we  now  proceed

a  It  is  so.  b  See  the  cut  at  the  head  of  this  chapter.  c  Gen.  xxvii.  27,  28.

CCXCIV

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

to  take  some  notice.  All  the  pictorial  illustrations  of  the  subject  which  we  have  to  offer  are
derived  from  ancient  and  modern  Egypt;  but  the  practices  are  the  same  which  prevail
throughout  Syria  and  Western  Asia,  and  indeed  the  same  which  have  been  in  use  from  ancient
times.  These  have  been  so  selected  as  to  convey  of  themselves  most  of  the  information
required,  and  are  designed  rather  to  supply  (more  efficiently)  the  place  of  written  description,
than  to  form  the  text  for  a  written  commentary.  The  very  great  importance  of  the  subject
in  a  country  where  rain  is  discontinued  throughout  the  summer,  and  where,  in  consequence  of
that  and  of  the  fervent  heat,  all  the  streams  are  quite  dried  up,  excepting  those  of  two  or  three
principal  rivers,  are  circumstances  not  only  to  justify  but  to  require  the  extent  of  illustration
which  we  are  prepared  to  afford .

The  water  is  to  be  raised  from  rivers  (say  the  Jordan),  from  reservoirs  (of  which  there  are
many  of  much  importance  in  Palestine),  or  from  wells,  and  to  be  distributed  over  the  fields
and  gardens ;  and  we  are  to  show  how  it  is  raised  and  distributed.

The  first  and  most  obvious  process,  where  the  water  was  near  at  hand,  as  in  a  reservoir  upon
the  grounds,  was  to  employ  men  to  water  the  beds  with  pails  or  pots.  This  appears  to  have
been  done  to  a  considerable  extent  in  ancient  Egypt,  in  the  manner  shown  in  the  annexed
cut.     The  yoke  by  which  they  bear  the  water-pots  from  their  shoulders  was  very  extensively

[Irrigation  with  Pails.  ]

[Yoke  and  Strap.]

employed  in  carrying  burdens;  and  being  much  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures,  a  more  complete
representation  of  it  may  be  acceptable  to  our  readers.

When  the  river  is  high,  or  the  bank  low,  two  men  are  often  employed  to  raise  water  by

[Irrigation  by  the  Ckutweh]

Chap.  VII]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JULY.

ccxev

their  united  action,  in  a  single  vessel,  (called  ckutweh)  after  a  manner  which  is  too  distinctly
shown  in  the  preceding  engraving  to  require  explanation.  When  the  grounds  are  so  situated  as
to  make  a  resort  to  this  method  expedient,  a  kind  of  trench,  as  shown  in  the  cut,  is  formed  in
the  hank,  which  serves  as  a  reservoir,  on  the  opposite  sides  of  which  the  men  necessarily  stand,
to  raise  the  water  between  them.     The  same  process  is  applicable  to  any  reservoir.

It  is  however  in  such  cases  more  usual  to  raise  the  bucket  by  means  of  the  shadoof,  which
is  the  most  common  and  simple  of  the  machines  used  in  the  East  for  raising  water,  whether
from  rivers  or  from  wells.  To  use  the  accurate  description  of  Mr.  Lane,a  "  It  consists  of  two
posts  or  pillars  of  wood,  or  of  mud  and  canes  or  rushes,  about  five  feet  in  height,  and  less  than
three  feet  apart,  with  a  horizontal  piece  of  wood  extending  from  top  to  top,  to  which  is
suspended  a  slender  lever,  formed  of  a  branch  of  a  tree,  having  at  one  end  a  weight  chiefly
composed  of  mud,  and  at  the  other,  suspended  from  two  long  palm-sticks,  a  vessel  in  the  form
of  a  bowl,  made  of  basket-work,  or  of  a  hoop  and  piece  of  woollen  stuff  or  leather ;  with  this
vessel  the  water  is  thrown  up  to  the  height  of  about  eight  feet,  into  a  trough  hollowed  out  for
its  reception."  That  this  mode  of  raising  water  is  very
ancient  is  evinced  by  the  engraving  here  annexed.

The  difference  between  it  and  that  of  which  we  have
quoted  the  description  is,  chiefly,  that  the  lever  is  not
suspended  from,  but  balanced  upon  the  cross  beam.
And  this  more  ancient  mode  is  preserved  in  Syria,  and
indeed  in  most  other  countries  (except  Egypt)  where
the  principle  of  the  balance  and  lever  is  applied  to  the
raising  of  water.  This  principle  is  very  extensively  em-
ployed in  eastern  Europe  and  Western  Asia  to  the  raising
of  water  from  wells.  It  prevails  from  one  end  of  Russia
to  the  other,  as  also  in  Asia  Minor,  parts  of  Persia  and
Syria.  In  the  latter  country  the  shadoof  is  now  less
frequent  than  in  other  parts  of  Western  Asia ;  but  where
it  is  found  (as  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jaffa,  etc.b),  the
lever  is  balanced,  not  suspended.  It  will  be  apparent
to  one  who  has  the  slightest  acquaintance  with  mechanics  that  the  principle  labour  of  the
man  who  attends  to  the  shadoof  is  not  to  raise  the  bucket,  but  to  lower  it  into  the  well  or
river.  We  have  ourselves  tried  it  often,  and  found  that  it  required  a  strenuous  muscular
exertion  to  lower  the  bucket ;  and  when  it  is  full,  the  chief  care  is  to  prevent  its  rising  too
high  and  with  too  much  force.

When  the  river  is  too  low  or  its  banks  too  high  for  shadoofs  on  the  same  level  to  raise  the
water  to  the  surface  of  the  soil,  a  series  of  four  or  five  shadoofs  or  sets  of  shadows  is  rendered
necessary.  The  water  is  then  raised  from  the  river  by  shadoofs,  and  discharged  into  a  trench,
from  which  it  is  taken  by  other  shadoofs,  and  discharged  into  another  trench  above,  and  so  on
from  trench  to  trench,  until  it  is  raised  to  the  level  of  the  fields.     (See  cut,  p.  ccxcvi  )

Instead  of  being  balanced  upon  or  suspended  from  a  cross  beam  between  two  pillars,  we
have  very  frequently  noticed  the  lever  balanced  upon  the  top  of  one  stout  beam  planted  per-
pendicularly, and  which  is  usually  forked  or  hollowed  at  the  upper  end  for  this  purpose.  It
is  thus  arranged  also  in  those  parts  of  Syria  where  the  shadoof  is  at  all  used,  as  in  the  gardens
around  Jaffa,  where  it  is  employed  in  drawing  water  from  the  wells.c

Mr.  Lane  writes  of  shadoofs  with  two  levers,  etc.,  which  are  worked  by  two  men ;  but  con-
cerning which  we  possess  no  further  information.

Another  machine,  much  used  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  shadoof,  not  only  on  the  banks
of  the  Nile,  but  on  those  of  the  Euphrates,  Tigris,  and  all  the  principal  rivers  of  Western
Asia,  is  the  Sackiyeh,  and  which  is  usually  in  all  places  called  "the  Persian  wheel,"  indicating
its  derivation  from  Persia,  where,  certainly,  it  is  now  very  largely  employed.  It  is  by  far  the
principal  machine  employed  for  the  irrigation  of  gardens  in  all  the  quarters  we  have  named.

[Ancient  Shadoof.]

a  '  Modern  Egyptians,'  vol.  ii.  p.  24.  b  See  Turner,  ii.  293.

c  See  the  cut  and  statement  in  Turner's  '  Tour  in  the  Levant,'  ii.  293.

CCXCV1

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

[Modern  Shadoof.-.]

,.-f  mlBs\

3

[The  Sackiycli,  or  Persian  Wheel.]

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JULY.

ccxcvu

The  most  concise  and  yet  clear  description  is,  again,  Mr.  Lane's,  which  we  therefore  adopt,
referring  those  who  desire   more  minute  information  to  tome  xii.  of  the   '  Descriptions  de
PEgypte,'  which  contains  an  account  of  all  the  processes  of
irrigation  employed  in  that  country.     The  Sackiyeh  "mainly
consists  of  a  vertical  wheel,  which  raises  the  water  in  earthen
pots  attached  to  cords,  and   forming  a  continuous  series;  a
second  vertical  wheel  fixed  to  the  same  axis  with  cogs ;  and  a
large  horizontal  cogged  wheel,  which,  being  turned  by  a  pair
of  cows  or  bulls,  or  by  a  single  beast,  puts  in  motion  the  two
former  wheels  and  the  pots.     The  construction  of  the  machine
is  of  a  very  rude  kind  ;  and  its  motion  produces  a  disagreeable
croaking  noise."     The  example  exhibited  in  our  cut  is  one  of
the  most  perfect  of  the  kind,  being  used  for  the  irrigation  of
the  gardens  of  one  of  the  old  beys,  on  the  banks  of  the  canal
by  which  Cairo  is  traversed.     The  reader  will  perceive  that
the  revolution  of  the  wheels  takes  down  the  string  of  buckets
on  one  side,  and  brings  them  up  full  on  the  other.     On  reach-
ing the  top,  they  are  reverted  by  the  continued  action  of  the
wheel,  and  pour  forth  their  contents  into  a  trough  which  con-
ducts it  to  a  reservoir,  whence  it  is  distributed  in  rills  over
the  garden.     The  annexed  engraving  will  render  more  clear
the  mode  in  which  the  string  of  buckets  acts  in  raising  the
water,  although  it  does  not  belong  to  the  interior  construction  of
the  same  machine  which  is  represented  in  the  preceding  engrav-
ing, but  is  derived  from  another  application  of  the  same  principle.
It  is  by  the  wheel  and  string  of  buckets  that  water  is  usually
raised  from  wells  in  Syria,  although  the  shadoof  is  sometimes
employed.    There  is  another  machine  used  for  the  irrigation  of
lands,  when  it  is  only  necessary  to  raise  the  water  a  few  feet.
This  is  called  the  Taboot.     "  It  somewhat  resembles  the  Sac-
kiyeh ;  the  chief  difference  being,  that,  instead  of  the  wheel
with  pots,  it  has  a  large  wheel  with  hollow  jaunts,  or  fellies,  in
which  the  water  is  raised. "a     Sometimes  men  are  employed
with  the  Ckutweh,  as  represented  in  the  first  of  this  set  of  illus-
trations, to  raise  the  water  to  the  channel  of  the  Taboot.    (See
the  first  engraving  in  the  following  page.)

The  water  being  raised  to  the  surface  by  these  various
methods,  is  distributed  over  the  grounds  in  the  manner
shown  in  the  second  engraving  in  the  following  page.
Grounds  requiring  to  be  artificially  watered  are  divided  into
small  squares  by  ridges  of  earth  or  by  furrows  :  and  the  water,
flowing  from  the  machine  or  cistern  into  a  narrow  gutter,  is
admitted  into  one  square  or  furrow  after  another  by  the  gar-
dener, who  is  always  ready  as  occasion  requires,  to  stop  and
divert  the  torrent,  by  turning  the  earth  against  it  with  his  foot,  and  opening  at  the  same  time
with  his  mattock  a  new  trench  to  receive  it.  This  mode  of  distributing  water  over  a  land
rarely  refreshed  with  rain,  is  more  than  once  alluded  to  in  the  Scriptures ;  and  indeed  a  dis-
tinction is  founded  upon  it  between  Egypt  and  the  Land  of  Canaan  ;b  showing  that  the  latter
was  naturally  so  much  better  watered  through  rains  than  the  former,  that  this  elaborate

[String  of  Buckets.]

a  Lane,  ii.  25.

b  "  The  laud  whither  thou  goest  iu  to  possess  it,  is  not  in  the  laud  of  Egypt,  from  whence  ye  came  out,  where  thou  son  edst  thy
seed,  and  wateredst  it  with  thy  foot,  as  a  garden  of  herbs  :  but  the  laud,  whither  ye  go  to  possess,  is  a  laud  of  hills  and  valleys,  and
drinketh  water  of  the  rain  of  heuveu." — Deut.  si.  10,  11.

VOL.  I.

2  (J

CCXCV111

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

[The  Taboot  ]

[A  Watered  Garden.]

mode  of  artificial  irrigation  would  there  not  be  required,  as  in  Egypt,  for  arable  lands,  but
only  for  gardens.  This  process  is  indeed  followed  for  the  irrigation  of  gardens  in  Syria;  and
rice,  which  requires  much  water,  is  only  sown  in  quarters  where  this  mode  of  irrigation  is
practicable,  as  in  the  valley  or  hollow  which  contains  the  Lake  Houle ;  the  valley  of  Baalbec ;
and  the  vicinity  of  Damascus.

After  having  said  so  much  respecting  the  irrigation  of  gardens,  some  information  respecting
the  gardens  themselves  will  be  acceptable  to  the  reader.

After  such  large  notice  of  the  beauty  and  odour  of  the  flowering  plants  and  shrubs  of
the  country,  the  reader  may  be  apt  to  imagine  that  the  gardens  must  be  the  finest  in  the
world.  This  is  very  far  from  being  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  to  copy  a  sensible  remark  of
Chardin,  when  speaking  of  Persian  gardens,  "  it  will  be  found  a  very  general  rule  that,  where
Nature  is  easy  and  abundant  in  her  productions,  the  art  of  gardening  is  in  a  low  state,  and

Chap.  VII]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— JULY.  ccxcix

almost  unknown.  The  reason  appears  to  be,  that  where  Nature  herself  acts  the  part  of  the
gardener  so  excellently  (if  the  expression  may  be  allowed),  there  seems  little  left  for  art  to
do."a  And  this  is  said  with  particular  reference  to  a  country  which  was  of  old  famous  for  its
"paradises,"  and  in  which  gardens  still  receive  more  than  the  average  attention  paid  to  them
in  Western  Asia.  It  is  even  more  applicable  to  Syria,  although  the  characteristics  of  a  good
garden  are  the  same  there  as  in  Persia.

The  gardens  in  Syria  are  separated  from  each  other  by  low  walls  of  stone  or  mud.  As  they
are  in  general  planted  more  with  a  view  to  profit  than  to  pleasure,  very  little  labour  is  applied
to  the  removal  of  unsightly  deformities,  in  levelling  or  sloping  the  ground,  or  in  any  other
improvement  unconnected  with  lucrative  cultivation.  The  gardens  are  a  compound  of  the
orchard,  the  kitchen-garden,  and  the  flower-garden,  blended  without  the  intervention  of  grass-
plats  or  parterres.  Even  in  the  best  gardens — those  of  grandees  and  princes — such  things  as
terraces  and  wildernesses,  and  even  parterres  do  not  exist,  and  greenhouses  and  conservatories
are  unknown  things.  The  whole  extent  is  divided  into  square  or  oblong  fields,  irregularly
bordered  with  dwarf-trees,  flowering  shrubs,  and  trees  of  longer  growth,  among  which  the
plane,  the  weeping-willow,  the  ash,  and  the  white  poplar,  make  a  conspicuous  figure.  Within
some  of  these  enclosures  are  cultivated  mad-apples,  melons,  and  cucumbers,  together  with  a
variety  of  esculent  roots,  green,  and  legumes  for  the  kitchen;  in  others,  tobacco,  sesamum,
palma  Christi,  and  lucern ;  an  1  some  are  even  sown  with  barley,  to  be  cut  green  for  the  use
of  the  horses  in  spring.

Interspersed  among  the  enclosures  are  large  plantations  of  the  pomegranate,  the  plum,  the
peach,  the  apricot,  the  apple,  the  pear,  the  quince,  the  olive,  the  walnut,  the  hazle-nut,  the  fig,
the  orange,  the  lemon,  the  lime,  and  other  fruit-trees  ;  and  sometimes  groves  composed  of  the
various  fruit-trees  that  the  country  produces.  All  these  trees  are  standards ;  and  although
sometimes  planted  in  rows,  they  are  for  the  most  part  crowded  close  together,  with  little  regard
to  symmetry;  forming  wild  and  almost  impervious  thickets.  But  in  other  parts  of  the  grounds
more  complete  shades  are  often  formed  by  clumps  of  forest-trees,  which,  uniting  their  branches
at  top,  give  shelter  to  roses  of  different  sorts,  and  to  a  profusion  of  wild  aromatic  herbs,  which,
thus  protected  from  the  sun,  long  retain  their  fragrance.  Among  these  loftier  trees  are  the
sycamore,  the  plane,  the  white  and  black  poplar,  the  plantain,  the  cypress,  the  birch,  the  box,
and  others  which  have  been  named  in  the  course  of  this  survey.  The  flowers  (which  are  often
only  cultivated  by  those  who  have  gardens  for  sale  to  those  who  have  none)  contribute  but  little
to  the  beauty  of  these  gardens,  being  neither  regularly  displayed  in  parterres  nor  dispersed  with
any  art  among  the  plantations.  When  the  grounds  happen  to  be  well  shaded,  and  require  less
watering,  several  of  the  diverging  rills  being  made  to  unite,  escape  in  a  swifter  current  through
the  shade,  and  the  swollen  brook  is  discovered  at  intervals  amidst  the  foliage,  or,  when  con-
cealed from  sight,  is  traced  by  the  pleasing  murmurs  which  it  makes.

Little  care  is  taken  to  prune  luxuriant  trees,  or  to  keep  in  order  the  garden-walks.  There
is  usually  one  broad  walk  surrounding  the  whole  garden,  and  another,  still  broader,  running
through  the  middle ;  but  the  rest  of  the  grounds  are  traversed  by  narrow  and  intricate
paths.

In  the  gardens  of  Persia  an  oblong  basin  of  water  usually  occupies  the  centre  of  the  garden,
of  a  size  proportioned  to  it.  In  Syria  these  are  more  generally  than  in  Persia  confined  to  the
small  gardens  attached  to,  or  rather  contained  within,  the  enclosure  of  inhabited  houses.

Much  of  the  difference  between  the  gardens  of  Europe  and  those  of  Western  Asia  arise
probably  from  the  fact  that  the  Orientals  do  not  walk  in  their  gardens,  and,  indeed,  have  not
the  least  idea  of  walking  for  pleasure.  The  owner,  with  some  friends  (seldom  by  himself),
goes  to  his  garden,  and  sits  down  in  some  pleasant  and  shady  place,  and  there  remains.
Most  commonly  there  is  a  small  open  structure  (often  with  some  pretensions  to  elegance),  or
summer-house,  called  a  kiosk,  in  which  the  whole  time  is  spent.  They  think  it  enough — and
perhaps  it  is  so  in  those  genial  climes— to  sit  enjoying  the  cool  shade  and  the  fragrancy  of  the
freshening  breeze ;   while  more  than  the  eye  is  satisfied  by  the  verdure  of  the  groves,  the

a  '  Voyages  de  Chardin,'  iii.  352.

2  q  2

ccc

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

glistening  of  the  redundant  blossoms,  and  the  golden  luxuriousness  of  the  ripening  fruits ;
and  the  ear  is  insensibly  solaced  by  the  murmuring  of  the  rills,  and  the  melodies  of  the  night-
ingale. Such  are  the  enjoyments  the  Orientals  seek  in  their  gardens,  and  which  their  gardens
are  calculated  to  afford.  To  us  they  have  ever  seemed  keen  but  quiet  admirers  and  enjoyers
of  nature; — more  alive,  indeed,  to  the  beautiful  than  to  the  grand — and,  from  habit  and  feeling,
more  inclined  to  enjoy  the  things  they  find,  and  as  they  find  them,  than  to  bestow  much  cost
or  labour  in  opening  new  sources  of  enjoyment  for  themselves.  The  great  principle  of  differ-
ence between  us  and  them  has  been  incidentally  evolved,  and  is  capable  of  more  extensive
applications  than  we  have  made  of  it.     We  walk,  and  they  sit.

The  time  was  when  much  attention  appears  to  have  been  paid  to  gardening  as  an  art,  both
in  Western  Asia  and  in  Egypt.  In  the  Scriptures  there  are  many  interesting  allusions  to
gardens  and  gardening ;  and  king  Solomon  in  particular  appears  to  have  bestowed  much

attention  on  the  matter.  The

3§8S\I

m
ifftHB

Persian  "  paradises"  were  fa-
mous over  the  world  ;  and
who  has  not  heard  of  "the
hanging  gardens"  of  Media
and  Babylon  ?  Even  so  late
as  the  time  of  Pliny,  the
Syrians  were  excellent  gar-
deners, and  their  skill  in  lay-
ing out  grounds  became  a
proverb  among  the  Greeks. a
And  with  respect  to  the
Egyptians,    their    nicety    in

[Part  of  an  Ancient  Egyptian  Garden.]

gardening  far  exceeded  all
we  should  have  supposed,
but  for  the  evidence  we  have
lately  obtained  from  the  plans
of  gardens  which  have  been
found  painted  on  the  walls  of
the  tombs.  Here  is  a  piece
from  one  of  these  representations,  which,  as  the  reader  will  perceive,  "  is  much  more  a
painted  ground-plan  than  a  picture, — a  kind  of  combination  of  the  ground-plan  and  the  bird's-
eye  view,  and  yet  neither  the  one  nor  the  other. "b

Many  of  the  gardens  thus  represented  must  have  been  of  great  extent;  and  judging  from
them,  as  the  author  of  the  work  last  cited  remarks,  Egyptian  gardens  must  have  been  planted
with  all  the  stiffness  and  formality  of  an  old  Dutch  garden.  As  from  this  source  we  may
obtain  some  of  the  most  definite  information  we  possess  respecting  the  gardens  of  early  times,
while  some  of  the  usages  of  the  ancient  Hebrews  are  illustrated  by  it,  we  cannot  abstain  from
a  further  statement  on  this  subject,  drawn  from  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson's  'Ancient  Egyptians.'

The  large  gardens  were  usually  divided  into  different  parts,  the  principal  sections  being
appropriated  to  the  date  and  sycamore-trees  and  to  the  vineyard.  The  former  might  be  looked
upon  as  the  orchard ;  but  similar  enclosures  being  also  allotted  to  other  trees,  they  equally  lay
claim  to  this  name ;  we  cannot  therefore  apply  a  fixed  appellation  to  any  part  but  the  vineyard
itself.

Gardens  are  frequently  represented  in  the  tombs  of  Thebes  and  other  parts  of  Egypt,  many
of  which  are  remarkable  for  their  extent.  The  most  important  of  them  is  shown  to  have
been  surrounded  by  an  embattled  wall,  with  a  canal  of  water  passing  in  front  of  it,  connected
with  the  river.  Between  the  canal  and  the  wall,  and  parallel  to  them  both,  was  a  shady
avenue  of  various  trees,  and  about  the  centre  was  the  entrance,  through  a  lofty  door,  whose
lintel  and  imposts  were  decorated  with  hieroglyphic  inscriptions,  containing  the  name  of  the

a  '  TS'at.  Hist.'  lib.  xx.  cap.  5.  b  •  Egyptian  Antiquities,' ii.  74,  in  the  '  Library  of  Entertaining  Knowledge.'

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— AUGUST.

CCCl

owner  of  the  grounds,  who,  in  this  instance,  was  the  king  himself.  In  the  gateway  were
rooms  for  the  porter,  and  other  persons  employed  about  the  garden,  and  probably  the
receiving  room  for  visitors,  whose  abrupt  admission  might  be  unwelcome ;  and  at  the  back  a
gate  opened  into  the  vineyard.  The  vines  were  trained  on  a  trellis-work,  supported  by  trans-
verse rafters  resting  on  pillars,  and  a  wall,  extending  round  it,  separated  this  part  from  the
rest  of  the  garden.  At  the  upper  end  were  suites  of  rooms,  on  three  different  stories,  and  the
windows  looking  upon  green  trees,  and  inviting  a  draught  of  air,  made  it  a  pleasant  retirement
in  the  heat  of  summer.  On  the  outside  of  the  vineyard  wall  were  planted  rows  of  palm-trees,
which  occurred  again  with  the  doums.  Along  the  whole  length  of  the  exterior  wall  four  tanks  of
water,  bordered  by  a  grass-plat,  where  geese  were  kept,  and  the  delicate  flower  of  the  lotus
was  encouraged  to  grow,  served  for  the  irrigation  of  the  grounds,  and  small  kiosks  or  summer-
houses,  shaded  with  trees,  stood  near  the
water,  and  overlooked  the  beds  of  flowers.
The  spaces  containing  the  tanks,  and  the  ad-
joining portions  of  the  garden,  were  each  en-
closed by  their  respective  separate  walls,  and
a  small  subdivision  on  either  side  between  the
large  and  small  tanks  seems  to  have  been  re
served  for  the  growth  of  particular  trees,  which
either  required  peculiar  care,  or  bore  a  fruit  of
superior  quality.  In  all  cases,  whether  the
orchard  stood  apart  from,  or  united  with,  the
rest  of  the  garden,  it  was  supplied,  like  the
other  portions  of  it,  with  abundance  of  water,
preserved  in  spacious  reservoirs ;  on  either  side
of  which  stood  a  row  of  palms,  or  an  avenue  of  shady  sycamores.  Sometimes  the  orchard  and
vineyard  were  not  separated  by  any  walls,  and  figs  and  other  trees  were  planted  within  the
same  limits  as  the  vines.3-   But  if  not  connected  with  it,  the  vineyard  was  close  to  the  orchard.

[Egyptian  Tank  with  Trees  ]

AUGUST.

Weather. — The  weather  for  the  greater  part  of  this  month  continues  much  like  that  of
the  two  preceding.  But  after  the  20th,  a  number  of  clouds  usually  pass,  larger  and  more
dense  than  those  seen  transiently  in  the  summer  months,  and  are  by  the  Europeans  called  "the
Nile  clouds. "b  From  this  time  dews,  which  are  hardly  ever  observed  in  summer,  begin  to  fall
in  the  night,  but  are  not  yet  considerable.  The  greatest  height  of  temperature  indicated  (at
Aleppo)  by  the  thermometer  is  ninety-seven  degrees,  the  least  seventy-four  degrees ;  and  the
greatest  difference  in  any  one  day  is  ten  degrees.  The  morning  station  of  the  mercury  before
the  appearance  of  the  Nile  clouds  is  much  the  same  as  in  July ;  but  as  soon  as  these  appear,
it  falls  four  or  five  degrees.  The  difference  in  the  afternoon  observations  throughout  the
month  is  about  eight  or  ten  degrees.

Trees  and  Shrubs. — August  brings  in  the  great  season  of  fruit :  most  of  the  fruits
which  had  ripened  in  the  preceding  months  continue  to  afford  ripe  fruits  still ;  while  most  of
those  which  had  not  previously  ripened  now  perfect  their  fruits.  The  fruit  trade  is  now  there-
fore carried  on  with  considerable  vigour  both  by  land  and  water.     In  the  interior  most  of  the

a  See  Luke  xiii.  6,  "  A  certain  man  had  a  fig-tree  planted  in  his  vineyard ;"  and  1  Kings  iv.  25,  "  Every  man  under  his  vine  and
under  his  fig-tree."

1>  "First,  about  the  end  of  June,  there  was  observed  a  chain  of  clouds,  to  be  attributed,  no  doubt,  to  the  overflowing  of  Egypt
by  the  Nile  (which,  by  the  way,  causes  a  curieut  along  the  whole  coast  of  Syria),  and  which,  in  fact,  proceeded  from  that  quarter,
and  were  passing  to  the  north-east.  After  this  first  irruption,  towards  the  end  of  .luly,  and  in  August,  there  was  a  second  season  of
clouds.  Every  day  towards  eleven  o'clock,  or  about  noon,  the  sky  was  overcast.  The  sun  was  often  invisible  the  whole  afternoon.
The  Sannin  or  summit  of  Lebanon  was  capped  with  clouds,  and  many  of  them  ascending  the  declivities,  remained  among  the
vineyards  and  the  pines  ;  and  I  was  frequently  so  enveloped  in  a  humid,  warm,  and  opaque  mist,  as  not  to  be  able  to  see  four  paces
before  me.  About  ten  or  eleven  at  night  the  sky  grew  clear,  the  stars  appeared,  and  the  remainder  of  the  night  was  very  fine ;  the
sun  rose  shining,  and  towards  noon  the  like  appearances  returned  in  the  same  circle." — Volney,  i.  321.  These  clouds  do  not  cause
rain  ;  but  this  traveller  supposes  that  they  occasion  the  dews  which  begin  to  fall  at  the  season  of  their  appearance.

cccu

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

towns  obtain  from  their  orchards  sufficient  for  their  own  wants.  The  two  great  market
gardens  of  southern  Syria  are  the  neighbourhood  of  Jaffa,  on  the  one  hand,  and  Damascus
on  the  other.  From  the  former  vast  quantities  are  carried  along  the  coast  to  Beirout,  Tripoli,
and  other  towns ;  and  considerable  quantities  come  to  the  same  quarter,  across  the  mountains,
from  Damascus.  That  fertile  city  does  not  of  course  send  fruits  which  can  be  more  easily
obtained  from  the  plains  of  Sharon.  Apricots,  plums,  and  pears,  are  the  chief.  All,  from
both  quarters,  is  sold  for  what  we  should  consider  a  mere  trifle.  Some  notice  has  been
already  taken  of  the  plums  of  Damascus.  Mr.  Paxtona  mentions  them  with  great  admiration.
He  declares  them  the  finest  he  ever  saw  in  any  place,  and  describes  them  as  being  nearly  as
large  as  a  hen's  egg,  and  has  a  fine  rich  pulp.  "  It  is  of  a  deep  red  colour,  and  does  credit
to  the  land  where  it  grows."

We  shall  not  again  mention  the  fruits  noticed  in  preceding  months,  even  though  they  con-
tinue in  season,  unless  there  are  some  new  developments  to  report.

The  ripening  of  the  Olive  in  this  month  affords  us  occasion  to  notice  a  tree  which  figures

perhaps  more  conspicuously
than  any  other  in  the  Scrip-
tures. How  abundantly  this
valuable  tree  was  enjoyed  in
Palestine,  and  how  rich  it
consequently  was  in  the  va-
luable oil  which  it  affords,
recurs  constantly  as  an  his-
torical fact  throughout  the
Hebrew  annals.  From  the
v  consciousness  of  the  benefits
it  confers,  there  have  been
few  trees  so  highly  honoured
by  man  as  this.  One  of  the
earliest  and  most  striking
facts  in  the  history  of  our
race  makes  the  olive-tree  a
symbol  of  peace  to  man;b
and  such  it  has  ever  since
continued  in  every  country
where  it  is  found,  and  even  (symbolically)  in  countries  where  it  is  not  found ;  and  wherever  it
exists,  it  has  been  regarded  as  a  peculiar  and  distinguished  gift  of  God  to  man.  This  arises,  not
only,  or  so  much,  from  the  excellent  qualities  of  its  fruit  as  from  the  superior  properties  of  its
oil,  and  the  unusual  abundance  with  which  it  is  furnished.  This  greater  abundance,  as  well
perhaps  as  some  of  the  qualities  peculiar  to  it,  arise  from  the  circumstance  that  in  the  olive  it
is  the  pericarp,  and  not  (as  in  most  other  plants)  the  nut  or  seed,  from  which  the  oil  is
obtained.

The  olive  rarely  becomes  a  large  tree ;  but  two  or  three  stems  frequently  rise  from  the  same
root,  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  high,  putting  out  branches  almost  their  whole  length,  covered
with  a  gray  bark.  The  leaves,  which  are  about  two  inches  and  a  half  long,  and  not  more
than  half  an  inch  wide  in  the  middle,  are,  as  in  its  congener  the  ash,  of  a  lively  green  on  their
upper  side,  and  hoary  under,  and  stand  opposite  to  each  other.  The  flowers,  which  are  pro-
duced in  small  axillary  branches,  are  small  and  white.  The  fruit  is  of  a  yellowish  green,
turning  towards  black  as  it  ripens ;  the  form  and  size  of  this  fruit,  as  well  as  the  qualities  of
its  flesh,  and  the  hard  bony  kernel  which  it  contains,  are  too  well  known  in  this  country  to
require  particular  notice.  Its  manner  of  growth  and  other  details  are  best  shown  in  the
following  engraving:.

The  tree  likes  a  warm  soil  and  exposure  to  the  sun  ;  and  although  not  properly  a  maritime

[Olive  Tree.    Olea  Europea.]

a  Letters,  p.  38.

b  Gen.  viii.  11.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— AUGUST.

CCClll

[Olive  branch  with  Fruit.]

A  flower;  2,  an  oviary  divided  vertically ;  3,  a  ripe  fruit  cut  iu  half;
4,  a  stone  divided  longitudinally.

plant,  as  the  ancients  supposed,  it  en-
dures the  spray  of  the  sea  better  than
many  other  trees  which  are  found  in
the  interior.  It  grows  in  all  parts  of
Palestine,  on  both  sides  the  Jordan,
in  Galilee,  in  Samaria,  in  Judea,  and
all  along  the  coast.  The  notices  of
travellers  give  to  the  olive-tree  the
same  prominence  in  Palestine  which
is  given  to  it  by  the  Scriptures.  Before
commencing  this  present  chapter,  we
formed,  for  our  own  use,  a  collection
of  references  to  all  the  notices  of
plants  in  the  different  travellers  enu-
merated in  the  first  chapter.  In  this
we  find  the  different  notices  of  the
presence  of  the  olive  exceed  one  hun-
dred and  fifty,  and  are  more  numerous
by  far  than  to  any  other  tree  or  plant.
The  references  to  vines,  fig-trees,  mul-
berries, and  oaks,  rank  next  in  fre-
quency ;  the  references  to  none  of  these
are  more  than  half  as  numerous  as
those  to  the  olive-tree.  Olives  and  figs
are  with  great  frequency  mentioned
together.  And  if  the  olive  be  so  fre-
quent and  so  abundant  now,  in  the  comparative  desolation  of  the  country,  which  was  once  "  full
of  people,"  how  much  more  must  it  have  been  when  the  energies  of  a  teeming  population  devoted
to  agriculture,  were  directed  to  the  care  and  culture  of  the  olive  as  a  primary  object  of  attention!
It  was  the  policy  of  Moses  to  direct  the  Israelites'  attention  to  this  culture  from  the  beginning —
aware  as  he  was  of  the  sources  of  wealth  and  comfort  which  it  opened  to  the  people.  The  advan-
tages in  this  respect,  which  the  Land  of  Canaan,  to  which  they  were  going,  possessed  over  Egypt,
which  they  had  left,  was  frequently  pointed  out  to  their  notice,  as  one  of  its  prime  recommend-
ations. It  was  "  a  land  of  oil  olive  ;"a  in  which  they  should  enjoy  the  benefit  of  olive-trees,
which  they  had  not  planted  ;b  and  it  was  probably  to  enforce  attention  to  this  essential  branch
of  agriculture  that  very  considerable  quantities  of  olive  oil  were  made  necessary  in  the  ritual
service,  for  the  lamps,  and  for  use  in  different  kinds  of  offerings.0

The  result  was  in  accordance  with  these  intimations.  The  Hebrews  applied  themselves
with  much  zeal  to  carrying  on  the  olive  culture  which  the  former  inhabitants  of  the  land  had
established.  We  afterwards,  at  distant  intervals,  read  of  "  olive-yards  "  as  very  common
possessions, — d  just  as  we  would  speak  of  an  orchard.  The  more  extensive  plantations  seem
to  have  been  in  "  the  low  plains  ;"e  but  olives  were  also  grown  on  the  hills,  as  the  mere  name
of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  near  Jerusalem,  would  alone  intimate.  They  were  also  grown  on
Mount  Carmel.

It  was  from  the  trees  that  grew  on  Mount  Olivet  that  the  Israelites  obtained  the  olive-
branches  which,  with  those  of  other  trees,  they  employed  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles/  There
appear  to  have  been  figures  of  olive-trees  in  the  temple  ;S  and  we  know  that  its  door-posts,  as
well  as  the  images  of  the  cherubim,  were  made  of  olive-wood.  Olive-trees  were  grafted,  as  we
learn  from  the  only  passage  in  Scripture  in  which  such  an  operation  is  mentioned.11     It

a  Deut.  viii.  8.  b  ibid.  11.

c  Exod.  xxv.  31 ;  xxvii.  20;  xl.  37  ;  Num.  xv.  4,  9  ;  xxviii.  5,  et  seq.;  xxix.  9,  14;  Lev.  xxiv.2.  See  also  Mishna,  tit.Menaclioth,
cap.  viii.  suet.  3.4.

'I  1  Sam.  viii.  14;  2  Kings  v.  26;  Ne'.i.  v.  11.  e  1  Cliron.  xxvii. 28.  i  Neh.  viii.  15.

8  Ps.  xlii.  8 ;  Zech.  iv.  3;  Rev.  xi.  4.  li  Rom.  xi.  17.  24.

ccciv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII

would  also  seem  that  at  times  the  tree  cast  off  its  blossoms,  and  "  the  labour  of  the  olive
failed."11  It  has  been  conjectured  that  this  was  owing  to  some  blight,  either  by  frost  or  insect ;
but  we  happen  to  know  that  this  generally  occurs  after  the  trees  have  been  temporarily  ex-
hausted by  over-production  in  a  succession  of  genial  seasons.  The  fruit  was  gathered,  in  the
first  instance,  by  shaking  the  tree;  and,  in  the  second,  by  beating  the  branches.1*  The  oil
appears  to  have  been  extracted  from  the  olive,  like  the  juice  from  the  grape,  by  treading,  at
least  in  the  first  instance.0  The  first-fruits  of  the  oil  were  offered  at  the  Feast  of  Ingathering,
or  of  Tabernacles,  on  the  15th  day  of  the  seventh  month.d

Large  quantities  of  the  oil  were  used  by  the  Israelites  themselves.  It  entered  largely  into
their  diet, — vegetable  oils,  and  especially  olive-oil,  being  preferred  by  them  for  many  of  the
purposes  to  which  we  apply  animal  fats,  gravies,  and  butter.  They  also  employed  it  liberally
in  anointing  their  persons,  for  which  use  it  was  often  perfumed.  It  was  likewise  burnt  in
lamps  ;  and  there  were  various  disorders  in  which  it  was  medicinally  employed.

Besides  the  large  quantities  consumed  at  home,  the  Israelites  were  enabled  to  raise  a  large
surplus  of  olive  oil  for  sale.  The  extent  and  importance  of  this  branch  of  Jewish  traffic  may
be  estimated  from  the  large  quantity  with  which  Solomon  undertook  to  supply  the  king  of
Tyre  by  the  year.e

In  Dr.  Bowring's  instructive  '  Report  on  the  Commercial  Statistics  of  Syria,'  which  has
just  been  issued,  we  find  the  following  passage  respecting  the  olive-trees  and  olive-oil  of
Syria  : —

"  The  quantity  of  olive-oil  consumed  in  Aleppo,  for  all  uses,  is  calculated  at  about  8000  to
10,000  cantars,f  the  average  supply  from  the  neighbourhood  being  about  5000  cantars  annu-
ally :  the  olive-trees  yield  at  most  an  abundant  crop  every  other  year.  The  quantity  consumed
from  Damascus,  brought  from  Safet,  Nablous,  and  the  southward,  amounting  to  three-fourths
of  the  whole  quantity,  and  one-fourth  from  the  environs  of  Damascus,  is  about  4800  to  5000
cantars  annually,  for  soap-boiling,  burning,  and  eating;  but  the  quantities  vary  both  at
Aleppo  and  Damascus,  depending  much  on  the  production  of  the  olive-trees,  which  yield
precariously,  so  that  sometimes  an  abundant  crop  is  obtained  but  once  in  four  years.  It  is
understood  that  Ibrahim  Pasha  has  made  arrangments  for  extending  the  cultivation  of  olives,
and  introducing  an  improved  method  of  expressing  the  oil  at  Tripoli,  and  in  the  neighbour-
hood. Oil  presses  have  lately  been  imported  from  France,  and  the  result  is  said  to  have  been
satisfactory,  both  as  regards  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  oil  produced."

A  few  words  respecting  the  Mount  of  Olives  may  not  here  be  misplaced,  This  hill  will
seem  to  many  of  our  readers  perhaps  the  most  interesting  locality  in  the  world.  The  marks
and  boundaries  of  Jerusalem  itself  have  been  so  altered  in  the  course  of  ages,  that  it  would  be
difficult  to  fix  upon  any  spot  which  may  be  supposed  to  present  even  nearly  the  same  appear-
ance which  it  did  in  the  time  of  Christ.  But  respecting  the  Mount  of  Olives  there  is  no
doubt  or  question.  In  all  the  changes  of  time  and  of  possessors,  it  has  continued  to  retain  its
name,  and  to  exhibit  the  perennial  green  of  the  tree  from  which  that  name  was  derived.
There  is  much  reason  to  conclude  that,  even  in  its  surface,  it  is  now  little  different  to  what  it
was  in  that  day  when  King  David  went  up  its  ascent  "  weeping  and  barefoot;"  or  that  later
day  when  the  Son  of  Man  was  wont  to  resort  thither — when  from  thence  he  wept  over  the
doomed  city, whose  "goodly  buildings"  he  had  viewed — and  when  at  last  he  ascended  thence
to  resume  his  place  "  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."

That  any  of  the  olive-trees  now  found  there  should  have  existed  in  the  time  of  Christ  can
scarcely  be  expected.  Yet  there  are  eight  old  trees  on  the  lower  slope  of  the  mountain,
towards  the  brook  Kedron,  standing  in  the  supposed  site  of  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  to
which  this  ancient  date  is  ascribed  by  the  monks,  and  which  are  in  consequence  regarded  with
high  veneration  by  the  pilgrims.  To  this  it  has  been  objected  that,  according  to  the  testimony
of  Josephus,  all  the  trees  within  some  distance  of  Jerusalem  were  cut  down  by  the  Romans  to

a  Job  xv.  33,  and  Habak.  iii.  17.  b  Dent.  xxiv.  20;  Isa.xvii.  6.  <=  Micahvi.  15.

d  Exod.  xxiii.  16  ;  Lev.  xxi  i.  19 ;  Num.  xviii.  12.  '  See  the  History  at  p.  507.

f  The  Syrian  cantar  is  180  okes  of  Constantinople,  and  equal  to  504  lbs.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— AUGUST.

cccv

be  employed  in  the  works  raised  against  the  devoted  city.  And  this,  together  with  the  impro-
bability that  such  trees  should  exist  for  above  eighteen  centuries,  has  been  considered  conclusive
against  the  claim  made  for  these  old  trees — although  it  has  not  been  denied  that  they  are  pro-
bably the  oldest  olive-trees  in  the  world.  Lastly,  however,  these  claims  have  found  an
advocate  in  Dr.  Wilde,a  whose  statement  involves  the  best  description  of  the  trees  we  have
met  with,  and  which,  on  that  account,  we  have  given  in  the  note  below.b

The  trees  which  bear  the  honoured  name  of  "  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  "  are  the  most  con-
spicuously exhibited  among  the  higher   ascents  of  the  mountain  from  which  they  take  their

[Cedars  of  Lebanon.     Laborde.]

name.  This  is  not  on  the  summit  of  Lebanon,  or  on  any  of  the  summits  which  that  range  of
mountains  offers,  as  sometimes  has  been  imagined ;  but  is  at  the  foot  of  a  lofty  mountain,  in
what  may  be  considered  as  the  arena  of  a  vast  amphitheatre,  open  on  the  west,  but  shut  in  by
high  mountains  on  the  north,  south,  and  east.  The  cedars  here  stand  upon  five  or  six  gentle  eleva-
tions, and  occupy  a  spot  of  ground  about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  in  circumference.  A  person  may
walk  around  it  in  fifteen  minutes.  The  largest  of  the  trees  is  about  forty  feet  in  circumference.
Six  or  eight  others  are  also  very  large,  several  of  them  nearly  of  the  size  of  the  largest.  But
each  of  these  is  manifestly  one  or  more  trees,  which  have  grown  together,  and  now  form  one.

a  '  Narrative,'  ii.  315.

b  *'  It  is  true  that  the  Romans  cut  down  the  wood  about  Jerusalem  ;  but  the  timber  of  our  olive-tree  would  be  of  little  value
indeed  in  constructing  engines,  towers,  and  battering-rams  to  be  used  against  the  cyelopean  walls  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  these  trees  in
particular  must  then  have  been  so  slender  that  the  besiegers  would  have  considered  them  unlit  for  any  such  purpose.  They  are
undoubtedly  the  largest,  aud,  I  may  add  with  safety,  the  most  ancient  olive-trees  in  the  world.  The  largest  is  twenty-four  feet  in
girth  above  its  roots,  though  its  topmost  branch  is  not  thirty  ieet  from  the  ground.  The  trunks  of  most  of  them  are  hollow  iu  the
centre,  and  built  up  with  stones.

"There  is  nothing  unnatural  in  assigning  an  age  of  nineteen  centuries  to  these  patriarchs  of  the  vegetable  kingdom,  whose
growth  is  the  slowest  of  any  in  existence.  They  have  not  borne  fruit  for  some  years  past;  but  though  their  trunks  are  greatly
decayed,  yet,  from  the  hardness  of  the  wood,  and  each  part  being  so  retentive  of  life,  there  is  still  a  considerable  head  to  each,
whose  light-coloured  silky  leaves  hang  like  so  many  silver  locks  over  their  time-worn  and  aged  stems,  that  now,  in  the  evening  of
life,  are  fast  tottering  to  decay."

vol.  i.  2  r

cccvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

They  generally  separate  a  few  feet  from  the  ground  into  the  original  trees.  The  handsomest
and  tallest  are  those  of  two  and  three  feet  in  diameter.  In  these  the  hody  is  straight,  the
branches  almost  horizontal,  forming  a  beautiful  cone,  and  casting  a  goodly  shade.  Pliny
Fisk,a  whose  account  we  are  now  following,  measured  the  height  of  one  of  them  by  the  shade,
and  found  it  ninety  feet.  The  largest  were  not  so  high,  but  some  of  the  others  seemed  to
him  a  little  higher.  He  counted  them,  and  made  the  whole  number  three  hundred  and
eighty-nine;  but  his  companion  (Rev.  J.  King),  who  in  counting  omitted  the  saplings,  made
the  number  three  hundred  and  twenty-one.  "  I  know  not,"  observes  Fisk,  "  why  travellers  have
so  long  and  so  generally  given  twenty-eight,  twenty,  fifteen,  five,  as  the  number  of  the  cedars.
It  is  true  that  of  those  of  superior  size  and  antiquity  there  are  not  a  greater  number ;  but
then  there  is  a  regular  gradation  in  size,  from  the  largest  down  to  the  merest  sapling."  This
is  confirmed  by  another  and  later  American  traveller,  who  confesses  he  did  not  count  them,
which,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  and  the  situation  of  the  trees,  would  be  no  easy  matter  ;b
but  he  counted  a  small  section,  and  was  disposed  to  think  that  there  might  be  three  hundred
to  five  hundred  trees  that  are  above  a  foot  in  diameter — possibly  one  hundred  and  fifty  that
may  be  above  two  feet — and  about  fifty  or  sixty  that  may  be  from  three  to  four  feet.  Of  the
few  he  measured  the  largest  was  thirty-nine  feet  in  circumference — one  thirty-two — one
twenty-nine — one  twenty-eight — one  twenty  three.  These  may  serve  for  a  sample.  "  It  is
pretty  certain,"  remarks  this  traveller,  "that  this  grove  did  not  furnish  wood  for  Solomon.
It  lies  opposite  to  Tripoli,  which  is  two  days  north  of  Beirout,  and  Beirout  is  [forty-five
miles]  north  of  Tyre,  and  [twenty-five  from]  Sidon.  It  lies  far  from  the  sea,  and  has  a  piece
of  country  between  it  and  the  sea,  as  rough  as  can  well  be  found  anywhere.  The  grove  does
not  appear  to  be  diminishing,  but  rather  increasing.  I  saw  no  stumps  of  fallen  trees,  and
young  ones  were  springing  up.  There  is  a  kind  of  religious  reverence  for  these  trees  among
the  neighbouring  villagers.  They  have  a  singular  appearance  standing  alone  in  the  midst  of
a  small  plain  on  which  no  other  trees  grow,  with  no  other  trees  above  them,  nor  for  a  consider-
able space  below.  Another  singular  fact  is,  that  there  is  no  running  water  among  them.
There  is  a  stream  on  the  side  of  the  plain,  but  it  comes  not  near  them.  The  ground  appears
enriched  with  the  leaves  that  fall  from  them,  and  looks  precisely  as  the  soil  usually  does  in  a
pine  grove."

Upon  the  whole,  the  grove  failed  to  make  upon  this  traveller  the  impression  for  which  he
was  prepared — and  perhaps  because  he  was  prepared.  On  approaching  them  at  first,  he
says : — "  Near  the  middle  of  the  little  plain,  at  the  foot  of  the  steep  ascent  below  us,  we  saw
a  clump  of  trees ;  but  they  looked  too  few  or  too  small  for  the  cedars.  They  resembled  a
small  orchard  of  evergreens.  We  found,  however,  on  reaching  the  plain  that  these  were  the
cedars  we  sought.  They  stand  in  irregular  groups,  spread  over  several  little  stony  knolls,  and
may  possibly  cover  eight  or  ten  acres  of  ground."

Such  undervaluing  impressions  had  been  fairly  met,  or  rather  anticipated,  by  Fisk,  who
observes  : — "  Let  such  a  one  put  himself  in  the  place  of  an  Asiatic  passing  from  barren  desert
to  barren  desert,  traversing  oceans  of  sand,  and  mountains  of  naked  rock,  accustomed  to
countries  like  Egypt,  Arabia,  Judea,  and  Asia  Minor,  abounding  in  the  best  places  only  with
shrubbery  and  fruit-trees, — let  him,  with  the  feelings  of  such  a  man,  climb  the  rugged  rocks,
and  cross  the  naked  ravines  of  Lebanon,  and  suddenly  descry  among  the  hills  a  grove  of  three
hundred  trees,  such  as  the  cedars  actually  are,  even  at  the  present  day,  and  he  will  confess
that  to  be  a  fine  comparison  in  Amos  ii  9, — '  Whose  height  was  as  the  height  of  the  cedars,
and  he  was  strong  as  the  oaks,' — let  him,  after  a  long  ride  in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  sit  down  in
the  shade  of  a  cedar,  and  contemplate  the  exact  conical  form  of  its  top,  and  the  beautiful
symmetry  of  its  branches,  and  he  will  no  longer  wonder  that  David  compared  the  people  of
Israel,  in  the  days  of  their  prosperity,  to  'the  goodly  cedars.'0  A  traveller  who  has  just  left
the  forests  of  America  may  think  this  little  grove  of  cedars  not  worthy  of  so  much  notice,  but
the  man  who  knows  how  rare  large  trees  are  in  Asia,  and  how  difficult  it  is  to  find  timber

a  *  Memoir  of  the  Rev.  Pliny  Fisk,  A.M.,  late  Missionary  to  Palestine.    Boston,  1828,  p.  327.
>>  Rev.  J.  Paxton,  81.  <=  Psalm  lxxx.  10.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— AUGUST.  cccvii

for  building,  will  feel  at  once  that  what  is  said  in  Scripture  of  these  trees  is  perfectly  natural.
It  is  probable  that  in  the  days  of  Solomon  and  Hiram  there  were  extensive  forests  of  these
trees  in  Lebanon.  A  variety  of  causes  may  have  contributed  to  their  diminution,  and  almost
total  extinction.  Yet,  in  comparison  with  all  the  other  trees  I  have  seen  on  the  mountain,
the  few  that  remain  may  still  be  called  '  the  glory  of  Lebanon.'  "a

a  The  allusions  necessarily  involved  in  the  preceding  statement  to  the  operations  of  the  king  of  Tyre  in  cutting  timber  in  Lebanon
for  king  Solomon  suggests  that  account  of  the  manner  in  which  such  operations  are  now  conducted  in  the  mountains.  This  we
are  enabled  to  supply  from  Dr.  Bowring's  very  valuable  '  Report  on  the  Commercial  Statistics  of  Syria,'  which  has  just  been  issued.
It  strikes  us  that  the  method  by  which  labourers  are  obtained  for  the  service,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  supplied  with  food,
is  deserving  of  particular  attention,  as  probably  illustrative  of  the  proceedings  of  the  two  kings,  and  in  particular  of  the  mode  in
which  Hiram  disposed  of  the  corn  obtained  from  Solomon.  The  statement  in  the  '  Report '  is  too  long  for  quotation  entire ;  and  we
are  able  to  introduce  only  the  principal  facts.  '

As  the  wood  destined  for  Egypt  is  embarked  at  Scanderoon,  it  is  of  course  obtained,  as  nearly  as  may  be,  from  the  mountains
which  enclose  the  gulf  and  plain  of  that  part,  it  is  necessary  to  premise  that  in  this  quarter  the  wood  is  derived  from  two  lines  of
mountains ;  namely,  from  the  mountains  of  Byass,  which  extend  north  and  south  at  the  bottom  of  the  gulf,  and  which  are  much
the  highest.  They  are  also  the  most  richly  timbered,  both  as  to  variety  and  quantity,  the  trees  being  of  much  target  growth,
except  near  the  base,  owing  to  the  difficulties  of  transporting  the  timber  to  the  sea-shore,  from  the  steepness  of  the  mountains
and  the  want  of  all  roads.  The  trees  on  them  are  white  and  yellow  pine,  of  length  from  ICO  to  150  feet,  and  of  dimensions,  to  take
a  square  of  from  24  to  25  inches  : —

Yellow  Oak             ...  80  feet   and  18  to  20  inches  square.

Green.         ....  18  to  20  feet  and    7  to   9  inches  square.

Beech      .....  30  to  35  feet  and  14  to  15  inches  square.

Linden          .         .         .         .  40  to  50  feet  and  25  to  27  inches  square.

The  pine  is  mostly  knotty  and  very  full  of  turpentine.  The  oaks  of  both  species  are  straight-grained,  like  the  American.  Tha
beech  is  of  good  close-grained  quality,  but  not  nearly  so  plentiful  as  the  other  two.     Thelinden  tree  is  scarce.

In  1837  about  150  wood-cutters  were  employed  on  these  mountains,  with  twice  the  number  of  trimmers  and  dressers;  but  in
1838  the  work  was  confined  to  the  lower  parts,  from  the  difficulties  of  the  transport,  and  from  the  want  of  roads,  which,  it  is
estimated,  would  require  an  outlay  of  3000/.  or  4000?.  to  make  practicable.  About  10,000  trees,  cut  the  years  1836  and  1837,
were  abandoned  in  consequence,  some  of  them  as  much  as  50  feet  long,  but  mostly  of  sizes  about  25  feet  long  by  10  inches  in
the  square.

The  distance  from  the  sea  is  from  three  to  five  leagues.  150  men  could  cut  35,000  to  40,000  trees  in  the  year,  which  it  would
require  twice  the  number  to  dress  and  trim,  and  upwards  of  600,  with  practicable  roads,  to  transport  to  the  sea  with  buffaloes  and
bullocks.  At  the  distance  of  about  two  to  three  leagues  from  the  coast,  where  the  work  is  still  carried  on.  the  trees  average  from
15  to  20  feet  long,  and  8  to  12  inches  square ;  from  thence  is  brought  a  large  quantity  of  firewood  in  large  billets.  In  183/  ten  or
twelve  vessels,  of  from  50  to  100  tons,  were  laden  with  it  on  government  account.

Theother  source  of  supply  is  from  the  mountains  of  Beilan,  which  stretch  east  and  west  along  the  southern  side  of  the  Gulf  of
Scanderoon.  They  take  their  ascent  at  from  about  one  mile  to  two  miles  from  the  sea,  leaving  a  rich  but  entirely  uncultivated
plain  between  them  and  it.    On  these  mountains  the  trees  are: —

Pine    .         .       from  30  feet  long,  by  about  15  to  16  inches  in  the  square  ;
Yellow  Oak  from  20  to  30  feet  long,  by  about  10  to  15  inches  in  the  square;

but  few  of  that  fize.  About  50,000  were  cut  in  183",  and  brought  down  to  the  sea,  for  which  about  100  men  were  employed  in
cutting,' 200  dressing  and  trimming,  and  three  times  the  number  in  the  transport.

From  both  sources  it  appears  that  the  number  of  trees  shipped  for  Alexandria  has  been,  by  the  year,  about  55,000  to  60,000
[anotherfstatement  says  70,000  to  80,000,  in  1837]  ;  about  40,000  fit  for  ship-building  purposes,  and  the  remainder  for  house
purposes,  freighted  in  39  vessels  of  collectively  14,120  tons,  besides  8  or  9  small  craft,  of  60  to  80  tons,  which  received  cargoes  of
fire-wood.

In  December'1837  a  European  engineer  in  the  Egyptian  service  arrived  from  Alexandria,  to  select  and  superintend  the  cutting
and  preparing  of  1,032,000  trees  for  dams  and  proposed  workson  the  river  Nile,  70,000  of  which  to  be  33  feet  long,  and  8  inches
square ;  the  rest  of  small  sizes,  and  even  branches  as  low  as  5  or  6  feet  long.  In  fact,  as  Mr.  Hay  remarks  (in  his  report  to
Dr.  Bowring)  the  Egyptian  government  appears  to  consider  the  mountains  of  this  part  of  Syria  as  an  inexhaustible  mine  for
timber.

We  think  that  this  statement  puts  in  our  possession  several  important  and  illustrative  facts.  It  enables  us  to  perceive  one  of  the
strong  reasons  which  has  made  the  mountain  forests  of  Syria  an  object  of  desire  to  the  rulers  of  Egypt,  from  the  Pharaohs  and
Ptolemies  down  to  the  Sultans  and  to  Mehemet  AH.  It  also  shows  the  extent  to  which  the  more  southern  forests  of  Syria  must
have  been  denuded  of  its  timber  to  meet  the  wants  of  a  country  so  void  of  timber  as  E^ypt.  And  the  extraordinary  demands
occasioned  by  the  peculiar  wants  of  Mehemet  Ali,  and  the  operations  which  thence  ati-e  in  the  mountains  and  on  the  coast  may
suggest  some  analogy  to  the  circumstances  which  attended  and  resulted  from  the  extraordinary  demands  of  king  Solomon.

But  to  complete  this  view  it  is  necessary  to  see  how  the  labour  required  for  this  service  is  obtained  and  remunerated.

For  this  work.'then,  all  the  effective  population  of  the  district  is  forcibly  taken,  [as  by  Solomon,  if  not  by  Hiram,]  not  leading
even  a  sufficient  number  of  men  to  cultivate  the  land  for  their  own  maintenance.  But  grain  has  been  imported  by  the  government
[as  by  king  Hiram,  from  Palestine]  from  other  parts  of  Syria,  and  from  Egypt,  and  i-sued  out  as  a  portion  of  their  pay,  which  is
nominally  three  piasters,  or  about  seven  pence  halfpenny  per  day,  but  of  which  it  falls  short  fully  one  third  by  their  being  obliged
to  take  a  fixed  portion  in  grain,  without  reference  to  their  actual  wants,  and  more  than  they  require,  at  a  stated  price,  which  is
enhanced  in  various  ways  and  under  various  pretences,  so  as  to  be  much  higher  than  what  it  could  be  produced  for  in  the  neigh-
bourhood. Thus  on  one  side  of  the  gulf  the  wood  cutters  liave  been  obliged  to  buy  corn  at  fifteen  piasters  the  measure,  while  it
might  be  had  at  nine  piasters  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  gulf.  It  is  possible  (for  the  system  is  an  old  one)  that  Hiram  dealt  thus
with  the  corn  which  he  received  from  Solomon  ;  for  that  which  had  so  much  analogy  in  other  points  perhaps  did  not  fail  in  this.

The  cutters  and  trimmers  of  the  wood  are  exposed  to  the  contingency  of  a  tree  they  have  cut,  being  found,  on  trimming  and
squaring,  to  have  perished  at  the  heart  or  otherwise,  when  they  receive  no  pay  for  it,  but  may  take  the  tree  and  make  what  u?e  of
it  they  can  :  but  in  fact  the  time  and  labour  is  lost,  as  the  distance  seldom  leaves  it  worth  the  transport.  It  seems,  however,  that
competent  persons  are  now  employed  in  the  selection  of  the  trees  to  be  cut  down.  Those  who  transport  the  trees  to  the  coast,  who
are  about  four  times  the  number  of  those  otherwise  employed,  receive  each  a  pair  and  a  half  of  bullocks,  which  are  valued  to  them

2  r  2

CCCV11I

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

There  are  doubtless  more  cedar-trees  growing  in  England  now  than  there  are  on  all  the
mountains  of  Lebanon.  They  are  not  uncommon  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London,  and
attract  attention  by  the  singular  appearance  which  their  horizontal  and  compact  layers  of
foliage  offers.  Most  of  the  specimens  seen  in  this  country  want  height  and  bulk ;  but  this  is
probably  only  owing  to  their  youth.

Among  the  trees  which  yield  their  fruit  in  summer,  the  sycamore  fig-tree  perhaps  required
our  earlier  notice.     This  is  the  "  sycamore-tree  "  of  the  Bible,  and  is  by  no  means  to  be  con-

[Sycamore  Fig-tree.     Ficus  Sycamorus]

founded  with  the  great  maple,  which  is  the  true  sycamore.    It  is  a  large  tree,  with  its  leaves  like
those  of  the  mulberry,  and  with  a  fruit  much  resembling  the  fig ;  and  hence  the  compound  name

at  about  700  or  1000  piasters  per  pair,  which  sum  they  are  debited  with,  and  must  make  good  in  case  of  loss,  death,  or  accident  :
the  consequence  is,  that  when  a  man  meets  with  such  a  misfortune,  before  he  has  the  means  of  repairing  it — which  he  must  be
fortunate  and  indefatigable  even  to  hope  for — he  generally  has  recourse  to  flight.

The  season  for  working  the  timber  continues  for  about  eight  mouths, — from  the  middle  of  March  to  the  middle  of  November, —
the  remaining  four  mouths  the  people  are  left  in  a  great  measure  to  themselves;  but  being  winter  months,  they  cannot  turn  them
to  much  account,  excepting  to  prepare  and  sow  a  little  land  to  meet  the  most  pressing  exigencies  of  their  families.  A  few  of  them
who  follow  different  trades  may  find  some  little  employment  in  the  larger  villages.  But  independently  of  such  resources,  their
yearly  earnings  may  be  computed  thus  : —

Piasters
Cutters      .         .         for  224  working-days,  at  2J  piasters     .         ,         .         504
Deduct  for  contingencies  ...  60

444

Trimmers        .  for  224  working-days  at  3  piasters         .         .         .         6/2

Deduct  for  contingencies  ...  80

-592

Transporters      .        for  224  working-days,  at  3J  piasters
Deduct  for  keep  of  animals     .

784
400

-384

The  contingencies  of  this  last  and  most  numerous  class  are  very  heavy,  for  not  only  have  they  to  provide  (at  the  computed  cost
of  400  piastres)  for  the  keep  of  their  bullocks  during  the  winter  months  when  grass  fails  ;  but  during  the  four  years  in  which  they
remain  fit  for  their  hard  service,  he  has  to  cover  their  cost,  which  is  debited  to  him  at  the  rate  of  350  piasters  each  bullock — or
1 050  piasters.  To  meet  this  he  would  have  to  lay  aside  262  piasters  of  his  net  earnings  of  384  piasters,  leaving  him  but  122  piasters
(or  twenty-four  shillings  !  five  current  piasters  in  Syria  being  equivalent  to  one  shilling),  for  his  eight  months  daily  subsistence,
being  a  fraction  over  half  a  piaster  a  day.  It  is  also  to  be  considered  that  the  above  rates  of  pay  are  often  merely  nominal ;  as  the
men  have  so  much  above  the  fair  market  price  to  pay  for  the  corn  and  otlier  provisions  supplied  to  them.

We  have  dwelt  the  more  particularly  on  the  developments  of  this  system,  as  it  very  strikingly  illustrates  the  principles  and
results  of  that  kind  of  compulsory  labour  to  which  there  are  so  many  allusions  and  references  in  the  early  history  of  the  Hebrews.

As  it  further  regards  the  timber,  it  results  from  the  preceding  estimates,  that  timber  of  from  15  to  18  inches  square,  prepared
either  for  the  saw  or  for  working,  stands  in,  ready  for  shipment,  at  one  piaster  the  foot.

A  tree  of  from  25  to  30  feet  in  length,  of  the  above  dimensions,  may  be  cut  into  planks  by  three  sawyers  (in  Syria  the  saws  are
generally  worked  by  three  men,  one  above  and  two  below)  in  about  two  days.  The  wages  of  the  sawyers  (three  piasters  a  day)
added  to  the  cost  of  the  trees,  brings  that  of  inch  planks  (of  from  25  to  30  feet  long,  and  exceeding  a  foot  in  breadth)  from  three
to  three  and  a  half  piasters  each,  or  little  more  than  a  farthing  per  foot.

Chap.  VII]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— AUGUST.  cccix

which  has  been  given  to  it.  Hasselquist  affirms  that  the  stem  is  often  fifty  feet  thick  ;  but  he
speaks  of  it  as  in  Egypt,  which  seems  to  afford  the  climate  the  most  congenial  to  its  nature.
It  seldom  grows  straight,  but  is  generally  bent  and  twisted ;  its  branches  extend  very  far
horizontally,  affording  excellent  shelter.3-  Forskal  states  that  its  head  is  often  forty  yards  in
diameter ;  and  it  thus  affords  an  expansive  and  excellent  shade,  for  the  sake  of  which,  not
less  than  for  its  fruit,  it  is  often  planted  by  the  way-side,  near  villages,  and  on  the  sea-coast.
When  old,  the  tree  becomes  gnarled  and  broken.  The  timber  is  of  little  use  to  the  carpenter,
and  is  now  used  chiefly  for  firewood.  But  being,  although  soft  and  insubstantial,  of  a  durable
nature,  and,  what  is  more,  being  almost  the  only  timber  tree  in  the  country,  it  was  employed
by  the  ancient  Egyptians  for  boxes,  tables,  doors,  and  other  objects  which  required  large  and
thick  planks,  as  well  as  for  idols  and  statues ;  and  from  the  great  quantities  discovered  in  the
tombs  alone,  it  is  evident  that  the  tree  was  largely  cultivated.b  It  is  alleged  that  the  mummy-
cases,  which,  after  the  lapse  of  3000  years,  came  before  us  as  fresh  and  new  as  in  the  day
they  were  made,  were  of  this  wood.  It  is  alleged  that  its  wood  is  impregnated  with  a  bitter
juice,  which  protects  it  from  being  worm-eaten  ;c  but  Professor  Don  is  rather  disposed  to
conjecture  that  they  were  made  from  the  timber  of  Cordia  Myxia.  We  know  not  how  far
he  would  extend  this  to  the  other  objects  supposed  to  be  made  of  sycamore  wood.

To  the  Egyptians  as  well  as  to  the  Israelites,  the  sycamore  was  highly  recommended  by  its
fruit,  to  which  both  were  very  partial.  This  fruit  is  not  produced  upon  the  young  branches,
but  in  clustered  racemes  upon  the  trunk  and  the  old  limbs.  These  clusters  are  sometimes  so
large  that  a  man  can  scarcely  grasp  them.  Hasselquist  says  that  the  tree  buds  in  March,  and
that  the  fruit  ripens  in  June.  This  may  be  the  more  proper  and  usual  times  ;  but  Norden
alleges  that  the  tree  is  always  green,  and  [like  the  true  fig-tree]  bears  fruit  several  times  in  the
year,  without  observing  any  certain  seasons.  He  had  observed  some  sycamores  giving  their
fruit  two  months  after  others  had  ceased.  He  adds,  "  The  fruit  has  the  figure  and  smell  of
real  figs,  but  is  inferior  to  them  in  the  taste,  having  a  sweetness  which  is  not  pleasant  to  a
European  taste.  Its  colour  is  a  yellow,  inclining  to  an  ochre,  shadowed  by  a  flesh  colour.  In
the  inside  it  resembles  the  common  fig,  excepting  that  it  has  a  blackish  colouring  with  yellow
spots.  This  sort  of  tree  is  pretty  common  in  Europe;  the  people  of  that  country  live  to  a
considerable  extent  upon  its  fruit,  and  think  themselves  well  regaled  when  they  have  a  piece
of  bread,  a  couple  of  sycamore  figs,  and  a  pitcher  of  water."

Hasselquist  states  that  the  tree  is  wounded  or  cut,  at  the  time  it  buds,  by  the  inhabitants,
who  say  that  without  this  precaution  it  would  not  bear  fruit.  Pliny  and  the  older  natural  his-
torians affirm  that  the  fruit  would  not  become  perfectly  ripe  until  scarified  with  an  iron  comb,
after  which  it  ripened  soon ;  and  Jerome  (upon  Amos  viii.  14)  states  that  without  this  or  some
analogous  operation,  the  fruit  could  not  be  eaten  from  its  intolerable  bitterness.  Fie  adds  that  to
render  the  tree  fruitful  it  was  necessary  to  make  chinks  and  clefts  in  the  bark,  through  which
a  kind  of  milky  liquor  continually  distilled.

The  importance  of  the  tree  in  Egypt  shows  how  grievous  must  have  been  the  loss  sustained
by  the  ancient  inhabitants  when  "  their  vines  were  destroyed  with  hail,  and  their  sycamore
trees  with  frost. "d  Various  passages  of  Scripture  evince  the  attention  which  was  paid  to  it  in
Palestine.  It  was  there  used  in  building  ordinary  houses  ;e  and  so  to  "  change  sycamores
into  cedars  "f  was  a  proverbial  expression  for  an  improved  condition  of  society  as  involved  in,
or  indicated  by,  superior  buildings.  Sycamore  trees  were  of  so  much  importance  that  David
placed  Baal-hanan,  the  Gederite,  "over  the  sycamore  trees  that  were  in  the  low  plains. "s  We
also  read  of  their  growing  by  the  wayside  in  the  time  of  Christ.11  Correspondingly  with  the
intimation  of  their  greater  frequency  in  the  low  plains,  the  Talmud  notices  their  growth  in  the
plain  of  Jericho,  in  which,  indeed,  from  the  resemblance  of  its  climate  to  that  of  Egypt,  we
should  the  most  expect  to  find  them.

a  Suvary,  i.  44.  b  Wilkinson,  iii.  1G8.  c  Savary,  ii.  45.

d  Psalm  lx.Yiii.47.  e  1  Kings,  x.  2/.  Isa.  ix.  10.  6  1  Chron.  xxvii.  28.

h  Luke  xvii.  6,  xix.  4.

cccx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

The  Vine. — Grapes  continue  to  be  gathered  for  the  table  ;  but  it  is  not  until  October
that  the  vintage  will  engage  our  attention.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  Moslem  countries
vines  are  chiefly  cultivated  for  the  sake  of  the  grapes  as  a  table  fruit;  the  followers  of
Mohammed  not  being  allowed  to  drink,  or  consequently  to  make  wine.  It  is  only  made  by
Christians  for  their  own  consumption  or  for  sale  to  unscrupulous  Moslems.

Grain. — In  some  parts  the  harvest  still  continues,  and  fields  of  wheat  (chiefly  bearded)
may  still  be  seen  standing  when  this  month  expires.  The  maize  and  dourra  is  now  fast
ripening  to  the  harvest.  The  context  would  suggest  that  Paxton  (this  month)  speaks  with
reference  to  the  latter,  or  to  both,  when  he  says, — "  The  corn  was  of  a  more  diminutive  kind
than  I  have  seen  in  the  East.  It  was  beginning  to  tassel  and  silk,  and  yet  its  general  height
was  not  above  four  feet.  With  us,  such  a  field  of  corn  would  not  be  thought  worth  anything.
It  was,  I  believe,  of  the  usual  size  and  promise."a

Esculent  Vegetables. — The  various  species  of  herbs,  legumes,  and  cucurbitaceae,  which
were  ripe  in  June  and  July  continue  in  season  in  August  also ;  and  we  are  not  aware  of  any
which  first  in  this  month  become  ripe.

Plants. — In  some  districts  the  cotton  becomes  ripe  towards  the  end  of  this  month;  in
others  not  until  September  or  even  October.1*  Paxton  describes  himself  as  unexpectedly  gra-
tified at  meeting  with  a  field  of  hemp  on  the  east  side  of  Damascus.  It  was,  he  says,  the  first,
and,  indeed,  the  only  field  of  hemp  he  saw  in  the  East.  It  was  just  beginning  to  blossom.  In
fact,  we  have  not  ourselves  met  with  any  notice  of  hemp  as  growing  in  Palestine.  But  Burck-
hardt  notices  its  cultivation  in  the  valleys  of  Sinai,c  and  in  Dr.  Bowring's  '  Report '  we  read
that  the  Damascus  district  produces  about  1200  to  1500  loads  of  hemp,  at  60  piasters  the
load,  amounting  to  from  900  to  1000  d  cantars.  About  half  this  quantity  is  said  to  be  pro-
duced around  Aleppo.  It  is  chiefly  employed  in  making  cord  and  twine  for  various  domestic
purposes,  and  none  is  exported.  In  the  Mishnae  hemp  is  barely  mentioned,  and  in  such  a
manner  as  to  show  that  its  cultivation  was  but  little  extended,  or  had  been  newly  introduced  ;
for  it  is  judged  necessary  to  premise  that  it  was  a  plant,  which,  like  the  flax,  afforded  a  thread
from  which  vestments  were  fabricated.  This  explanation  would  have  been  superfluous  had
the  plant  been  generally  known.     It  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures.

SEPTEMBER.

Weather. — With  reference  to  the  weather  at  Aleppo,  Dr.  Russell  reports,  that  during  the
first  fortnight  it  is  much  the  same  as  in  the  latter  part  of  August,  but  rather  more  sultry.
When  no  rain  falls,  the  whole  month  continues  clear  and  sultry ;  but  commonly  between  the
15th  and  25th  heavy  and  black  clouds  arise,  and  hard  squalls,  blowing  like  whirlwinds  from
the  west,  fill  the  air  with  dust.  This  phenomenon  forebodes  rain ;  for  within  a  day  or  two,
some  heavy  showers  fall,  called  the  first  rains,  by  which,  although  not  considerable  in  quantity,
the  air  being  much  refreshed,  the  remainder  of  the  month  is  rendered  very  pleasant.

Lightning,  without  thunder,  is  seen  almost  every  night,  flashing  from  the  edge  of  heavy
clouds,  in  the  north-west  quarter  ;  but  when  it  appears  in  the  west  or  south-west,  it  is  a
sure  sign  of  approaching  rains,  which  are  often  accompanied  with  loud  thunder.  The  westerly
wind  in  this  month  seldom  rises  above  a  light  breeze,  and  it  is  very  often  perfectly  calm.

The  greatest  height  of  temperature  indicated  by  the  thermometer  is  ninety-two  degrees,  the
least  sixty-two  degrees,  and  the  greatest  difference  in  any  one  day  is  twelve  degrees.  The
morning  station  of  the  mercury  at  the  beginning  of  the  month  is  seventy-eight  degrees,  the
difference  in  the  afternoon  is  rather  greater  than  in  August.    Upon  the  fall  of  rain  the  mercury

a  '  Letters,'  46.  b  Comp  ire  Kovte,  437 ;  Neitzohatz,  213.  224,  225  ;  Pococke,  ii.  88  ;  Russell,  i.  33.

c  '  Syria,'  603.  d  Misprinted  100.  e  Mishna,  tit.  Nejjaim,  c.  xi.  §  2.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— SEPTEMBER.

CCCXl

immediately  sinks  three  or  four  degrees,  and  usually  continues  descending  till  it  gets  to  sixty-
rive  degrees.  After  this  the  difference  of  the  morning  and  evening  height  of  the  thermometer
seldom  exceeds  three  or  four  degrees,  and  during  the  rain  is  perhaps  only  one  or  two
degrees.

Various  travellers  in  Palestine  complain  in  the  early  part  of  this  month  of  the  excessive
heat,  as  in  former  months  ;  hut  some  of  them  let  us  know  that  the  nights  begin  to  be  some-
what cold.  The  simoom  still  blows  at  times. a  Mr.  Addisonb  being,  at  the  latter  end  of  this
month,  in  the  lazaretto  at  Beirout,  describes  the  weather  as  "  heavenly,  and  the  nights  most
lovely.  We  are  obliged  to  get  under  cover  during  the  middle  of  the  day,  and  creep  under  our
mosquito-nets  to  escape  the  flies,  but  the  mornings  and  evenings  are  delicious."

Trees  and  Shrubs. — The  fruits  that  were  before  in  season  continue  ripening  on  the  trees,
as  the  various  kinds  of  apples,  pears,  plums,  and  figs.  The  pods  of  the  carob-tree  also  ripen
before  and  in  this  month.  The  pomegranate  now  offers  ripe  fruit :  and  this,  from  its  import-
ance in  Palestine,  and  from  the  frequency  of  allusions  to  it  in  Scripture,  requires  further
notice.  The  tree  will  endure  our  own  winters,  and  grows  well  in  our  gardens  ;c  but  it  is  here
valued  chiefly  for  its  blossoms,  as  although  it  ripens  its  fruit  tolerably  well  in  warm  seasons,
this  ripening  is  too  late  in  the  autumn  for  the  fruit  to  be  able  to  acquire  that  delicate  flavour
which  constitutes  its  value,  and  which  it  receives  in  its  native  climes.

The  pomegranate  tree  d  rises  with  a  woody  stem  upwards  of  twenty  feet  high,  sending  out
branches  the  whole  length ;  which  likewise  put
out  many  slender  twigs,  rendering  the  whole
tree  very  thick  and  bushy.  Some  of  these
twigs  are  armed  with  sharp  thorns,  which  are
more  abundant  in  the  wild  than  in  the  culti-
vated. The  leaves  are  of  a  lucid  green,  and  stand
opposite  to  each  other  :  they  are  narrow  and
spear-shaped,  about  three  inches  long,  and  half
an  inch  broad  in  the  middle.  The  flowers
come  out  at  the  ends  of  the  branches  singly,  or
three  or  four  together.  Frequently  one  of  the
larger  terminates  the  branch,  and  immediately
under  that  are  two  or  three  smaller  buds  which
continue  a  succession  of  blossoms  for  some
months,  giving  a  continued  brilliance  to  the  gardens  in  which  they  grow,  after  (in  the  East)
most  other  trees  have  ceased  their  blossoming.  The  blossoms  are  bell-shaped,  large,  hand-
some, and  of  a  red  colour.  From  the  deficiencies  of  the  fruit  in  this  country,  the  double
flowering  kind  is  much  preferred,  for  the  sake  of  the  peculiarly  large  and  fine  flowers,  which
are  of  a  most  brilliant  scarlet ;  although  when  the  flowers  are  double  there  is  no  fruit.  From
the  quantities  imported  into  this  country  the  fruit  is  much  better  known  than  the  tree,  and
therefore  in  an  unscientific  notice  requires  no  further  description  than  that  it  is  about  the  size
of  an  orange,  and  contains  within  its  ruddy-brown  and  hard  leathery  rind  a  number  of
cells  divided  by  membranous  partitions,  in  which  lie,  closely  packed  in  orderly  rows,  the
seeds  or  grains,  which  are  variously  angular,  pellucid,  generally  tinged  with  red,  and  always
shining  like  crystals.  Their  richly-flavoured  juice  is  most  refreshing  and  pleasant  in  the
East ;  and  the  extracted  grains  are  not  only  eaten,  but  are  largely  employed  in  the  preparation
of  drinks  (sherbets)  for  summer,  to  which  they  impart  a  ruddy  and  vinous  tinge.     Scarcely

a  Compare  Korte,426;  Wormbser,  i.  212;  Tschudis  von  Glarus,  236;  Des  Hayes,  370;  Polschnitz,  ii.  26 ;  Schulze,  P.  V.
418—420;  Robinson,  ii.  235.

b  Damascus  and  Palmyra,  ii.  7-

c  Like  many  other  trees  and  plants,  now  found  to  be  quite  hardy  and  able  to  endure  our  severest  winters,  the  pomegranate-tree,
was  formerly  nursed  up  in  cases  and  preserved  in  greenhouses  with  great  tenderness  and  care.

J  Mala  granata.

[Pomegranate.]

cccxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

any  of  the  various  sherbets  employed  in  Moslem  countries  are  more  valued  than  those  which
are  made  with  the  juice  of  the  pomegranate.

The  tree  is  much  cultivated  in  the  gardens  and  orchards  of  Palestine  and  Northern  Syria. a
The  ripe  fruit  is  seldom  abundant  earlier  than  the  end  of  August,  when,  and  in  September,
most  families  lay  in  a  stock  for  winter  consumption.  There  are  three  varieties  of  the  fruit,
one  sweet,  another  very  acid,  and  a  third  in  which  both  qualities  are  very  agreeably  blended.
The  juice  of  the  sour  sort  is  often  used  instead  of  vinegar.  The  others  are  cut  open  when
served  up  to  table  ;  or  the  grains,  taken  out  and  besprinkled  with  sugar  or  rose-water,  are
brought  to  table  in  saucers.  The  grains  also,  fresh  as  well  as  dried,  make  a  considerable
ingredient  in  cookery  .b

Pomegranates  were  among  the  good  things  of  the  Land  of  Canaan  promised  to  the  Israelites,0
and  accordingly  they  were  among  the  choice  fruits  which  were  brought  from  that  land  by  the
spies. d  Pomegranates  were  not  forgotten  by  the  prophets  of  the  restoration^  They  were
planted  in  orchards  as  principal  trees  ;f  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  they  attained  larger
sizes  than  are  known  to  us  :  for  Saul  (if  the  text  is  correctly  read)  pitched  his  tent  on  one
occasion  under  a  pomegranate -tree  in  Migron.s  It  would  seem  that  the  present  employment
of  the  juice  in  preparing  a  pleasant  and  refreshing  drink  was  practised  by  the  Israelites.11
And  from  the  manner  in  which  its  figure  was  employed  in  the  ornaments  of  the  temple  and
of  the  priestly  raiment,1  it  may  appear  that  some  religiously  symbolical  ideas  were  connected
with  it.

In  a  preceding  page  (cclxx)  the  Cordia  Sebesten  has  been  noticed  after  Hasselquist.  This
month  it  produces  its  fruit,  the  Sebesten  plum.  The  tree,  or  rather  shrub,  is  small,  about
nine  feet  high.  The  large  clusters  of  beautiful  flowers,  changing  from  a  deep  vermilion  to  a
bright  scarlet,  and  at  last  assuming  a  purplish  hue,  make  it  a  fine  object  when  in  blossom.
The  fruit  is  shaped  somewhat  like  an  inverted  pear,  and  is  the  only  edible  fruit  (except  the
similar  fruit  of  the  Cordia  Myxa)  which  the  whole  order  of  Curdiacese  affords.  The  wood  is
aromatic,  and  a  small  piece  of  it  emits  a  strong  perfume  in  burning.  The  natives  of  the
Society  Isles  procure  the  red  dye  with  which  they  colour  their  clothing  from  the  juice  of  the
leaves,  mixed  with  that  extracted  from  the  leaves  of  a  species  of  fig  or  of  some  other  trees.
Such  are  the  principal  characteristics  of  the  cordia  sebesten  :  although  this  species  does  grow
in  Palestine,  it  is  evident  that  the  tree  to  which  Hasselquist  and  others k  give  the  name,  is
really  the  cordia  myxa,  or  Assyrian  plum,  which  certainly  does  grow  in  Syria  as  well  as  in
Arabia  and  Egypt ;  and  it  is  certainly  this  and  not  the  other  from  which  glue  (of  which
Hasselquist  speaks)  is  obtained.  The  wood  of  this  tree  is  tough  and  solid,  and  is  used  in
procuring  fire  by  friction.  The  fruit  (from  which  the  glue  is  obtained)  is  red,  and  about
an  inch  in  diameter  :  it  is  only  eaten  by  children.

The  Rev.  W.  Jowett  describes  the  Lebanon  districts  to  be  as  remarkable  for  the  innumerable
multitude  of  its  mulberry  tree  as  is  Egypt  for  its  palms ;  and  remarks  that  during  the  chief
part  of  that  year  the  mulberry  trees  clothe  the  prospect  in  every  direction  with  most  delightful
verdure.1  Having  already  fully  noticed  this  tree,  we  are  only  induced  to  return  to  the  subject
for  the  sake  of  introducing  to  the  notice  of  the  reader  the  additional  and  very  valuable  inform-
ation contained  in  Dr.  Bowring's  recent  '  Report,'  the  substance  of  which  will  be  found  in  the
note  below.m

a  Rauwolff,  21,  64,  102,  168  ;  Cotovic,  312;  Morison,  245,  486;  D'Arvieux,  ii.  311  ;  Burckhardt,  100,  102,  274.

t>  Russell,  i.  85.  <=  Deut.  viii.  8.  d  Num.  xiii.  23.

e  Hag.  ii.  19.  f  Solomon's  Song,  iv.  13.  S  1  Sam.  xiv.  2.

h  Solomon's  Song,  viii.  2.  i  Exod.  xxviii.  34 ;  1  Kings  vii.  16.

k  Rauwolff,  21,  64 ;  D'Arvieux,  ii.  234  ;  Egmont  and  Heyman,  ii.  242.  '  '  Christian  Researches  in  Syria,'  75.

m  The  information  is  contained  in  a  Report,  rendered  to  Dr.  Bowring  by  Colonel  Campell,  lately  the  British  consul-general  in
Egypt.  He  considers  that  silk  is  the  principal  article  of  produce  in  Syria,  and  that  which  under  an  improved  system  of  manage-
ment would  more  than  double  the  resources  of  that  country.  It  is  cultivated  more  generally  in  the  districts  of  Saida,  (Sidon)
Beiiout,  Lebanon,  Damascus,  Tripoli,  Latakiah,  and  Antioch,  where  extensive  plantations  of  the  mulberry  tree  exist,  and  which
have  been  greatly  increased  (in  common  with  other  principal  branches  of  culture)  since  the  country  has  been  under  the  rule  of
Ibrahim  Pasha.

Colonel  Campell  then  proceeds  to  state  that  "  the  mulberry  trees  are  planted  in  (quincunx)  rows,  at  four  paces  distant  from

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— SEPTEMBER.  cccxiii

Captain  Light,  travelling  this  month  in  Palestine,  takes  frequent  notice  of  the  Sindian  or
Turkish  oak,  the  acorn  of  which  differs  from  that  of  the  common  species  hy  the  fact  of  its
growing  in  a  tufted  pod.  He  saw  it  on  Mount  Tabor,  and  on  the  slopes  of  Lebanon  ;a  and
the  same  trees  are  often  mentioned  by  Buckingham  in  traversing  the  country  beyond  Jordan.

The  Vine. — Clusters  of  ripe  grapes  are  now  common  in  the  market.  It  has  been  disputed
when  the  vintage  commences  in  Palestine.  Russell  says  that  the  vintage  is  at  its  height  about
Aleppo  in  November;  but  he  does  not  say  when  it  commences.  It  is  probably  earlier  in  the
more  southern  parts  of  Syria ;  and  from  a  variety  of  circumstances  we  are  led  to  conclude  that
the  vintage  commences  about  the  middle  of  September,  and  is  continued  into  and  through
October.  That  it  is  at  its  height  in  the  early  part  of  October  appears  from  the  testimony  of
Paxton.b  We  shall  therefore  be  on  assured  ground  in  deferring  to  the  ensuing  month  that
account  of  the  operations  of  the  vintage  which  it  will  be  our  duty  to  render.

Grain. — As  it  appears  that  all  the  grain  is  off  the  ground  in  the  month  of  September,  we
may  suitably  notice  here  the  kinds  of  grain  which  have  not  hitherto  engaged  our  attention,  and
with  the  periods  of  collecting  which  we  are  not  precisely  acquainted.

Dourra,  as  the  natives  designate  Holcus  Sorghum,  is  gathered  in  August  in  Egypt ;  and
as  the  seasons  of  production  are  somewhat  more  backward  in  Syria,  it  is  well  to  ascribe,  the
harvest  of  this  grain  to  September.  This  has  the  negative  confirmation  derivable  from  the
fact  that  after  August  and  September  no  travellers  speak  of  the  fields  of  standing  dourra.  In
that  country  the  dourra  is  very  extensively  cultivated,  and  principally  forms  the  bread  of  the
labouring  population.  According  to  the  tables  of  Dr.  Bowring,c  the  produce  of  dourra  is
only  exceeded,  and  not  greatly  exceeded,  by  that  of  wheat  ;d  but  we  do  not  suppose  that  it
maintains  so  high  a  proportion  in  Syria,  which  appears  less  favourable  to  its  culture.  How-
each  other.  During  the  first  eight  years  they  give  a  greater  or  less  quantity  of  leaves.  After  that  term  their  produce,  if  cultivated
with  care,  remains  stationary,  but  soon  begins  to  decrease  if  the  cultivation  be  neglected.  The  plantations  of  mulberries  require
great  care,  and  the  ground  between  the  trees  is  ploughed  or  turned  up  eight  times  each  year,  and  the  greatest  attention  is  necessary
to  extirpate  all  weeds.  When  a  person  buys  a  plantation,  he  reckons  that  three  trees  will  give  20  rottoli  [of  51bs.  each]  of  leaves.
Then  130  to  140  rottoli  of  leaves  are  considered  to  suffice  for  the  nourishment  of  worms  enough  to  give  one  rottol  of  silk  of  720
drachms.  After  the  worms  are  hatched,  they  are  left  twenty  days  in  a  room  in  osier  baskets.  The  worms  are  kept  four  times
fasting  in  all  their  existence  ;  after  eight  days  they  fast  four  or  five  days  :  they  are  then  removed  to  a  larger  habitation,  made  of
reeds  and  matting,  and  in  which  they  make  their  (cocoons)  or  balls.  The  Syrians  are  ignorant  of  the  mannei  of  making  their
worms  produce  twice  in  a  year  ;  they  are  ignorant  of  any  other  plant  (as  in  Europe)  to  serve  as  a  substitute  for  the  mulberry
leaves,  with  which  the  worms  may  be  nourished  during  the  first  four  days.  The  miri,  or  land-tax,  is  fixed  in  proportion  to  the
quantity  of  seed  (eggs)  of  silkworms  which  the  cultivators  can  produce.  Experience  has  shown  that  one  ounce  of  eggs  produces
three  rottoli  of  silk.  In  the  district  of  Beirout,  at  half  an  hour  from  the  city,  the  miri  is  30  piastres,  besides  three  piastres  more
per  rottol  in  virtue  of  a  tax  called  bisreye,  which  makes  33  piastres  tax  in  all  per  rottol.  In  the  Lebanon  the  tax  is  infinitely
higher ;  it  amounts  to  nearly  100  piastres,  and,  although  in  the  middle  region  of  the  mountains,  one  ounce  of  eggs  gives  some-
where about  50  per  cent,  more  silk  than  on  the  plain  or  at  the  summit,  still  the  whole  produce  is  often  absorbed  by  the  enormity
of  the  tax.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Beirout  the  mulberry  plantations  are  worked  in  the  following  manner:— The  proprietor
takes  a  farm-servant,  who,  with  his  family,  lives  in  the  plantation,  and  does  all  the  labour  required  for  the  cultivation  of  the
mulberry -trees  in  the  course  of  the  year ;  but  during  the  two  months  in  which  the  silk  is  produced,  they  are  obliged  to  hire  people,
and,  between  women  and  children,  15  are  required  for  each  1000  mulberry-trees.  Labour  is  rather  dear  in  Syria ;  a  man  is  paid
five  piastres  per  day,  a  woman  four  piastres,  and  a  young  person  three  piastres.  In  conformity  with  a  convention  generally
adopted,  the  farm-servant  receives  for  his  share  one-fourth  of  the  produce  ;  of  the  remaining  six-eighths,  three-eighths  are  absorbed
by  the  expenses  of  cultivation,  one-eighth  serves  to  pay  taxes,  so  that  the  clear  gain  of  the  proprietor  is  only  one-fourth  of  the
whole.  And  as  a  plantation  which  would  give  20  loads  of  leaves,  costs,  in  the  present  day,  6000  piastres,  a  capital  employed  in
this  branch  would  not  yield  more  than  five  per  cent.  In  one  "  division  "  it  is  generally  calculated  that  there  are  1350  trees  which
will  give  450  loads  of  leaves,  and  will  produce  64  rottoli  of  silk,  which,  at  200  piastres  per  rottol,  give  a  total  of  12,900  piastres ;
from  which  must  be  deducted  one-fourth,  or  3,200  piastres,  for  the  farm-servant;  three-eighths,  or  4,800  piastres  for  the  expenses
of  cultivation ;  and  one-eighth,  or  1,600  piastres  for  the  payment  of  taxes:  this  makes,  altogether  9,600  piastres,  leaving  the
proprietor  the  net  profit  of  3,200  piastres.

In  the  Lebanon  the  mode  of  working  is  different,  inasmuch  as  the  proprietor  cultivates  the  ground  liimself,  instead  of  letting  it
out  to  a  farm-servant.  By  this  means  he  economises  one-fourth  of  the  produce,  but  as  the  taxes,  as  I  have  stated  already,  are  much
higher,  the  gain  of  the  proprietors,  in  good  years,  is  not  more  than  one-fourth,  and  in  bad  years,  it  hardly  suffices  to  pay  the
expenses  of  cultivation  and  the  amount  of  the  taxes.  The  total  amount  of  silk  produced  in  Syria  may  be  quoted  at  1700  cantars,
of  which, — 100  are  from  the  district  of  Saida ;  200  from  that  of  Beirout  ;  100  from  that  of  Tripoli;  700  from  that  of  Lebanon;
70  from  that  of  Damascus ;  30  from  that  of  Latakia ;  and  500  are  from  that  of  Antioch.

a  Light,  199,  221.  b  Letters,  214.  <=  •  Report  on  Egypt,'  p.  17.

d  Wheat,  950,000  ardebs ;  dourra,  850,000  ;  beans,  800,000  ;  barley,  560,000;  maize,  160,000;  helbeh  ['*  a  grain  with  some-
what bitterish  taste,  whose  flower  is  mixed  with  dourra  by  the  Fellahs  "],  110,000;  lentils,  70,000;  chick-peas,  50,000  ;  lupins
35,000;  total  3,585,000  ardebs.  The  ardebs  are  those  of  Cairo,  which  are  equal  to  1000  of  those  of  Alexandria,  and  to  14  Paris
bushels.    This  was  in  1834.     It  is  to  be  regretted  that  a  similar  estimate  for  Syria  was  not  attainable.

VOL.  I.  2  s

CCCX1V

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

[Douvra.    Hulcus  Sorghum.]

ever,  it  is  grown  along  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes,  and  in  the
plains  of  the  country  on  both  sides  that  river, — that  is,
wherever  there  are  facilities  for  the  artificial  irrigation
which  this  grain  much  requires,  and  for  the  purposes  of
which  the  fields  are  divided  into  squares,  as  in  the  cut  at  p.
ccxcvii.  The  frequent  waterings  which  it  requires  during
the  season  of  drought  are  so  laborious,  where  water  is  not
of  the  easiest  access,  that,  even  on  the  borders  of  the  Nile,
people  are  driven  by  this  exigency,  rather  than  by  choice,
to  the  culture  of  wheat  and  barley.  When  the  dourra  ap-
proaches its  maturity,  men  are  stationed  at  the  intersections
of  the  fields,  to  fray  by  their  cries  the  birds,  which  are  fond
of  this  grain,  and  swarm  to  devour  it  in  its  panicle.  It
rises  to  about  six  feet,  and,  when  fully  ripe,  is  cut,  at  about
six  inches  from  the  ground,  with  a  kind  of  sickle,  smaller
and  less  curved  than  that  employed  by  our  reapers.  It
takes  the  day's  labour  of  ten  reapers  to  clear  one  feddan.a
After  being  exposed  for  some  days  to  the  sun,  the  severed
produce  is  taken  to  the  threshing-floor,  where  the  grain  is
trodden  out  by  the  feet  of  oxen.  It  takes  two  oxen  the
labour  of  five  days  to  tread  out  the  produce  of  one  feddan.
The  grain  is  winnowed  by  being  tossed  into  the  air  with
forks  of  wood.  In  some  parts  of  Egypt  another  crop  of
dourra  is  sown  at  the  latter  end  of  July  or  in  August,  and
is  harvested  in  November.     But  we  know  not  that  this  occurs  in  Syria.

The  straw  of  the  dourra  is  employed  in  Egypt  as  a  covering  for  huts  and  cabins,  and
when  the  Arabs  and  the  peasants  of  that  country  wish  to  cross  the  Nile,  they  support  them-
selves (on  their  bellies)  upon  a  bundle  of  it,  by  which  they  are  enabled  to  pass  over  with  less
danger  and  fatigue.  This  mode  of  crossing  rivers  (though  not  always  on  bundles  of  dourra
straw)  is  common  in  Western  Asia.b

There  are  several  varieties  of  this  grain.  That  which  is  principally  cultivated  in  Egypt,
Arabia,  and  Syria,  is  of  good  quality,  and  affords  a  good  white  flour,  which  is  generally  made
up  into  cakes,  about  two  inches  in  thickness.

Maize,  otherwise  called  '  Indian  corn,'  is  called  in  Egypt  "  Syrian  dourra,"  which  name,
while  it  indicates  the  resemblance  to  the  plant  of  which  we  have  just  spoken,  also  conveys  the
impression  that  it  was  more  common  in  Syria,  and,  possibly,  that  it  was  derived  from  that
country.  It  may  be  of  greater  relative  importance  there ;  for,  as  seen  by  the  extract  lately
given  from  Dr.  Bowring's  '  Report,'  only  a  very  small  proportion  of  maize  is  cultivated  in
Egypt :  but  we  are  not  aware  that  the  culture  is  other  than  a  subsidiary  object  even  in  Syria.
The  maize  (zea  mays)  is  a  monoecious  grass  of  vigorous  growth,  with  stems  not  more
than  two  feet  high  in  some  varieties,  but  reaching  the  height  of  eight,  or  even  ten,  feet  in
others.  The  leaves  are  broad,  and  hang  down  from  large  rough  sheaths  that  surround  the
stem.  The  male  flowers  grow  in  loose  terminal  compound  racemes,  standing  clear  of  the
leaves ;  the  females  are  arranged  in  numerous  rows  on  a  spike,  which  is  wrapped  round  by
several  folds  of  sheathing  bracts,  which  press  upon  the  grains,  and  give  them  that  flattened
figure  which  they  eventually  acquire  when  ripe.  Each  grain  has  a  long  thread-like  style,
which  projects  beyond  the  enveloping  sheaths  ;  and  as  there  are  some  hundreds  of  them,  the
whole  form  a  long  tassel,  which  looks  as  if  made  of  silk.c  The  figure  and  appearance  of  the
flattened  grains,  lying  one  over  the  other  in  rows,  is  too  well  known  to  need  description.  The
plant  generally  bears  two  full  ears,  the  grains  in  which  vary  greatly  in  number.     M.  Girard

a  This  is  the  acre  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  and  may  conveniently  be  compared  to  the  English  acre.

•>  See  Girard, '  Memoire  sur  1' Agriculture,  &c,  del'Egypte  ;'  in  '  Descript.  del'Egypte,'  xvii.  52 — 59

e  This  description  is  copied  from  '  The  Penny  Cyclopaedia,'  art.  Maize.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— SEPTEMBER.

cecxv

[Maize.    Zea  Mays.]

says  that  the  average  product  of  this
culture  in  Egypt  is  eighteen  for  one,
without  including  the  value  of  the  straw,
which  is  there  used  only  for  fuel.  It  is
fit  for  the  sickle  four  months  after  being
sown ;  and  while  in  the  ground  the  same
attention  is  paid  to  the  irrigation  as  with
dourra.  It  is  reaped  with  the  sickle;
and  five  or  six  men  suffice  to  reap  a
feddan  of  maize  in  one  day.  The  reaped
maize  is  transported  on  the  backs  of
camels  or  asses  to  a  place  near  the  vil-
lage, where  the  women  and  children
employ  themselves  in  separating  the  ears
from  the  stalk.  The  ears  are  then  de-
spoiled of  the  large  leaves,  which  en-
velope them.  Fifteen  or  sixteen  such
operators  can  in  this  way  clear  in  one
day  the  produce  of  a  feddan  of  maize.
The  panicles  are  then  exposed  to  the
sun  for  twelve  or  fifteen  days,  that  they
may  be  completely  dried.  After  this
they  are  deposited  in  the  magazines,
and  are  there  beaten,  as  needed,  to  de-
tach the  grain.  The  green  ears,  being  tied  in  packets  of  five  or  six,  are  roasted,  and  thus
form  a  sort  of  eatable  to  which  children  are  very  partial.51

Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  is  well  convinced  from  the  evidence  of  the  sculptures  that  the  dourra
was  cultivated  in  Egypt  in  the  most  ancient  times.b  He  also  informs  us  that  he  had  been
assured  that  maize  had  been  found  in  the  ancient  tombs  of  Thebes.  This  he  doubts,  but  only
on  the  ground  that  maize  was  "  first  discovered  in  Cuba  by  Columbus,  in  1492. "c  An
American  origin  has  indeed  been  commonly  ascribed  to  it  hence;  its  name  of  "  Indian  corn  ;"
and  it  is  unquestionable  that  the  culture  of  maize  was  established  in  the  New  World,  when  first
discovered  by  Europeans.  Yet  the  name  of  "  Turkish  corn,"  which,  from  the  time  of  its  first
introduction  into  those  countries,  it  has  borne  in  Italy,  Germany,  and  France,  appears  to
indicate  that  its  culture  had  been  brought  from  the  East ;  and,  under  this  point  of  view,  the
westward  movement  of  the  Arabs  may  appear  to  have  contributed  to  its  expansion.  Of  this,
however,  there  is  no  positive  proof.  There  is  no  mention  of  maize  in  the  documents  which
relate  to  their  dominion  in  Sicily  :  yet,  again,  this  fact  would  not  certainly  intimate  that  the
product  had  not  been  introduced,  but  only  that  it  was  not  exported,  for  it  is  only  under  the
article  of  customs  that  such  documents  notice  the  products  of  the  isle.  Reynier,d  on  this
question  as  to  the  Asiatic  origin  of  maize,  refers  to  "  the  curious  researches  which  have  been
published  in  the  '  Bibliotheque  Physieo  economique '  (An.  1818,  t.  iv.  p.  234  of  the  new
translation),  where  the  author  cites  botanists  contemporary  with  the  discovery  of  America,
who  speak  of  maize  as  recently  imported  from  Asia  Minor."  It  might  thus  be  collected  that
maize  is  a  product  common  to  the  Old  and  the  New  World,  and  not  derived  from  the  latter
to  the  former.

Millet,  which  is  cultivated  not  only  in  the  East,  but  in  the  south  of  Europe,  as  an  esculent
grain,  is  raised  to  some  considerable  extent  in  Palestine  and  Syria.  This  plant  rises  with
a  reed-like  channelled  stalk,  from  three  to  four  feet  high :  at  every  joint  there  is  one  seed-like
leaf,  joined  on  the  top  of  the  sheath,  which  embraces  and  covers  that  joint  of  the  sheath  below

a  See  Girard,  as  before.  *>  'Topography  of  Thebes,'  213,  214.

A  '  De  l'Economie  Publique  et  Rurale  des  Arab«s  et  des  Juifs.'     1820.

Ibid.  p.  11.

2  s2

CCCXV1

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

[Millet.     Panicum
Milaceum.]

the  leaf,  and  is  clothed  with  soft  leaves.  The  stalk  is  terminated  by  a
large  loose  panicle,  hanging  on  one  side.  The  grain  forms  a  useful
article  of  human  food  in  the  countries  favourable  to  its  culture ;  poultry
also  are  fond  of  it ;  and  cattle  are  partial  to  its  straw.  There  is  no
doubt  that  the  culture  of  millet  is  of  very  ancient  date  both  in  Syria  and
Egypt.  It  has  been  disputed  whether  millet  or  dourra  be  the  dochan
Qm)  of  Ezek.  iv.  9.  Our  translators  decide  for  millet,  and  we  are  dis-
posed to  acquiesce  in  their  opinion  (supported  as  it  is  by  Hiller  and  Celsius),
although  we  doubt  not  that  the  dourra  also  was  cultured.

Rice  is  an  article  of  large  consumption  in  Syria,  as  well  as  in  other
Asiatic  countries;  from  its  use  in  pillaus,  which  form  the  staple  of  the
principal  daily  meal  of  the  inhabitants.  Although  this  grain  is  to  some
extent  cultivated  in  Syria,  the  quantities  produced  are  by  no  means  equal
to  the  demand.  Even  Damascus,  in  whose  neighbourhood  rice  is  culti-
vated, is  obliged  to  import  a  large  proportion  of  that  which  it  consumes.
The  rice  is  chiefly  imported  from  Egypt;  but  in  1836  and  1837  Aleppo
received  and  consumed  about  five  hundred  and  forty  bags  (each  weighing
seventy-five  pounds)  of  rice  from  Great  Britain.11

The  rice-plant  seems  to  be  a  native  of  India,  whence  it  extended  at
a  very  early  date  over  the  continent  of  Asia,  and  eventually  into  the
south  of  Europe.  Indeed,  there  is  reason  to  conclude  that  wherever  the
summer  heat  is  powerful,  steady,  and  long-continued,  and  where,  at  the  same  time,  the
plant  can  obtain  either  naturally  or  by  art  the  moisture  it  requires,  there  it  will  grow  and
flourish :  but  heat  and  water  it  must  have.  The
period  of  its  introduction  into  Egypt  and  Western
Asia  is  not  with  certainty  known.  Theophrastus
only  speaks  of  it  as  an  alimentary  plant  of  the
Indians,b  which  renders  it  probable  that  it  did
not  then  exist  in  Egypt.  Dioscorides  only  no-
tices it  as  a  plant,  to  the  vegetation  of  which
constant  watering  was  needful,0  without  indicat-
ing the  country  in  which  its  culture  was  esta-
blished ;  but  it  may  be  remarked  that  although
he  says  not  that  it  grew  in  Egypt,  where  he
lived,  or  in  the  neighbouring  country  of  Syria,
neither  does  he  intimate  that  it  was  a  pro-
duct of  distant  countries,  or  was  brought  from
them.  Strabo,  his  contemporary,  is  more  defi-
nite, stating  that  it  was  cultivated  in  the  oases  of
the  Desert  inhabited  by  the  Gramantes,d  and  also
upon  the  banks  of  the  Indus,  and  in  the  southern
provinces  of  Syria*  The  fact  contained  in  this
last  testimony,  which  of  course  points  to  Palestine,  is  confirmed  and  illustrated  by  notices  in
the  Mishna,  which  it  would  not  be  easy  to  refer  to  any  other  product  than  rice.  Of  all  these
passages  the  most  decisive  is  one  which  distinguishes  the  rice  cultivated  in  the  country  from
that  imported  from  abroad/  Besides  other  casuistical  decisions  in  reference  to  its  culture/
there  is  one  which  allows  it  to  be  watered  and  even  gathered  in  the  seventh,  or  sabbatic  year,
provided  it  had  began  to  vegetate  in  the  year  preceding.11     As  there  is  not  the  least  evidence

[Rice.     Oryxa  sativa.}

a  Dr  Bowring's '  Report,'  96.  *>  Theoph.  '  Hist.  Plant,'  iv.  5.  c  Dios. '  Hist.  Plant,  ii.  117.

d  Strabo,  Geog.  lib.  xvii.  adfin.  e  Ibid.  lib.  xvi.  f  Mishna,  tit.  Demai,  cap.  ii.  sec.  1.

B  Mishna,  tit.  Peah,  cap.  viii.  sec  .3 ;  tit.  Challa,  cap.  i.  sec.  4 ;  tit.  Bava-mezia,  cap.  iii.  sec.  7.
1>  Mishna,  tit.  Sheevith,  cap.  ii.  sects.  7-10.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— SEPTEMBER.  cccxvii

that  the  Hebrews  had  any  knowledge  of  rice  before  the  Babylonian  captivity,  it  is  more  than
probable  that,  on  their  return,  they  brought  the  culture  with  them  from  the  banks  of  the
Euphrates —  on  the  lower  and  marshy  parts  of  which  river  it  is  still  cultivated  with  much
facility  and  success.  But  there  is  no  likelihood  that  this  important  grain  was  ever  cultivated
to  any  considerable  extent  in  a  country  generally  so  dry  as  Palestine.  The  culture  seems  to
have  been  concentrated  in  certain  districts — probably  the  same  in  which  it  is  still  found.

The  figure  which  we  have  given  must  supply  the  place  of  a  description  of  the  plant.  It  is
only  necessary  to  add  that  the  panicle  which  it  exhibits  is  supported  on  a  stalk  more  thick  and
hard,  and  also  taller  than  that  of  corn.

We  know  nothing  of  the  process  of  culture  in  Syria.  It  is  doubtless  much  the  same  as  in
Egypt,  allowing  for  the  difference  that  during  a  portion  of  the  time  it  remains  in  the  ground
it  is  naturally  watered  in  Egypt  by  the  inundation  of  the  Nile,  but  in  Syria  by  rams.  In
both  countries  it  requires  much  artificial  irrigation  when  these  sources  fail.

The  seed  is  sown  in  April.  It  is  previously  well  soaked,  and  then  spread  upon  mats  in  the  sun.
The  action  of  the  heat  upon  the  moistened  grain  accelerates  the  germination ;  and  it  is  only
when  the  germ  is  developed  that  the  seed  is  committed  to  the  earth,  which  has  previously
been  laid  under  water  for  several  days,  and  laboured,  so  as  to  bring  it  to  the  state  of  slush  or
mud,  to  which  the  grain  is  committed.  Towards  the  end  of  July  the  rice  is  transplanted —
generally  to  grounds  from  which  the  corn  has  lately  been  reaped,  but  which  have  since  been
ploughed  and  soaked  for  the  rice  ;  and  which  are  generally  as  near  as  may  be  to  the  ground
from  which  the  plant  is  taken.  In  transplanting,  the  plants  are  distributed  over  twice  the
extent  of  ground  in  which  they  first  grew.  The  harvest  is  in  November ;  when  the  plant  has
been  altogether  seven  months  in  the  ground.  It  is  cut  down  by  the  scythe,  like  corn ;  and,
as  with  com,  the  grain  is  separated  by  the  wain,  or  norreg.  The  straw  is  used  in  Egypt  for
fuel.

The  further  process  to  which  the  rice  is  subjected  before  it  is  brought  to  the  state  in  which
it  is  used  for  food  (in  the  East),  may  be  described  in  the  language  of  Hasselquist : — "  It  is
pounded  by  hollow  iron  pestles,  of  a  cylindrical  form,  an  inch  in  diameter,  lifted  up  by  a
wheel  worked  by  oxen.  A  person  sitting  between  the  two  pestles  pushes  forward  the  rice
when  the  pestles  are  rising.  In  this  manner  they  continue  working  it  until  it  is  entirely  free
from  chaff  and  husks.  When  it  is  clean  they  add  a  thirty-eighth  part  of  salt,  and  pound
them  together,  by  which  the  rice  becomes  white,  which  before  was  grey.  After  this  fineing
it  is  passed  through  a  fine  sieve,  to  part  the  salt  from  the  rice,  and  then  it  is  ready  for  use."
To  this  statement  we  have  only  to  add  that  families  often  purchase  a  stock  of  rice  before  it
has  undergone  this  process,  and  hire  two  men  (or  even  women),  whose  trade  it  is,  to  come
and  pound  it  at  the  house.  This  is  done  with  heavy  wooden  pestles,  worked  by  manual
labour,  in  wooden  mortars.  This  operation  (with  the  subsequent  sifting)  is  often  witnessed
by  a  traveller  in  the  East.

Esculent  Vegetables. — This  month  we  shall  devote  this  section  to  the  collective  notice  of
such  leguminous  plants  as  have  not  already  engaged  our  particular  attention,  regardless  of  the
place  they  might  severally  occupy  in  the  monthly  routine.

Lentiles*  the  early  use  of  which  for  food  is  indicated  in  several  passages  of  Scripture,b  as
well  as  by  the  paintings  of  Egypt.0  From  these  sources  we  also  gather  that  their  principal
use  was  for  making  pottage,  which  is  still  the  case  in  Egypt  and  Palestine,  in  both  which
countries,  and  certainly  in  the  former,  lentiles  constituted  a  great  article  of  diet  to  the  labouring
classes,  and  in  certain  forms  of  preparation  was  not  unacceptable  at  the  best  tables.  Lentiles  are
too  often  mentioned  by  the  ancient  writers  who  speak  of  Egypt,  to  leave  any  doubt  of  the  extent
to  which  this  useful  pulse  was  cultivated  j  and  of  the  excellence  which  it  there  attained,  proof
is  given  in  the  fact  that  the  lentiles  of  Pelusium  were  esteemed  both  in  Egypt  and  in  foreign

a  Ervum'lens.  b  Gen.  xxv.  34  ;  2  Sam.  xvii.  28.  xxiii.  11 ;  Ezek.  iv.9.

c  See  the  cut  in  the  History,  at  p.  574.

cccxvm

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

[Lentiles.     Ervumlens.]

countries.a  Large  quantities  of  lentiles  were
exported  from  Alexandria  to  foreign  lands.b  In
the  Mishna  mention  is  made  of  an  esteemed  spe-
cies of  Egyptian  lentile,  neither  large  or  small  ;c
and  Plinyd  mentions  two  Egyptian  species,  and
takes  occasion  to  remarke  that  the  lentile  likes
best  a  red  soil,  and  infers  that  it  thence  derived
the  colouring  principle  by  which  it  imparted  a
red  colour  to  the  pottage  made  with  it.  This  is
interesting,  as  the  first  notice  of  lentiles  in  the
Scriptures  contains  a  distinct  allusion  to  the
red  colour  of  the  lentile  pottage  for  which  Esau
sold  his  birthright.  Correspondingly,  it  is  re-
ported by  Dr.  Shaw  that  lentiles  dissolve  easily,
in  boiling,  into  a  mass,  and  form  a  pottage  of  a
red  or  chocolate  colour,  much  esteemed  in  Egypt
and  Western  Asia.f

The  lentiles  remain  about  four  months  in
the  ground.  When  ripe,  the  plants  are  rooted
up,-  if  they  have  been  sown  along  with  other
plants,  as  is  sometimes  done,  but  are  cut  down
with  the  scythe,  if  growing  by  themselves.
Lentiles  are  threshed,  winnowed,  and  cleaned
like  corn.
Chick  Peas  s  are  common  enough  in  Palestine  and  Egypt.  We  know  it  was  one  of  the
ancient  products  of  the  latter  country,11  and  probably
was  so  of  the  former.  Reynier  thinks  it  may  very
well  have  been  the  ketzach  (ITUp)  of  Isa.  xxviii.
25,  27,  which  we  rather  doubt.

The  plant  of  the  chick-pea  raises  its  erect,  leafy,
and  branched  stem,  to  the  height  of  a  foot  or
eighteen  inches,  and  bears  an  inflated  two-seeded
pod  with  tuberculated  seeds.  The  seeds  are  re-
markable for  their  resemblance  to  a  ram's  head  ;
and,  although  generally  unpalatable  to  northern
Europeans,  they  form  a  prized  article  of  food  in
the  East  and  in  some  parts  of  southern  Europe.
They  are  eaten  raw  or  boiled.  "The  most  re-
markable circumstance  about  Cicer  arietanum  is,
that  during  the  heats  of  summer  its  leaves  and
stem  exude  little  viscid  drops,  which,  on  evapora-
tion, leave  behind  crystals  of  nearly  pure  oxalic-
acid.  Its  grateful  refrigerating  qualities  are  owing
to  this  acid.  Persons  who  walk  through  the  fields
where  it  grows,  with  common  leather  shoes,  find  them  destroyed  by  the  acid."1

The  cicer  plant  remains  seven  months  in  the  ground.  It  is  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  and
threshed  by  the  norreg.  Besides  the  constant  use  of  this  pulse  by  the  peasantry,  it  is  usual  in
the  principal  towns  of  Egypt  and  Syria  to  roast  the  grains  over  the  fire  in  a  large  basin,  and
to  eat  them  when  properly  parched.

[Chick  Pea.     Cicer  arietanum.']

a  Virgil,  Georg.i. 228;  Martial,  xiii.  9.
c  Mishna,  tit.  Celim,  cap.  xvii.  sec.  8.
f  Shaw,  i.  257.
'  'Penny  Cyclopaedia.'  art.  "  Cicer."

K  Cicer  Arietanum.

b  Augustin,  Comment  in  Psalm  xlvi.
d  •  Nat.  Hist.'  xviii.  12.  e  Ibid.  17.

h  Plin.  'Nat  Hist.' xviii.  12.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— SEPTEMBER.  cccxix

What  has  been  stated  of  the  culture  of  chick-peas  may  be  applied  almost  without  restriction
to  Lupins,*  fields  of  which  have  been  noticed  in  Syria  by  various  travellers.  The  culture  is
probably  conducted  on  the  principles  and  for  the  same  purposes  as  in  Egypt.  It  is  there  sown
in  November,  and  in  about  five  months  is  ready  for  the  scythe.  The  stems  are  too  ligneous
to  be  of  service  in  finding  cattle ;  but  they  are  all  the  more  serviceable  for  fuel,  and  for
making  a  kind  of  charcoal  which  enters  into  the  manufacture  of  gunpowder.  The  grains  are
beaten  out  with  rods,  or  staves,  a  substitute  for  the  flail  of  very  ancient  date  in  those
countries.

That  Beansh  are  cultivated  in  the  country  has  already  been  more  than  once  intimated.
The  extent  of  this  cultivation  in  Palestine  we  have  no  means  of  knowing ;  but  it  has  been
shown  that  in  Egypt  the  quantity  raised  is  inferior  only  to  that  of  wheat  and  dourra.  In  that
country  they  are  sown  in  November  and  reaped  in  the  middle  of  February  (three  months  and
a  half  in  the  ground)  ;  but  it  seems  that  in  Syria  they  may  be  had  throughout  the  spring.
The  stalks  are  cut  down  with  the  scythe,  and  these  are  afterwards  cut  and  crushed  under  the
norreg,  to  fit  them  for  the  food  of  cattle — camels,  oxen,  and  goats.  The  beans  themselves,
when  sent  to  market,  are  often  deprived  of  their  skins,  as  is  the  case  also  with  lentiles,  by  the
action  of  two  small  millstones  (if  the  phrase  may  be  allowed)  of  clay  dried  in  the  sun.  Beans
were  undoubtedly  in  use  among  the  ancient  Hebrews,  being  mentioned  in  some  of  the  sacred
books.0  Basnage  reports  it  as  the  sentiment  of  some  of  the  Rabbins,  that  beans  were  not
lawful  to  the  priests,  on  account  of  their  being  considered  the  appropriate  food  of  mourning
and  affliction. d  If  this  notion  were  really  entertained,  of  the  unlawfulness  of  beans  to  sacred
persons,  it  was  probably  derived  from  the  Pythagorean  philosophy,  the  principles  of  which
were  adopted  to  a  considerable  extent  by  the  later  Jews.  But  we  doubt  that  any  such  notion
existed  anywhere  in  Israel.  Basnage  does  not  refer  to  the  authority ;  and  neither  in  the
sacred  books  nor  in  the  Mishna  can  be  found  any  traces  of  the  notion  to  which  he  alludes.  So
far  from  attaching  any  sort  of  impurity  to  this  legume,  it  is  described  as  among  the  first-fruit
offerings  ;e  and  several  other  articles  in  that  collection  prove  that  the  Hebrews  had  beans
largely  in  use,  after  they  had  passed  them  through  the  mill.'

Fenugreek^  called  helbeh  in  Syria  and  Egypt,  is  among  the  plants  often  noticed  by  travellers
in  the  latter  country ;  but  we  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  whether  it  is  there  cultivated  for
food,  as  it  is  in  middle  Egypt  to  an  extent  inferior  only  to  that  of  maize.11  The  helbeh  is  cor-
rectly described  in  Dr.  Bowling's  '  Report  on  Egypt,'  as  "  a  seed  with  a  somewhat  bitter
taste,  whose  flour  is  mixed  with  dourra  by  the  fellahs."     The  stalks,  cut  and  broken  by  the

"  wain,"  or  "  sledge,"  serve  for  the  food  of  camels.

There  would  seem  to  be  a  second  gathering  of  cucurbitacese  in  this  month.  Russell *  says
that  young  cucumbers  are  brought  to  market  in  September  for  the  purpose  of  pickling  ;  and
Polschnitzk  affirms  that  he  saw  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rama  (or  Ramla)  a  species  of  melon,
called  by  the  Arabs  batiecce, l  which  was  not  yet  gathered.  From  this  we  conclude  that
cucumbers  and  melons  are  sown  twice  in  the  year,  as  in  Egypt,  where  the  periods  of  sowing
are  March  and  July.

Plants. — As  we  consider  that  all  the  crops  are  off  the  ground  in  September,  with  the  ex-
ception of  a  few  which  are  delayed  to  the  early  part  of  October,  we  will  proceed  to  notice  the
oil-plants,  or  those  which  afford  oil,  and  for  which  they  are  more  or  less  cultivated.

First,  there  is  the  Sesame,™  a  plant  of  summer  culture,  along  with  the  dourra  and  maize,
after  the  barley  has  been  harvested.  In  Egypt  it  is  ripe  at  the  end  of  October  after  having
been  five  months  in  the  ground.  When  cut  down,  it  is  carried  to  the  threshing-floor,  and
there  exposed  in  the  sun  until  thoroughly  dry,  when  the  grain  is  beaten  out  with  rods.     Some-

a  Lupinus  termis.  b  Viciafaba  equina.  c  2  Sara.  xvii.  18  ;  Ezek.  iv.  9.

*  '  Hist,  des  Juifs,'  liv.  iv.  chap.  31.  e  Mishna,  tit.  Orla.  cap.ii.  sec.7-

f  Mishna,  tit.  Maaseroth,  cap.  v.  8,  et  passim ;  tit.  Eduith.  cap.  iii.  8.  8  Trigonellafmnum  Grcecum.

h  Maize,  160,000  ardebs  ;  helbeh,  110,000.  '  '  Nat.  Hist.'  i.  91.  k  Theil,  ii.  p.  26.

1  A  curious  way  this  of  spelling  an  Arabic  word.     But  we  may  recognise  in  it  the  Arabic  word  (batykh)  for  a  melon  in  general,
and  not  for  any  particular  species — which  is  always  denoted  by  an  addition.
m  Sesamum  Orientate.

cccxx

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

times   the  plants  are  tied  up  in  bundles,  and
<=jq|L  l^wfe?  suspended  from  a  line  to  dry.     The  seerig,  as

the  oil  expressed  from  this  grain  is  called,  is  reck-
oned the  best  lamp-oil.  It  is  also  used  in  the
kitchen,  but  is  considered  of  inferior  flavour  to
that  extracted  from  the  lettuce,  though  of  greater
value.  The  residue  of  the  pressed  seed,  after
the  oil  is  extracted,  is  eaten  by  the  peasants,
and  to  some  extent  by  the  townspeople,  and  sold
under  the  name  of  koosbeh.  The  unbruised
seeds  are  strewed  upon  cakes,  and  give  their
name  and  flower  to  a  coarse  conserve.1  The
stalks  are  used  for  fuel.

Sesame  was  cultivated  by  the  old  Hebrews ;
and  to  the  dietetic  use  of  its  oil,  they  added
its  employment  to  give  light.b    In  the  casuistical
decisions  of  the  Hebrew  doctors,  the  same  ac-
amnm   uen  'l  commodating  rule  was  extended  to  it  as  to  rice

and  to  millet,  that  it  might  be  attended  to  and  gathered  in  the  sabbatic  year  provided  it  had
begun  to  vegetate  before  the  end  of  the  year  preceding.0  It  is  observable  that,  according  to
Russell,  the  seerige  oil  is  now  much  used  by  the  Jews  of  Syria  in  their  cookery,  although  it
is  disagreeable  in  taste  and  smell  to  a  European,  and  even  to  the  Asiatics,  if  we  may  judge
from  the  fact  that  although  it  is  eaten  by  some  mixed  with  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  grape,
called  dibs,  very  few  besides  the  Jews  employ  it  in  place  of  olive-oil.

From  Talmudical  sources  we  learn  that  the  Castor-Oil  plant d  was  reckoned  among  those
plants  whose  oil  was  used  in  lamps.
No  notice  is  taken  of  its  medicinal
properties ;  and  it  is  remarkable
that  those  properties  are  also  un-
known to  the  present  inhabitants
of  Syria  and  Egypt,  or  are,  at  least,
not  so  appreciated  as  to  form  an
object  in  the  culture  of  the  plant.e
Its  ancient  culture  in  Syria  and
Egypt  is  undoubted.  It  is  one  of
the  plants  whose  nature,  or  rather
developments,  are  much  affected  by
climate  and  situation.  Pliny,  speak-
ing of  it  as  in  Egypt,  calls  it  a  tree,
from  whose  seeds  a  lamp-oil  was
extracted.  We  know  not  whether
the  form  of  its  growth  entitles  it
now  in  the  same  country  to  that  designation;  but  we  know  that  in  some  parts  of  Africa,  and  in
the  warm  plains  of  the  Arabian  Irak,  it  attains  the  stature  of  a  tree,  and  is  not,  as  with  us,
a  biennial  plant,  but  endures  for  many  years.  Its  life  and  growth  are  variously  diminished  by
more  or  less  congenial  climates.

Among  the  plants  cultivated  from  the  oil  which  may  be  drawn  from  them  are  the  Coleseed,
or  purple  field-cabbage, f  and  the  lettuce ;  "  both  were  anciently  applied  to  this  use  in
Egypt,h  and  the  former  certainly  (and  probably  both),  in  Palestine ;  for  it  is  named  among
those  plants  from  which  a  lamp  oil  was  obtained.1

a  Girard,  '  Memohe,'  &e.  p.  92—94  ;  Wilkinson's  '  Topography  of  Thebes,'  221.  b  Mishna,  tit.  Shabbah,  cap.  ii.  2.

c  Mishna,  tit.  Sheevith,  cap.  ii.  7.  d  Ricinus  Communis.

e  So  testifies  Wilkinson  for  Egypt  in  '  Topography  of  Thebes,'  211  ;  and  Russell  for  Syria,  vol.  i.  p.  80.

f  Brassica  arvensis.  S  Lactuca  sativa.  h  Plinii  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  v.  cap.  7.

1  Mishna,  tit.  Shabbah,  ii.  sects.  1  and  2.

*>,,

^4^

.-■T^

[Ricinus  Communis.]

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— SEPTEMBER.

CCCXX1

The  selgam,  as  the  natives  name  the  coleseed,  remains  three  months  in  the  ground,  and  is
then  rooted  up.  The  seed  is  beaten  out  with  staves.  The  root  of  the  plant  is  only  used  for
fuel,  and  is  of  so  little  value  as  such,  that  the  cultivator  generally  leaves  it  on  the  threshing-
floor  for  the  use  of  the  poor.  As  for  the  lettuce,  when  the  plant  is  cultivated  for  oil,  its  head,
charged  with  the  seed,  is  cut  off  when  it  reaches  maturity,  and  is  taken  to  the  threshing-floor,
where,  after  being  exposed  to  dry  during  six  days,  the  grain  is  beaten  out  as  with  coleseed.
A  part  of  the  stalks  or  leaves  of  the  plant  are  commonly  taken  off,  during  the  growth,  to  feed
cattle,  without  in  the  least  diminishing  the  production  of  seed.  The  dry  plant  is  also  some-
times given  to  oxen  for  fodder,  but  as  such  is  but  little  esteemed.

The  Sajjloiver*  or  bastard  saffron,  may  take  its  place  here  among  oleiferous  plants,  for  a
considerable  quantity  of  oil  is  extracted  from  it  in  Egypt,  if  not  in  Syria,  although  in  both
countries  the  plant  is  chiefly  cultivated  for  the  flowers,  for  their  use  in  dyeing.  The  beautiful
and  somewhat  fugitive  rose-colour  which  is  obtained  from  this  plant,  is  well  known;  as  is  also
the  red  pigment  which  is  obtained  from  the  stamens,  which  is  used  by  painters,  and  known  as
a  cosmetic  rouge  under  the  name  of  Spanish  vermilion.  The  quantity  produced  in  Syria
affords  no  surplus  for  exportation,  and  is  consumed  in  the  country  chiefly  in  colouring
rice  pillaus  and  other  eatables.  The  quality  is  very  inferior  to  that  of  Egypt,b  where  the
plant  was  cultivated  in  very  ancient  times,  and  where  it  still  receives  much  attention.  When
the  plants  come  into  flower  they  are  visited  every  morning  about  sunrise,  by  women  and
children,  who  pluck  the  petals  of  the  flowers  which  are  sufficiently  developed.  The  petals
thus  collected  are  spread  out  upon  mats,  in  the  shade,  for  a  whole  day,  after  which  they  are
brayed  in  a  wooded  mortar,  until  reduced  to  a  paste,  to  which  the  form  of  flat  round  cakes  is
given.  Sometimes  the  flour  of  lupins  is  mixed  with  the  safflowers,  but  although,  as  intended,
consistence  is  thus  given  to  the  paste,  the  drug  is  thereby  deteriorated  in  quality  and  value.
The  cakes  are  left  to  dry  in  the  shade  for  about  fifteen  days,  during  which  they  lose  about  a
moiety  of  their  original  weight.0

Having  insensibly  slid  into  the  notice  of  plants  from  which  dyes  are  obtained,  we  will
preserve  the  connection  by  stating  what

else  we  know  on  this  class  of  plants,  -  E _.—  _

beyond  what  has  been  formerly  stated.  I  ;^y^^

"  Indigo  grows  wild  in  several  parts
of  Palestine.  I  am  not  aware  that  any
attention  has  been  paid  to  its  culture  or
collection."  This  is  Dr.  Bowring's
report  respecting  indigo.  It  appears,
however,  that  some  attention  is  paid  to
its  culture.  Burckhardt  intimates'1  that
indigo  dyeing  is  one  of  the  principal
occupations  of  the  people  of  Szaffad
(or  Safet)  ;  a  fact  of  no  consequence
in  itself ;  but  we  elsewhere6  learn  that
indigo  is  a  very  common  product  of
"  the  Ghor,"f  the  inhabitants  of  which
sell  it  to  the  merchants  of  Jerusalem
and  Hebron,  where  it  is  ivorth  twenty
per  cent,  more  than  the  indigo  of
Egypt.  It  is  also  cultivated  on  the
borders  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias  ;S  so
that  it  appears  that  the  warm  valley  of

[Indigo  Harvest.     West  Indies.]

a  Carthamus  tinc'orius.  b  jjr.  Bowring's  '  Repirt  on  Syria,'  32.  c  Girard,  xvii.  94—98.

d  '  Syria/  317.  e  Ibid.  39?.

f  Understood  here  of  the  low  plain  between  the  eastern  brink  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  monntiins  which  on  that  side  hem  it  in.
g  Seetzen,  12.

VOL.  I.

2  t

cccxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

the  Jordan  is,  as  might  be  expected,  the  part  of  Palestine  the  most  favourable  to  the  culture  of
this  tropical  plant.  Volney  indeed  alleges  that  on  the  banks  of  that  river,  about  Bysan,  the
indigo  plant  grows  without  cultivation,  and  adds  that  it  only  requires  care  to  make  it  of  an
excellent  quality. a  This  it  actually  is  when  cultivated,  as  evinced  by  its  superior  value  in  the
market  over  Egyptian  indigo.  Perhaps  (but  we  have  no  evidence  on  the  point)  this  superior
value  may  be  partly  owing  to  some  superiority  in  the  preparation,  which  is  very  defective  in
Egypt,  where,  as  Belzoni  informs  us,  the  manufacturers  make  it  up  into  cakes,  of  the  size  of
sea-biscuits,  in  a  very  rough  manner ;  for,  not  knowing  how  to  extract  the  colour  from  tbe
plant  without  mixing  it  with  sand,  the  cake  glitters  all  over,  the  light  being  reflected  from
every  particle.  But,  apart  from  any  reference  to  this,  there  is  so  acknowledged  a  superiority
in  the  Syrian  plant,  that  the  cultivator  in  Egypt  almost  invariably  sows  his  grounds  with  seeds
imported  from  Syria,  as  it  is  found  by  experience  that  the  seed  obtained  from  the  plants  in
Egypt  is  of  very  inferior  quality .b     In  other  words,  the  indigo  plant  degenerates  in  Egypt.

It  appears  from  various  evidence,  not  necessary  to  adduce,  that  the  indigo  itself  was  known
both  in  Syria  and  Egypt,  as  a  product  imported  from  the  East,  long  before  the  culture  of  the
plant  itself  was  introduced.  The  greatest  quantity  is  produced  at  Nebk,  and  a  small  quantity
in  the  plains  of  Horns  and  Hamah.  The  whole  produce  is  calculated  at  seventy  to  eighty
cantars  by  the  year.c  The  epoch  of  its  introduction  it  would  not  be  easy  to  deter-
mine. In  the  time  of  Pliny,  the  Romans,  although  they  had  long  been  the  masters  of  Syria,
only  knew  indigo  as  an  importation  from  the  far  east,  and  professed  to  know  nothing  of  the
plant/1  But  it  would  be  unsafe  to  rely  exclusively  upon  the  ignorance  of  the  Romans,  who
were  a  singularly  unobservant  people.  The  positive  testimony  of  the  Mishna  is  of  greater
importance  ;  and  that  has  a  number  of  decisions  relating  to  this  plant,  the  most  important
and  conclusive  of  which  is  one  which  forbids  the  destruction  of  an  indigo  plantation  before  it
has  completed  its  third  year.e  To  this  may  be  added  the  later  testimony  of  Abulfeda,1'  who
states  that  in  his  time  the  culture  of  indigo  was  much  extended  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Jericho.  Considering  all  the  circumstances  which  have  been  stated,  it  is  more  than  probable
that  Egypt  received  the  plant  from  Syria,  although  the  respective  dates  of  its  introduction  into
those  countries  cannot  now  be  ascertained.

Madder^  grows  abundantly  and  almost  without  cultivation  in  different  parts  of  Syria  and
Palestine  ;  nor  does  any  reason  appear  beyond  the  generally  backward  state  of  all  agriculture
in  the  country,  why  this  valuable  root  should  not  be  very  abundantly  produced.  It  is
cultivated  in  the  Aleppo  district,  and  somewhat  more  extensively  in  that  of  Damascus.  The
dye  from  the  madder-root  was  certainly  in  very  common  use  among  the  Egyptians,  and
doubtless  also  among  the  Hebrews.  The  reddish-coloured  dye  of  the  mummy-cloths  appears
to  have  been  produced  from  madder,  and  affords  curious  and  interesting  monuments  of  its  use.
It  is,  from  this  instance,  obvious,  however,  that  their  manipulations  were  very  imperfect.

OCTOBER.

Weather. — Until  the  fall  of  the  second  rains,  in  this  month,  the  weather  is  serene,  cool,
and  rather  more  pleasant  than  at  any  other  time  of  the  year.  These  second  rains  are  in  some
measure  regulated  by  those  of  September,  the  usual  interval  between  them  being  from  twenty
to  thirty  days.  Like  those  also,  the  quantity  varies  considerably  in  different  years ;  but  the
second  rains  are  generally  more  copious  than  the  first,  and  descend  in  heavy  interrupted
showers  three  or  four  days  successively .

The  winds  are  commonly  variable,  and  seldom  blow  fresh.

The  greatest  height  of  temperature  marked  by  the  thermometer  is  eighty-four  degrees,  the
least  fifty-one  degrees ;  the  greatest  difference  in  any  one  day  is  ten  degrees.  The  morning
station  of  the  thermometer,  till  the  fall  of  the  second  rains  (being  higher  than  in  the  end  of

a  Volney,  i.  395.  b  Giiard,  xvii.  109.  c  Dr.  Bowring's  ■  Report,'  17-

tl  *  Nat.  Hist.'  xxxv.  27.  e  Mishna,  tit.  Kilaim.  c.  ii.  sec.  5.  f  Tab.  Syriae,  p. 96.

B  Rulia  Tinctorum.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— OCTOBER.

CCCXXlll

September),  is  usually  about  seventy-two  degrees  :  the  common  difference  in  the  afternoon  is
five  or  sis  degrees ;  after  the  rains  the  mercury  gradually  sinks  in  the  morning  to  sixty
degrees ;  the  difference  in  the  afternoon  is  then  seldom  more  than  three  or  four  degrees,  and
still  less  when  it  rains.

The  above  is  Dr.  Russell's  report  on  the  weather  at  Aleppo  in  October,  and  its  general
applicability  to  Palestine  is  evinced  by  the  incidental  notices  by  the  principal  travellers  of  this
month,  some  of  whose  more  interesting  statements  we  proceed  to  note.

The  night-dews  are  very  heavy  in  October;  and  the  higher  regions  are  not  unfrequently
enveloped  in  mists  in  the  morning.3-  It  would  seem  to  be  not  a  rare  thing  for  the  plains  of
the  Jordan,  and  those  east  of  that  river  and  of  Anti-Libanus,  to  be  unvisited  by  rain  up  to  the
middle  of  this  month.  The  Rev.  J.  Paxton,  travelling  in  the  plains  of  Jericho  and  its  vicinities
between  the  10th  and  15th,  observes  that  not  a  shower  of  rain  had  fallen  for  six  months,  in
consequence  of  which  the  whole  country  had  a  parched  and  chapped  appearance.b  Mr.  Addi-
son, about  the  same  season  of  another  year,  makes  precisely  the  same  observation  with  refer-
ence to  the  desert  plains  around  Damascus;0  but  the  climate  of  that  city  itself  is  in  this  season
delightful.  Towards  the  end  of  the  month,  Paxton,  sleeping  at  night  in  an  open  court  in  the
town  of  Tiberias,  observes  that  the  air  was  mild,  and  there  was  no  fear  of  rain  ;d  but  we  must
remember  where  this  was.  Travellers  in  other  parts  describe  the  night-air  as  more  or  less
chill  according  to  the  height  and  situation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  heat  at  mid-day,  in  clear
weather,  is  still  very  strong.e

From  the  result  of  numerous  observations  it  would  seem  that  the  autumnal  rains  should  in
Palestine  be  referred  to  October  and  November,  rather  than  to  September  and  October,  as  in
northern  Syria  and  Natolia.  Indeed  this  is  the  amount  of  Korte's  express  testimony/
Tschudis  also  fixes  the  commencement  of  the  rainy  season  to  this  month  ;&  and  Cotovic  first
experienced  rain  on  the  21st  at  Hebron,  and  Rheinfelder  about  the  same  time  near  Csesarea.1'
The  rains  are  sometimes  accompanied  with  thunder.

Trees. — The  Pistachio-tree  is  the  only  one,  not  noticed  in  preceding  months,  which  now
requires  our  attention ;  for  it  is  now  laden

with  fruit.     It  is  not  much  cultivated  in  ^0M0s

Palestine,  although  found  there  growing
wild  in  some  very  remarkable  positions,
as  on  Mount  Tabor,  and  on  the  summit
of  Mount  Attarous  (Nebo?).1  In  more
northern  parts  of  Syria  considerable  atten-
tion is  paid  to  it,  particularly  in  the  neigh-
bourhood. It  is  with  a  primary  reference
to  it  as  growing  there,  that  it  is  described
by  Russell,  whose  account  is  by  much  the
best  which  we  possess,  and  which  is
doubtless  sufficiently  applicable  to  its
growth  and  partial  culture  in  Palestine.

The  tree  is  of  the  same  genus  with  the
terebinth.  The  fruit  (nuts)  which  it  pro-
duces in  Syria  are  very  far  superior  to
those  which  it  affords  in  any  other  quarter.
It  was  from  Syria  that  the  tree  was  intro-
duced into  Italy,  by  Lucius  Vitellius,  in  the
reign  of  Tiberius  ;k  and  Galen1  mentions  Berrhcea  (Aleppo)  as  being  famous  for  this  fruit

V-^v

[Pistachio-Tree.    Pistacia  vera.~\

a  Monconys,297;  Jowett,  ii.  113  ;  Robinson,  ii.  27;  Addison,  ii.  248.  b  Paxton,  15G.  c  A'ldison,  ii.  152.

<*  Paxton,  178.  e  Addison,  ii.  75;  Jowett,  ii.  113;  Le  Bruyn,  ii.  152;  Korte,  257  ;  Cotovic,  137,  130  ;  Shulze,  459.

i  Kovte,  150,  278,  426.  S  Tschudis,  23(5.  b  Cotovic,  242;  Rheinfelder,  50.

Burckhardt,  334.

k  Pliny,  xiii   5  ;  xv.  24.

De  Aliment.  Facult.  lib  ii.  c.  30.

2t2

cccxxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

in  liis  time.  Now,  besides  a  considerable  consumption  of  tbem  at  home,  large  quantities  are
exported  to  Europe.  The  fruit  loses  much  of  its  beauty  by  drying,  but  perhaps  improves  in
flavour.  The  tree,  when  laden  with  clusters  of  the  ripe  smooth  nuts,  of  a  beautiful  pale  bluish
colour,  makes  a  fine  appearance ;  but  at  other  times  is  far  from  being  handsome,  its  branches
being  remarkably  subdivided  and  crooked.  It  seldom  exceeds  thirty  feet  in  height,  and  often
not  more  than  twenty.  The  trunk,  which  is  proportionably  short,  is  about  three,  or  about
three  feet  and  a  half  in  circumference.  The  female  tree,  when  not  ingrafted,  bears  a  small
nut  of  little  value.  The  pistachio-nuts  are  of  various  sizes.  The  kernel  is  alike  green  in  all ;
but  the  outer  husk  is  of  different  colours,  from  almost  entirely  white  to  a  red  ;  but  these  two
colours  are  commonly  blended,  and  the  varieties  are  produced  by  engraftment.

The  pistachio  delights  in  a  dry  soil.  As  the  male  and  female  flowers  grow  on  separate
trees,  it  is  necessary  for  the  fecundation  of  the  nut,  that  a  male  should  be  planted  at  intervals
among  the  female  trees.  In  the  back  yard  of  a  house  belonging  to  an  English  gentleman  at
Aleppo,  stood  a  very  flourishing  pistachio-tree,  which  was  almost  every  year  laden  with  nuts
of  the  fairest  appearance,  but  perpetually  without  kernels.  Its  solitary  situation  was  considered
by  the  gardeners  as  the  only  cause  of  this.a

Vine. — Considering  this  as  the  month  of  vintage,  we  have  chosen  under  it  to  notice  the  subject
somewhat  at  large.  In  this  notice  we  shall  make  due  use  of  the  various  Scriptural  allusions
to  the  vine  and  to  its  produce  ;  which  are  so  numerous,  as  amply  to  evince  the  extent  and  im-
portance of  its  ancient  cultivation,  and  that  Palestine  was  formerly,  as  to  some  extent  it  still  is,
a  land  of  corn  and  the  grape.  One  preliminary  observation  is  needful,  with  respect  to  the
comparatively  infrequency  of  the  mention  of  grapes  and  raisins— the  solid  produce  of  the  vine,
as  compared  with  wine,  the  liquid  preparation — in  our  version  of  the  Scriptures.  The  fact  is
that  of  the  two  words  both  rendered  invariably  by  wine  in  our  version,  it  is  more  than  probable
that  one  (tfpTl,  tirosh)  never  does  denote  the  liquid  produce  of  the  wine,  and  that  the  other,
which  is  of  more  common  occurrence,  must  be  frequently  understood  of  the  grape  rather  than
of  wine.b

By  a  comparison  of  the  numerous  notices  in  the  Scriptures,  as  well  as  in  the  various
travellers,  ancient  and  modern,  it  appears  that  any  part  of  Palestine  was  favourable  to
the  culture  of  the  vine,  unless  the  low  and  hot  valley  of  the  Jordan  be  excepted,  for
in  that  we  find  no  notice  of  its  growth.  It  is  there  wanting  (if  wanting)  probably
for  the  same  reasons  which  occasion  its  absence  in  the  greater  part  of  Egypt.  With  this
exception,  and  with  the  limitations  that  the  vine  appears  to  be  less  abundant,  and  the
grape  less  perfect,  on  the  plain  along  the  coast,  than  on  the  hills  and  in  the  valleys  of  the
interior,  the  vine  was  anciently,  and  is  to  this  day,  produced  abundantly  from  the  northernmost

°  Russell,  i.  83.

b  With  reference  to  this  matter  we  have  received  a  communication  from  a  learned  correspondent  at  Birmingham,  which,  as  we
are  disposed  to  concur  in  its  statements,  we  cannot  do  better  than  here  introduce.  With  the  view  of  reminding  us  to  notice  this
circumstance  when  we  should  come  (as  now)  to  treat  of  the  vintage,  he  remarks  : —

|J  I     dagan,  I  I     corn,  sometimes  wheat  ;

The  three  words,     ^     t£^"l  /l    tirosh,  and      I         rendered  iu  our  Bibles  as       J     wine,  sometimes  new  or  sweet  wine  ;
"imP    yitzhar,  oil,

mean  respectively, — the  first,  all  kinds  of  corn,  as  wheat,  barley,  oats,  rye,  millet,  &c.  The  second,  the  solid  produce  of  the  vine,
as  grapes,  whether  moist  or  dried,  or  "  the  produce  of  the  vine  in  general."  The  third,  all  kinds  of  other  fruits  not  comprised
under  tirosh,  capable  of  being  preserved  and  serving  for  food  throughout  the  best  parts  of  the  year,  as  dates,  figs,  olives,  pome-
granates, citrons,  oranges  perhaps,  &c.  &c.

The  three  terms  in  fact  included  nearly  everything  in  the  shape  of  vegetable  produce  which  the  Jews  had  either  for  subsistence
or  luxury,  and  are  so  used  as  indicative  of  the  great  goodness  of  the  Lord,  either  as  promised  blessings,  or  as  such  as  having  been
already  given  are  threatened  to  be  taken  away  for  disobedience,  and  the  practice  of  our  translators  has  the  effect  of  curtailing  the
idea  of  the  beneficence  of  the  Almighty,  by  cutting  down  the  interpretation  of  them  (the  two  last  always)  to  two  specific  articles,
such  as  wine  and  oil.

"  There  are  some  instances  also,  in  which  it  seems  to  me  that  the  term  ('  yayin  should  have  been  rendered  in  the  sense  that
Cato  sometimes  uses  the  word  vinum,  viz.  grapes  rather  than  wine.  It  seems  to  me  that  grapes  must  have  formed  in  Palestine
an  important  article  of  food,  full  as  deserving  of  occasional  mention  in  the  Bible,  though  our  translation  speaks  of  '  wine  '  above
two  hundred  times,  and  of '  grapes'  less  than  thirty  times."

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— OCTOBER.  cccxxv

heights  of  Lebanon  to  the  southernmost  cultivable  limits  of  Judea.  The  latter  province,  how-
ever, would  appear  to  have  been  that  which  claimed  consideration  for  the  superior  quality  of
the  fruit.  There  is  an  early  allusion  to  this,  in  Jacob's  blessing  to  Judah  ;a  and  the  most
celebrated  vine  localities  to  which  the  sacred  books  refer,  Eshcol  and  Sorek,  were  within  its
limits.  As  the  Moslem  inhabitants  of  the  country  are  forbidden  to  drink  wine  or  to  make  it  for
sale  for  those  who  do  not  labour  under  the  same  restriction ;  and  as  all  agriculture  is  checked
and  discouraged  by  a  very  deficient  population,  we  may  easily  conceive  that  the  aspect  of  the
country,  as  to  this  branch  of  culture,  is  very  different  to  what  it  was  in  ancient  times  when
the  land  was  thronged  with  industrious  inhabitants,  devoted  to  agriculture,  and  specially
encouraged  to  the  culture  of  the  vine  and  to  the  use  of  its  products.  This  is  still  more
apparent  when  we  discover  that,  under  all  discouragements,  the  vine  still  maintains  its  relative
rank  among  the  principal  products  of  the  country  :  for  greatly  as  its  culture  has  declined,  its
decline  has  not  been  in  much  disproportion  to  that  of  other  productions  of  the  country ;  for
although  the  Moslems  drink  not  wine,  they  have  great  enjoyment  in  the  fruit;  while  the
Christian  inhabitants  (especially  in  Lebanon)  cultivated  it  not  only  for  this,  but  for  wine,  which
they  make  for  their  own  use  and  for  exportation.

The  ancient  abundance  of  the  vines  in  Palestine  and  Syria,  and  the  excellent  quality  of  the
wines  which  they  afforded,  is  celebrated  from  various  quarters.15  And  as  wine  was  inter-
dicted only  to  the  Nazarites  during  the  continuance  of  their  vow,  and  to  the  priesthood  during
their  actual  service  at  the  temple,  it  is  not  surprising  if  the  fine  qualities  of  the  wines,  and  the
facility  with  which  they  might  be  obtained,  offered  some  temptation  to  the  abuse  of  the  benefit.
This  is  intimated  by  the  earnestness  and  frequency  with  which  the  prophets  dehort  the  people
from  excess  in  the  use  of  wine.c

It  appears  that  the  Hebrews  had  different  methods  of  cultivating  the  vine,  and  doubtless
the  difference  of  the  localities  determine  their  adoption.  It  appears  that  the  hill  sides  were
principally  devoted  to  this  culture,  and  that  care  was  taken,  as  now,  to  bank  up  with  stones
successive  ascending  terraces  to  arrest  and  confine  the  soil.d  It  was  to  the  construction  of  such
embankments  that  the  stones  were  applied,  and  not  always,  as  our  translators  have  understood,
to  "hedges"  in  the  usual  sense  of  that  term.  The  construction  and  repair  of  these  embank-
ments was  a  matter  of  so  much  importance  that,  by  a  rare  exception,  the  traditions  which
in  general  rather  increased  than  lessened  the  rigour  of  the  written  law,  allowed  labour  to  be
expended  on  them  during  the  Sabbatic  year  ;e  and  of  so  much  importance  was  their  pre-
servation that  their  destruction  supplies  to  the  prophet f  a  strong  but  appropriate  figure  of
national  calamity  and  desolation.  It  was  in  these  situations  particularly  that  the  vines  were
kept  growing  low ;  and  as  these  were  the  more  common  circumstances  of  its  position,  this  was
the  most  prevalent  mode  of  growth. s  The  wines  obtained  from  vines  thus  cultivated  are  found
to  be  superior  to  those  from  high  growing  vines ;  and  this  probably  supplies  the  reason  that
such  were  not  admitted  for  oblations  ;  and  even  among  the  wines  from  low  vines,  it  was  directed
that  a  preference  should  be  given  to  those  of  particular  localities  which  were  the  most  dis-
tinguished for  their  excellent  fruit.1'  This  regulation  shows  that  the  Hebrews  cultivated  tall
vines  also ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by  other  testimonies.  They  were  trained  up  the  trees,  or  on
erect  palisades  of  wood,  or  upon  trellises  of  reeds.1  Sometimes  they  were  sustained  upon  long-
poles,  connected  by  bands  of  osier  upon  which  the  branches  extended  across  the  intervals.15-

The  different  physical  constitution  of  the  two  countries  rendered  the  practice  which  was  least
usual  in  Palestine  the  most  common  in  Egypt.  In  the  latter  country  the  most  usual  method
was  to  train  the  vines  in  bowers,  or  in  avenues  formed  by  rafters  and  columns.  There  the
vines  never  appear  to  have  been  trained  to  trees ;  but  sometimes,  although  rarely,  they  were

a  Gen.  xlix.  11.

b  See  Ezek.  xxvii.  18;  Hos.  xiv.  7;  Herod,  iii.  6;  Athen.lib.  i.  ;  Strabo,  lib.  xvi;  Pliny,  lib.  xv.  cap.  9.

c  Prov.  xxxi.  4,  5  ;  Isa.  v.  11,  22  ;  xxviii.  7  ;  Hos.  iii.  1,  &c.  d  Isa.v.  1  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  5;  Amos,  ix.  13.

c  Mishna,  tit.  Sheevith,  vii.  6.  f  Micah,  i.  6.  6  Pliny,  xvii.  35.  sec.  15.

h  Mishna,  tit.  Menachoth,  viii.  6.

i  Misbna,  tit.  Kilaim,  iv.  5  et  9;  v.  3  ;  vi.  1,  et  seq.;  Bava-mezia,  ix.  1  ;  Bava-bathra,  iii.  4,  sec.  9,  etc.

k  Mishna,  tit.  Kilaim,  vii.  1,2;   Bikuirim,  i.  1.

cccxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

allowed  to  grow  as  standing  bushes. a  In  the  same  country  where  the  vineyard  was  enclosed
within  its  own  wall  of  circuit,  it  frequently  had  a  reservoir  of  water  attached  to  it,  as  well  as
the  building  which  contained  the  wine-press.b

It  will  be  seen  how  closely  these  various  facts  coincide  with  those  passages  of  Scripture  in
which  vineyards  are  with  the  most  particularity  described.  To  point  that  coincidence  we  here
adduce  them.  The  fullest  information  is  conveyed  in  that  very  beautiful  passage  of  Isaiah
in  which  the  nation  of  Israel  as  a  church,  is  compared  to  a  vineyard,  Jehovah  being  the  Lord
thereof : —

"  My  beloved  had  a  vineyard
On  a  high  and  fruitful  hill  :

And  he  fenced  it  round,  and  he  cleared  it  from  the  stones,
And  he  planted  it  with  the  vine  of  Sorek;
And  he  built  a  tower  in  the  midst  of  it,
And  he  hewed  out  also  a  lake  therein  ;
And  he  expected  that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes  :

But  it  brought  forth  poisonous  berries.

*****

But  come  now,  and  I  will  make  known  unto  you

What  I  purpose  to  do  to  my  vineyard :

To  remove  its  hedge,  and  it  shall  be  devoured, —

To  destroy  its  fence,0  and  it  shall  be  trodden  down  :

And  I  will  make  it  a  desolation  ;

It  shall  not  be  pruned,  neither  shall  it  be  digged;

But  the  brier  and  the  thorn  shall  spring  up  in  it.

And  I  will  command  the  clouds

That  they  shed  no  rain  upon  it.  " J

Bishop  Lowth  thinks  that  in  this  case  "  the  tower"  in  the  vineyard,  which  is  also  mentioned
by  our  Saviour  in  his  parable  of  the  vineyard/  (the  general  idea  of  which  coincides
with  this)  means,  "  The  farm,  as  we  may  call  it,  of  the  vineyard,  containing  all  the
offices  and  implements,  and  the  whole  apparatus  necessary  for  the  culture  of  the  vineyard  and
the  making  of  the  wine."  But  we  prefer  the  more  usual  interpretation  which  regards  the
tower  as  being  designed  for  the  keeper  of  the  vineyard  to  watch  and  protect  the  fruits.  This
most  consists  with  existing  usages.  Mr.  Paxton  notices  the  number  and  picturesque  effect  of
the  "  watch-houses,  or  little  towers,"  which  appear  in  the  vineyards  on  the  hills  near
Bethlehem.  "  Some  of  these  are  round  and  some  square,  made  of  stone,  from  ten  to  fifteen
or  twenty  feet  high.  These  serve  as  places  from  which  a  watch  is  kept  on  the  vineyards
during  the  season  of  the  grape.  It  is  common  to  watch  in  this  way  their  gardens  and  fruit-
trees,  which  otherwise  might  be  liable  to  pillage. "f  In  Egypt,  and  doubtless  in  Palestine,  great
care  was  taken  to  protect  the  ripe  clusters  from  the  birds ;  and  boys  were  constantly  em-
ployed about  the  season  of  vintage  to  frighten  them  with  the  sling,  and  by  the  sound  of  the
voice.

Vines  were  propagated  by  layers,?  and  also  by  cuttings ;  the  stocks  were  improved  by
grafting."  Pruning  is  mentioned  in  the  preceding  extract  from  Isaiah.  This  important
operation  was  tolerated  in  the  Sabbatic  year,  but  not  so  the  dressing  of  the  vine.1

The  frequent  expression  in  the  Scripture  which  describes  a  state  of  safety  and  repose  by  the
sitting  of  any  man  under  the  shade  of  his  own  fig-tree  and  his  own  vine,  shows  that  the
Hebrews  had  the  same  use  of  vine-arbours  as  existed  among  the  ancient  Egyptians,  and
which  we  still  find  in  Syria.  Besides  what  has  been  already  stated  as  to  the  practice  of  the
Egyptians,  an  interesting  illustration  may  be  derived  from  the  Mosaic  pavement  at  Prseneste,
where  we  see  a  trellissed  vine-bower,  under  whose  pleasant  shade  several  persons  sit  on  benches
drinking  wine  and  solacing  themselves  with  music.  At  a  village  (Beitdjin)  near  Csesarea,
Shulze  and  his  party  took  supper  under  a  large  vine,  the  stem  of  which  was  nearly  a  foot
and  a  half  in  diameter,  the  height  about  thirty  feet,  and  covered  with  its  branches  and  shoots
(for  the  shoots  must  be  supported)  a  hut  of  more  than  fifty  feet  long  and  broad.    The  bunches

a  Wilkinson,  ii  14?.  b  ibid.  148.

c  Properly  "  embankment,"  for  we  have  "  hedge"  in  the  preceding  line.  d  Isa.  v.  2,  3,  5,6. — Lowth's  translation.

c'  Matt,  xxi;  Mark  xii.  f  Paxton,  145.  £  Mishna,  tit.  Kilaim,  vii.  sec.  1.2;  Bikurrim  i.  sec.  1.

h  John  xv.  1—4.  i  Lev.  xxv.  5;  Mishna,  tit.  Sheevith,  ii.sec.  2.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— OCTOBER.

cccxxvn

^v1^-

IsHf

IP  ;

fUl

[Vine  Arbour.]

of  the  grapes  were  so  large  as  to  weigh  ten  or  twelve  pounds,  and  might  he  compared  to  our
plums.  Such  a  bunch  is  cut  off  and  laid  on  the  board,  and  each  helps  himself  to  as  many
as  he  pleases.  Dr.  Russell  acquaints  us a  that  "  the  large  grapes  produced  in  the  houses,
upon  the  vines  that  cover  the  stairs  and  arbours,  are  of  beautiful  appearance,  but  have  little
flavour."

In  Psalm  lxxx  we  find  the  same  favourite  figure  as  that  employed  by  Isaiah,  and  in  its
amplification  some  beautiful  descriptions,  with  a  little  further  information,  occur : —

"  A  vine  thou  didst  bring  out  of  Egypt  ;

Thou  castedst  out  the  nations  and  plantedst  it.

Thou  preparedst  the  ground  for  it;

It  spread  its  roots  and  filled  the  land.

The  mountains  were  covered  with  its  shade,

And  with  its  tendrils  the  lofty  cedars  ;

Its  boughs  it  extended  to  the  sea.

And  its  branches  to  the  great  river.

Why  hast  thou  broken  down  its  fences

So  that  every  passenger  croppeth  it?

The  boar  from  the  forest  wasteth  it,

And  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  devour  it."

As  the  allusions  here  are  to  modes  of  culture  which  have  already  been  noticed,  no  further
elucidation  is  required.  The  use  of  fences  is  implied  in  the  evils  attending  their  destruction  :
for  as  the  destruction  of  the  embankments  of  the  terraced  hills  involves  the  destruction  of  the
vineyard  by  the  action  of  the  elements,  so  the  ruin  of  the  fences  expose  the  vines  to  be  spoiled
by  man  and  beast.  Both  these  consequences  are  exhibited  in  connection,  in  the  passage
previously  adduced  from  Isaiah.

The  fences  appear  to  have  been,  as  they  now  are,  of  thorns  and  of  stones.

Among  the  depredators  on  vines,  mention  is  made  of  "  the  foxes — the  little  foxes,"  which
spoiled  the  vines  when  they  had  tender  grapes,  and  which  the  vine-dressers  were  anxious  to
catch.b

It  seems  that  the  system  under  which  the  vineyards  were  once  cultivated  was  in  ancient

a  Vol.  i.  p.  80.  t>  Sol.  Pong,  ii.  15.

CCCXXV111

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

times  much  the  same  as  that  which  now  prevails  in  the  same  country  ;  that  is  to  say,  when  a
man  cultivated  his  own  vineyard,  he  hired  day-labourers  (at  the  times  when  extra  labour  was
required),  whose  wages,  in  the  time  of  Christ,  was  seven-pence  halfpenny  by  the  day  ;a  but  ex-
tensive proprietors  generally  let  out  their  vineyards  when  a  certain  proportion  of  the  produce
was  given  to  the  owner  and  another  to  the  cultivator  of  the  soil.b  The  general  principles
under  which  this  system  at  present  works  has  been  exhibited  in  the  note  at  p.  cccviii.  respecting
the  culture  of  silk.  But  the  conditions  somewhat  vary  as  applied  to  other  products.  The
proprietor  is  supposed  to  have  the  ground  in  perfect  working  condition  when  the  bargain  is
made.  Then,  in  the  first  instance,  he  advances  a  sum  of  money  for  whatever  outlay  may  be
necessary  as  to  implements,  animals,  etc.  From  the  product  he  first  deducts  ten,  fifteen,  or
twenty  per  cent,  according  as  (after  ancient  regulations)  the  ground  is  more  or  less  taxed.
The  remainder  is  divided  into  two  equal  parts,  one  of  which  the  proprietor  takes,  and  the
other  is  for  the  cultivators,  the  value  of  whose  moiety  is  however  reduced  by  the  obligation  to
repay  the  money  advanced  to  them  at  the  outset.c  Seed,  when  required  by  the  nature  of  the
cultivation,  is  always  supplied  by  the  proprietor.  But  some  inconvenience  in  thus  dividing
the  produce  of  the  vine,  appears  to  have  suggested,  as  sometimes  the  better  course,  that  the
husbandman  should  keep  all,  and  pay  to  the  proprietor  either  a  fixed  rent  or  the  value  of  his
share  in  money.  In  Isaiah  vii.  23,  the  rent  for  a  thousand  vines  is  said  to  have  been  "  a  thou-
sand silverlings,"  or  shekels,  about  half-a-crown  each.  From  this,  as  compared  with  Solo-
mon's Song,  viii.  11,  12,  we  may  collect  that  a  shekel  the  vine  was  an  ordinary  rent,  and  also
that  vines  were  rented  by  the  thousand,  and  sometimes  perhaps  to  different  tenants,  in  the
same  vineyard  or  estate  where  it  contained  several  thousand  vines.  It  would  also  appear  that
the  cultivator  received  at  the  rate  of  twenty  per  cent.,  which  is  certainly  less  than  the  present
proportion,  in  about  the  same  degree  as  the  difference  in  the  day's  wage  of  the  ancient  and
modern  husbandman,  and,  doubtless  from  the  same  cause,  a  redundant  population  in  former
times  and  a  great  want  of  inhabitants  now.d

a  Matt.  xx.  2,  et  seg.  Wages  are  now  and  always  have  been  paid  by  the  day  in  Syria  and  other  eastern  countries.  This  was  indeed
made  obligatory  upon  the  Hebrews  by  the  Law  of  Moses.  At  present  the  nominal  rate  of  wages  for  field-labour  is  higher,  indeed
about  double  that  amount  (five  to  six  and  a  half  piastres,  or  twelve  to  fourteen  pence),  but  no  doubt  the  price  of  food  is  now  higher
in  the  same  proportion.

b  Matt,  xxi.34.  c  Dr.  Bowring's  '  Report,'  132.

d  Dr.  Bo  wring,  as  the  result  of  different  estimates,  does  not  suppose  the  present  population  of  Syria  to  exceed  1,500,000— that  is  ;
not  nearly  equal  to  the  population  of  Scotland.  In  former  times  Palestine  alone  must  have  contained  twice  or  thrice  the  population
which  all  Syria  now  affords.  This  fact,  by  itself,  would  suffice  to  account  for  all  the  differences  between  the  ancient  and  modern  con-
ditions of  Syria  in  general,  and  of  Palestine  in  particular.  M.  de  Salle,  the  author  of '  Peregrinations  en  Orient.'  in  a  paper  lately  read
before  the  Aeidemie  des  Sciences  (inserted  in  '  The  Times' newspaper  for  Oct.  12th,  1840),  gives  an  estimate  of  the  population
agreeing  with  that  of  Dr.  Bowling.  He  obtains  his  conclusion  by  comparing  the  results  obtained  by  different  travellers,  as  Dr.
Bowring  does  by  comparison  of  the  various  answers  he  received.  Both  acknowledge  the  uncertainty  of  their  conclusions,  but
fairly  state  the  data  on  which  they  are  founded,  and  the  coincidence  in  the  result  is  remarkable.  M.  de  Salle  says,  "  At  the  time
of  the  Arabian  conquest  the  total  population  of  Syria  exceeded  6,000,000  ;  and,  judging  by  the  importance  of  their  towns,  the
influence  of  their  emirs,  and  the  resistance  which  they  opposed  to  the  Christians,  the  Syrians  must  still  have  been  a  numerous
nation  during  the  Crusades.  So  considerable  however  is  the  decrease  in  the  present  day  that  the  Mussulman  part  of  the  popu-
lation is  inferior  to  the  Christians."  This  we  much  doubt.  But  (unless  he  counts  the  Druses  as  Christians)  M.  de  Salle  probably
means  no  more  than  that  the  non-Moslem  exceed  the  Moslem  inhabitants;  and  this  all  accounts  confirm.  However,  we  insert
De  Salle's  estimate  of  the  different  classes  of  the  population,  and  set  opposite  to  it  the  estimate  supplied  to  Dr.  Bowring  by
Col.  Campbell,  who  however  estimates  the  population  higher,  even  above  1,800,000,  which,  he  says,  the  best  informed  people  in
the  country  divide  as  in  his  table  : —

De  Salle.

Turks 10,000

Mussulmans,  Arabs,  Syrians          ....  400,000
Eastern  tribes  of  the  Anti- Lebanon  and  left  bank  of

the.lordan 50,000

Metualis 100,000

Anzarians 60,000

Kourds  and  Turkomans 15,000

Druses 300  000

Jews 20,000

Maionites 400,000

Catholics,  Greeks,  Syrians,  Armenians  .         .         .  50,000

Schismatic  Catholics 80,000

Floating  population  of  merchants  and  pilgrims         .  40,000

Total         .         .  1,525,000

Colonel  Campbell.

Mussulmans
Ansaries  (Bedouins)
Mutualis  and  Yezidis     .
Druses           ....
Catholics  and  Maronites
Members  of  the  Greek  Church
Jews

Total

997,000

22,000

17,000

48,000

260,000

345,000

175,000

]  ,864,000

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— OCTOBER.

CCCXX1X

The  passage  alluded  to  describes  king  Solomon  as  letting  his  vineyard  at  Baal-hamun  to
tenants,  each  of  whom  paid  a  thousand  shekels  (125/.)  for  the  fruit.  Then  follows  a  response
by  the  bride,  who  appears  to  speak  of  another  vineyard51  which  belonged  to  her,  from  which  she
obtained  a  rent  of  a  thousand  shekels  [or  perhaps  a  thousand  from  each  of  several  tenants],
while  the  husbandmen  were  allowed  two  hundred  for  their  care  and  labour.

With  reference  to  the  culture  of  the  vine  in  Palestine,  the  information  thus  brought  together
is  more  precise  and  important  than  can  be  obtained  from  modern  sources  respecting  the  present
condition  of  this  culture.  And  the  little  to  be  found  only  shows  that  the  old  practices  are  fol-
lowed, with  small  variation.  We  shall,  therefore,  content  ourselves  with  the  following  passage
from  Elliot.  Alluding  to  the  different  methods  for  cultivating  the  vine  in  different  countries,
he  says  : — "  In  our  own  country  it  is  suffered  to  expand  itself  to  any  size,  and  nailed  in
regular  lines  to  the  wall  or  to  the  frame  of  a  greenhouse;  thus  a  single  tree  will  produce  several
hundred  weight  of  grapes.  On  the  banks  of  the  Rhine  the  growth  is  limited  to  three  feet  in
height,  and  each  tree  is  supported  in  an  upright  position.  In  France  it  is  formed  into  arches
and  ornamental  alcoves.  In  Sardinia  it  assumes  the  aspect  of  a  parasitical  plant,  luxuriating
among  the  branches  of  the  largest  forest  trees,  and  clasping  with  its  tendrils  the  extreme  twigs.
In  Asia  Minor  its  wild  festoons  hang  their  green  and  purple  pendants  from  rural  bowers  of
trellis-work.  On  the  heights  of  Lebanon  it  lies  in  a  state  of  humiliation,  covering  the  ground
like  the  cucumber,  and  subsequently  we  saw  it  in  the  valley  of  Eschol,  in  a  position  different
from  all  that  have  been  named.  These  three  vines,  planted  close  together,  and  cut  off  at  the
height  of  five  feet  in  the  apex  of  a  cone  formed  by  their  stems,  where,  being  tied,  each  is  sup-
ported by  two  others,  and  thus  enabled  to  sustain  the  prodigious  clusters  for  which  that  region
has  always  been  famous  ;  clusters  so  large,  that,  to  carry  one,  the  spies  of  Moses  were  compelled
to  place  it  on  a  stick  borne  by  two  men.b  Each  mode  is  doubtless  the  best  that  could  be
adopted  in  the  quarter  where  it  prevails,  considering  the  nature  of  the  soil  and  climate,  the
value  of  the  land,  and  the  object  of  the  cultivator."0

The  latter  observations  are  confirmed  by  Belon ;  who  adds,  that  the  vines  are  planted  in
an  orderly  manner,  and  at  such  distances  from  each  other  that  the  plough  may  pass  between
them.  The  trunks  of  the  vines  are  very  thick,  and  the  branches  extensive.  But  in  the
vineyards  near  Jerusalem,  he  observes,  the  vines  are  planted  without  order,  and  grow  without
support.*1

We  submit,  that  although  there  are  parts  of  Palestine  in  which  grape-clusters,  of  a  size
which  we  should  consider  extraordinary,  are  produced,  the  manner  in  which  the  spies  conveyed
their  samples,  proves  less  its  size  than  the  care  which
was  taken  to  carry  it  fresh  and  unbruised  to  the
expectant  Israelites.  However,  we  now  come  to  con-
sider the  size  and  quality  of  the  grapes  in  Palestine.

And,  in  the  first  place,  we  may  observe  that  the
goodness  of  a  grape  is  very  far  from  being  in  the
ratio  of  its  size.  On  the  contrary,  Russell  assures
us  that  a  small  white  grape  is  reckoned  superior  to
any  other  in  Syria,  while,  as  we  have  before  seen,  a
larger  species  is  poor  and  of  little  flavour.  No  doubt
there  are  vines  in  Palestine  which  produce  extraordi-
narily large  grapes,  and  others  which  afford  remark-
ably large  clusters.  As  to  the  former,  we  introduce
a  cut,  copied  from  Laborde,  showing  the  natural  size
of  some  of  the  grapes  produced  in  that  country.  Nau
affirms  that  he  saw  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hebron,  [Palestine  Grapes.]

a  Some  think  it  the  same  vineyard  to  which  the  preceding  verse  refers,  and  which  had  been  transferred  to  her  king  and  husband  ;
but  for  various  minute  reasons,  needless  to  recapitulate  here,  we  are  disposed  to  think  it  a  different  vineyard.
*>  Num.  xiii.33.  «  Elliot,  ii.  264.  d  Belon,  340,  341.

VOL.  I.  2  U

cccxxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

grapes  as  large  as  one's  thumb. a  Dandini,  although  an  Italian,  was  astonished  at  the  large
size  which  grapes  attained  in  Lebanon,  being,  he  says,  as  large  as  prunes.b  Mariti  affirms
that  in  differeut  parts  of  Syria  he  had  seen  grapes  of  such  extraordinary  size  that  a  bunch  of
them  would  be  a  sufficient  burden  for  one  man.c  Neitzschutz  states  he  could  say  with  truth,
that  in  the  mountains  of  Israel  he  saw  and  had  eaten  from  bunches  of  grapes  that  were  half
an  ell  long,  and  the  grapes  two  joints  of  a  finger  in  length.  Paxton  also,  speaking  of  the  vines
around  his  summer  residence  at  Bhadoom  in  Lebanon,  remarks  that  the  grapes  were  of  various
kinds,  most  of  them  white  and  large. d

Then,  as  to  the  clusters,  it  is  remarked  by  Nau  that  the  size  which  they  attain  in  some
favourable  situations  in  Syria  astonishes  those  who  have  seen  the  fruit  only  in  France  and
Italy.  He  affirms  that  he  had  seen  clusters  in  Syria  weighing  ten  or  twelve  pounds  ;  and
had  heard  that,  in  the  Archipelago,  clusters  of  thirty  or  forty  pounds  were  not  uncommon. e
Morison  makes  a  similar  statement/  and  Doubdan,  travelling  near  Bethlehem,  found  himself
in  a  most  delightful  valley,  full  of  aromatic  herbs  and  rose-bushes,  and  planted  with  vines.
This  was  the  traditionary  vale  of  Eshcol,  from  which  the  clusters  were  obtained  by  the  spies.
The  traveller  indeed,  not  being  there  in  the  proper  season,  saw  no  such  clusters,  but  he  was
assured  by  the  monks  that,  even  in  the  present  neglected  state  of  the  country,  they  still  found
some  weighing  ten  or  twelve  pounds. e  The  valley  of  Eshcol  we  would  rather  refer  to  the
neighbourhood  of  Hebron,  according  to  the  ancient  and  modern  traditions  of  the  Jews,  com-
bined with  good  Scriptural  probabilities.  It  was  here  that  Nau  saw  his  large  grapes  ;  and
here  the  ground  is  still  so  well  set  with  vineyards,  that  for  miles  on  either  hand  nothing  is
seen  on  either  side  of  the  road  to  Hebron  but  a  succession  of  vineyards,  whose  vines  were
laden  with  the  most  delicious  grapes.h

Even  in  our  own  country,  a  bunch  of  Syrian  grapes  was  produced  at  Welbeck,  and  sent  as
a  present  from  the  Duke  of  Portland  to  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  which  weighed  nineteen
pounds.  It  was  conveyed  to  its  destination — more  than  twenty  miles  distant — on  a  staff  by
four  labourers,  two  of  whom  bore  it  in  rotation,  thus  affording  a  striking  illustration  of  the
proceeding  of  "  the  spies."  The  greatest  diameter  of  this  cluster  was  nineteen  inches  and  a
half;  its  circumference  four  feet  and  a  half;  and  its  length  nearly  twenty-three  inches.1

The  Vintage  next  requires  our  attention.  This  was  a  season  of  festivity  and  joy,  of
which  it  may  be  difficult  to  give  an  idea  to  the  inhabitant  of  a  country  not  of  the  vine,
but  by  a  reference  to  the  old  festivities  of  the  corn  harvest.  The  facts  which  may
be  collected  from  the  Scripture  concerning  the  vintage  are  very  few.  It  amounts  to  this  : —
that  the  wine-press  was  a  building,  generally  erected  in  the  middle  of  the  vineyard  ;  its
form  we  know  not,  but  there  were  cisterns  hewn  in  the  rock,  or  formed  with  masonry  and
lined  with  cement,  to  receive  the  expressed  juice.k  In  this  press  the  grapes  were  trodden
with  the  feet.1  The  wine  was  afterwards  preserved  in  jarsm — a  usage  still  common  on  all  the
shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  unless  where  the  art  of  cooperage  has  been  received  from  the
north.  But  as  the  fragility  of  these  vessels  precluded  their  removal,  skin-bottles  were
employed  for  that  purpose,  and  hence  a  frequent  expression  alludes  to  the  bursting  of  such
bottles  from  the  working  of  new  wine.n

As  far  as  these  particulars  go,  they  agree  very  precisely,  as  might  be  expected,  with  the
information  supplied  by  the  ancient  paintings  of  Egypt.  The  same  agreement  may  therefore
be  expected  to  prevail  in  the  further  information  derivable  from  this  source,  and  which  has
been  embodied  by  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  in  a  statement  which  we  shall  now  follow.

"  When  the  grapes  were  gathered,  the  bunches  were  carefully  put  into  deep  wicker  baskets,
which  men  carried  either  upon  their  heads  or  shoulders,  or  slung  upon  a  yoke,  to  the  wine-

a  Nau,  458.  b  Dandini,  79.  c  Mariti,  iii.  134.  d  Paxton,  214.

e  Nau,  464.  f  Voyage,  493.  S  Doubdan,  23,  24.  h  Paxton,  136.

'  '  Times  Telescope,'  for  1819,  p.  273."  k  lsa.  v.  2.  1  Isa.  xvi.  10  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  33.

w  Jerem.  xlviii.  12.  n  Josh.  ix.  4.  13;  Job,  xxxii.  19  ;  Matt.  ix.  1/  ;  and  tile  parallel  passages.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— OCTOBER.

CCCXXXl

press ;  but  when  intended  for  eating,  they  were  put,  like  other  fruits,  in  flat  open  baskets,  and
generally  covered  with  leaves  of  the  palm,  vine,  and  other  trees.a  These  flat  baskets  were  of
wicker-work,  and  similar,  no  doubt,  to  those  of  the  present  day,  used  at  Cairo  for  the  same
purpose,  and  which  are  made  of  osiers  or  common  twigs.b

The  wine-press  was  of  different  kinds.  The  most  simple  consisted  merely  of  a  bag,  in
which  the  grapes  were  put,  and  squeezed  by  means  of  two  poles  turning  in  contrary  directions:
a  vase  being  placed  below  to  receive  the  falling  juice.c  The  mode  of  representing  it  in
Egyptian  sculpture  is  not  very  intelligible,  or  in  accordance  with  our  notions  of  perspective,

[Egyptian  Wine-press.     Roselliui.]

though  we  may  easily  understand  that  the  man  at  the  top  of  the  picture  is  in  the  act  of
pushing  the  poles  apart,  in  order  to  stretch  the  bag,d  as  a  finale  to  the  process,  the  poles

[Egyptian  Wine-press.    Rosellini.]

being  at  that  time  in  a  horizontal  position,  and  opposite  to  each  other.     Another  press,  nearly
on  the  same  principle,  consisted  of  a  bag  supported  in  a  frame,  having  two  upright  sides,

a  See  the  cut  at  p .  ccxiii .

•>  It  appears  from  the  sculptures  that  monkeys  were  sometimes  trained  by  the  Egyptians  to  assist  in  gathering  the  fruit.

c  Prior  to  the  publication  of  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson's  book,  the  author  of  the  present  work  declared  his  opinion,  [See  '  Pictorial
Bible,'  note  on  Neh.  xiii.]  that  this  squeezing  in  the  bags  was  intended  to  exhibit  a  second  process,  to  which  the  grapes  were  sub-
jected for  the  more  complete  extraction  of  the  juice  that  remained  after  the  treading.  The  analogy  of  the  subsisting  usages  in  vine
countries  suggested  this  interpretation,  to  which  we  are  still  disposed  to  adhere.  Indeed,  its  probability  is,  presently,  admitted  by
Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  himself.

d  It  would  be  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  pushed  witli  his  hands  and  one  leg,  while  the  other  rested  on  the  ground  to
support  him.

2  u  2

cccxxxu

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

connected  by  beams  at  their  summit.  In  this  the  bag  was  retained  in  a  horizontal  position,
one  end  fixed,  the  other  passing  through  a  hole  in  the  opposite  side,  and  was  twisted  by
means  of  a  rod  turned  with  the  hand  :  the  juice,  as  in  the  former,  being  received  into  a  vase
beneath,  and  within  the  frame  stood  the  superintendent,  who  regulated  the  quantity  of  pressure,
and  gave  the  signal  to  stop.

Sometimes  a  liquid  was  heated  on  the  fire,  and,  having  been  well  stirred,  was  poured  into
the  sack  containing  the  grapes  during  the  process  of  pressure ;  but  whether  this  was  solely
with  a  view  of  obtaining  a  greater  quantity  of  juice,  by  moistening  the  husks,  or  was  applied
for  any  other,  it  is  difficult  to  determine :  the  fact,  however,  of  its  being  stirred  while  on  the
fire  suffices  to  show  it  was  not  simple  water  ;  and  the  trituration  of  the  fruit  while  it  was
poured  upon  it,  may  suggest  its  use  in  extracting  the  colouring  matter  for  red  wine.

The  name  torcular,  by  which  the  Romans  designated  their  press,  would  not  be  inapplicable
to  such  a  mode  of  twisting  or  squeezing  out  the  juice ;  but  in  this  machine  the  grapes  were
crushed  beneath  a  wooden  beam  (prelum),  so  that  the  process  and  principle  were  somewhat
different ;  and  we  learn  from  Vitruvius  that  the  Roman  torcular  was  of  two  kinds,  one  turned
by  a  screw,  and  the  other  by  levers.

The  two  Egyptian  hand-presses  were  used  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  but  principally  in

Lower  Egypt,  the  grapes  in  the  The-
ba'id  being  generally  pressed  by  the
feet.  The  foot-press  was  also  used  in
the  lower  country,  and  we  even  find
the  two  methods  of  pressing  the  grapes
represented  in  the  same  sculptures  :  it
is  not,  therefore,  impossible  that,  after
being  subjected  to  the  foot,  they  may
have  undergone  a  second  pressure  in
the  twisted  bag.  This  does  not  appear
to  have  been  the  case  in  the  Theba'id,
where  the  foot-press  is  always  repre-
sented alone ;  and  the  juice  was  allowed
to  run  off  by  a  pipe  directly  to  an  open
tank .

Some  of  the  large  presses  were
highly  ornamented,  and  consisted  of
at  least  two  distinct  parts.  The  lower
portion  or  vat  (lacus),  and  the  trough,
where  the  men  with  naked  feet  trod
the  fruit,  supporting  themselves  by
ropes  suspended  from  the  roof,  though
from  their  great  height  some  might  be
supposed  to  have  an  intermediate  re-
servoir, which  received  the  juice  in  its  passage  to  the  pipe,  answering  to  the  strainer  or  colum
of  the  Romans.

After  the  fermentation  was  over,  the  juice
was  taken  out  in  small  vases,  with  a  long  spout,
and  poured  into  earthenware  jars,  which  corre-
sponded to  the  cadi  or  amphora  of  the  Romans,
but  whether  anything  was  added  to  it  after  or
previous  to  the  fermentation  it  is  difficult  to
determine,  though,  from  our  finding  men  re-
presented in  the  sculptures  pouring  some  liquid
from  a  small  cup  into  the  lower  reservoir,  we
may  conclude  that  this  was  sometimes  the  case.  [TheWine  poured  into  Jars.]

[Egyptian  Wine-press.]

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— OCTOBER.

CCCXXXUl

[Vessels  closed  and  scaled. j

When  the  must  was  considered  in  a  proper  state,
the  amphorae  were  closed  with  a  lid  resembling
an  inverted  saucer,  covered  with  liquid  clay,  pitch,
gypsum,  mortar,  or  other  composition,  which  was
stamped  with  a  seal.  They  were  then  removed
from  the  wine-house,  and  placed  upright  in  the
cellar.

The  mode  of  arranging  amphorae  in  an  Egyp-
tian cellar,  was  similar  to  that  adopted  by  the
Greeks  and  Romans.  They  stood  upright  in  suc-
cessive rows,  the  innermost  set  resting  against  the
wall.  Sometimes  each  jar  was  secured  by  means
of  a  stone  ring,  fitting  round  its  pointed  base,  or
was  raised  on  a  wooden  stand;  and  from  the
position  they  were  occasionally  shown  to  have  occupied,  as  in  the  annexed  cut,  we  may

conclude  that  many  were  placed  in  an  upper  room,
as  the  amphorae  in  a  Roman  apotheca.

With  respect  to  the  removal  of  wine  in  skins
although  it  was  kept  in  jars,  which  has  already
been  pointed  out  as  a  Hebrew  custom,  the  paint-
ings afford  no  illustration  of  it — nor,  indeed,  of  the
act  of  removing  wine  in  any  form ;  but  that  this  was
an  Egyptian  custom  is  shown  by  the  well  known
story  of  Rhampsinitus  in  Herodotus,      (ii.  121.)

There  are  few  undertakings  more  interesting  than
to  trace  the  similarity  or  difference  of  the  customs
of  ancient  nations  (or,  indeed,  of  different  modern
nations,  or,  again,  of  ancient  and  modern  nations)
with  reference  to  the  same  class  of  objects  or  pur-
suits. But  this  pleasure  we  may  not  now  indulge
further  than  to  intimate  that  the  ancient  Hebrew
customs  with  reference  to  the  vintage  and  its  results,  might  also  be  illustrated  from  the
sculptures  of  Greece  and  Rome.  Among  the  paintings  of  Herculaneum,  and  in  the  mosaics
of  an  old  temple  (supposed  of  Bacchus)  at  Rome,  there  are  examples  of  wine-presses  very
similar  to  that  of  Egypt.  But  on  this  subject  we  can  only  afford  to  convey  the  pictorial
intimations  which  the  subjoined  engravings  exhibit.

The  first  illustrates  the  statement  just  made  by  showing  the  manner  in  which,  among  the

[Wine  Jars  in  Stove-roam.]

[Wine  Cart.    Pompeii.]

CCCXXX1V

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VII.

[Manner  of  carrying  Amphorae.]

Romans,  the  wine  was  carried  [to  the  house  of  the  consumer  or
dealer]  in  skin  carts,  from  which  it  is  decanted  at  the  door  into
amphorae,  in  which  it  is  carried  to,  and  remains  deposited  in,  the
store-room  or  cellar.  The  manner  of  carrying  the  amphorae  is
shown  in  the  annexed  cut.  These  customs  are  still  those  of
Syria  and  Western  Asia  generally,  with  the  exception  that  the
skins  (of  the  ox,  goat,  or  kid,  according  to  quantity)  are  not
drawn  on  carts,  but  are  carried  by  men  or  animals.  Small  quan-
tities for  current  use  are  often  kept  in  small  kid  skins,  as  was
also  a  Roman  custom.

Of  the  present  process  of  making  wine  in  Syria,  there  is  a
meagre  notice  in  D'Arvieux.a  We  need  not  repeat  over  again,  as
modern  usages,  those  which  have  already  been  described
as  ancient.  The  principal  difference  which  we  notice  is
that  the  grapes  are  conveyed  to  the  press,  or  to  the
market,  not  in  crates  or  baskets,  but  in  skins,  which
are  stuffed  at  the  mouth  with  leaves  to  protect  the  fruit
while  transported  by  camels  and  other  animals.  For
the  rest,  we  prefer  to  quote  the  following  from  Paxton,
who  had  the  opportunity  of  witnessing  the  vintage  in
Lebanon : —

"  There  are  several  houses  b  that  seem  to  be  common
property,  where  they  express  the  juice  of  the  grape.
They  have  along  one  side  of  the  house  a  row  of  large
vats,  into  which  the  grapes  are  thrown ;  and  beside
these  some  stone-troughs,  into  which  the  juice  flows.
Men  get  into  the  vats,  and  tread  the  grapes  with  their
feet.  It  is  hard  work,  and  their  clothes  are  often  stained
with  the  grape.  The  figures  found  in  the  Scriptures
taken  from  this  are  true  to  the  life.  '  I  have  trod  the  wine-press  alone;'  '  I  will  stain  all  my
raiment.'  '  The  wine-press  was  trodden  without  the  city.'  The  juice  that  was  extracted  when
I  visited  the  press  was  not  made  into  wine,  but  into  what  is  called  dibs.c  It  resembles  molasses.
They  take  the  juice  from  the  troughs,  put  it  into  large  boilers,  reduce  it  to  one-half,  possibly
one-third  of  the  original  quantity.  It  is  then  removed  to  large  earthen  jars,  and  subjected  to  a
process  not  unlike  churning,  which  is  repeated  for  a  few  days  until  it  thickens.  When  properly
churned  or  beaten,  but  little  separation  of  the  particles  takes  place.  It  forms  a  pleasant  article
for  table  use,  and  is  decidedly  preferable  to  molasses. "d

The  difference  as  to  the  making  of  wine  is  that  the  juice  extracted  by  the  press  is  deposited
in  earthen  vases,  where  it  is  stirred  about  with  a  stick  every  day,  for  a  month  or  more.  When
the  working  is  over,  it  is  restored  to  the  vat,  upon  a  thick  bed  of  the  murk  from  which  it  was
taken.  It  here  settles  and  clarifies,  and  is  finally  drawn  off  into  the  pitchers  in  which  it  is  to
be  preserved.6

With  respect  to  the  quality  of  the  wines  of  Syria,  there  are  differences  in  the  statements
which,  we  suppose,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  difference  in  the  localities  in  which  they  are  pro-
duced. Those  of  Aleppo  are  poor.  Dr.  Russell  informs  us  that  although  the  white  wines
there  are  palatable,  they  are  so  thin  and  poor  that  it  is  with  difficulty  they  can  be  preserved
from  one  year  to  another.  The  red  wine  is  deep-coloured,  strong,  hardy,  without  flavour,
and  more  apt  to  produce  drowsy  stupidity  than  to  raise  the  spirits.  One-thircl  part  of  the
white- wine  mixed  with  two  parts  of  the  red,  make  a  liquor  tolerably  palatable,  and  much  lighter
than  the  red-wine  itself.f

(Skin  Bottle.]

a  '  Memoires,'  vi.  462,  463.  b  At  Bliadoom.

c  This  is  supposed  to  be  sometimes  mentioned  in  Scripture  uuder  a  word  which  our  translation  renders  by  "  honey," — an
explanation  which  obviates  some  difficulties  which  occasionally  attends  the  use  of  the  better  word.
d  Paxton,  215.  e  D'Arvieux,  vi.  463.  l  Russell,  i.  81.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— OCTOBER.  cccxxxv

Dr.  Bowring's  report  respecting  the  wines  of  Syria  is  very  brief : — "Wine  might  become  an
important  article  both  for  consumption  and  export  in  Syria  [as  it  anciently  was].  Some  of  the
convents  of  Mount  Lebanon  produce  it  of  excellent  quality,  known  by  the  name  of  the  '  Vino
d'Oro.'  It  is  both  white  and  red,  and  when  properly  attended  to  is  very  superior.  But  the
habit  of  boiling  wine  is  almost  universal,  and  destroys  its  character.  The  use  of  skins,  as  in
ancient  times,  is  very  unfriendly  to  the  preservation  of  the  finer  characteristics. "a

D'Arvieux,  writing  of  the  same  wine  (of  Lebanon)  remarks  that  it  is  excellent,  and  has
much  resemblance  to  the  wine  of  Cyprus,  but  that  it  is  necessary  to  avoid  drinking  it  unmixed
with  water,  as  it  contains  a  large  quantity  of  spirits  which  offend  the  nerves,  and  produce  con-
siderable inconvenience,  especially  when  it  is  new.b  Rauwolff  drank  some  wine  in  Lebanon
which  he  thought  superior  to  the  wines  of  Cyprus  and  Candia.c  Le  Bruyn  affirms  that  wines
more  delicate  or  better  than  those  he  drank  at  the  monastery  of  Canobin  (in  Lebanon)  were
not  to  be  found  in  the  world.  They  are  of  a  fine  red  colour,  and  so  unctuous  that  they  adhere
to  the  glass.  He  confesses  that  the  common  and  more  abundant  wines  of  the  mountain  are
not  equal  to  those  to  which  his  statement  refers.'1  La  Roque,  speaking  of  the  same  wines  (at
Canobin)  says  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  any  more  excellent  than  were  there  set  before
him,  and  which  led  him  to  perceive  that  even  now  the  prophetic  praise  of  the  wine  of  Lebanon  e
was  still  applicable.  "  Thebe  wines  are  of  two  sorts  ;  the  most  common  is  the  red,  and  the  most
exquisite  is  of  the  colour  of  our  muscadine  wine;  they  call  it  golden  wine  [Vi?io  d'Oro]  on
account  of  its  colour.  "f

Concerning  the  wines  of  the  southern  country,  little  information  is  to  be  obtained  from  tra-
vellers. Morison,  indeed,  speaks  of  the  wine  obtained  from  the  vineyards  of  the  valleys  a  few
miles  north-west  of  Jerusalem  (which  he  takes  to  be  the  country  of  Sorek,  from  which  the
most  esteemed  vine  of  ancient  Palestine  took  its  name),  of  which  he  drank  in  the  monastery
of  St.  John.  This  is,  he  says,  one  of  the  best  in  the  Holy  Land.  It  is  a  white  wine,  so  deli-
cate, so  delicious,  that  in  tasting  it  his  conscience  rebuked  him,  and  accused  him  of  imitating
so  badly  the  ardent  Baptist,  who,  although  born  in  this  district,  never  tasted  wine  or  strong
drink.s

We  know  that  the  wines  formerly  held  in  the  highest  estimation  were  those  obtained  from
the  grapes  of  Lebanon,  of  Hermon,  of  Carmel,  of  the  mountains  of  Israel,  and  of  Caphtor,
which  last  some  take  to  be  Crete,  others  Philistia.h  The  valley  of  Sharon  also  was  cele-
brated for  producing  the  best  wine  in  Judea,  and  so  strong  that  it  was  generally  taken  with
two  parts  of  water.1  The  wine  of  Helbon  (Aleppo)  was  so  celebrated  that  the  kings  of  Persia
are  said  to  have  drank  no  other,1'  which,  if  true,  is  only  likely  to  have  been  so  while  Syria
was  under  their  dominion.  The  Mishna  forbids  smoked  wines  from  being  used  in  offerings;1
it  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  Romans  had  introduced  this  usage  of  fumigating  wines.™  The
Jews  did  not  allow  themselves  the  use  of  the  wine  or  even  vinegar  of  foreigners  ;  not,  certainly,
from  any  views  of  policy  as  to  the  encouragement  of  the  home  products,  but  in  fear  lest  the
wine  or  vinegar  should  have  been  previously  consecrated  to  the  idols  of  a  foreign  worship."

Mention  is  made  of  a  kind  of  vinegar  made  from  grapes  which  were  unripe  at  the  time  of
the  vintage,  and  which  were  more  common  on  the  tall  than  on  the  low-growing  vines.  This
usage  was  proscribed  in  many  of  the  Rabbinical  dicta ;  but  less  with  reference  to  any  supposed
insalubrity  in  the  product,  than  because  it  was  not  possible  that  the  tithe  could  be  drawn  from
this  unripe  gathering  or  the  products  of  it.0  In  the  Scriptures  two  kinds  of  vinegar  are  men-
tioned ;  one  was  really  a  weak  kind  of  wine,  used  as  a  common  drink  by  the  labouring
classes,!'  as  now  in  Syria  and  southern  Europe  ;  and  this  was  probably  the  kind  of  wine  of

a  Bowling,  17.  b  D'Arvieux,  vi.  463.  c  Rauwolff,  205.    '  Topog.  of  Thebes,'  215.

k  "  Blessed  are  ye  that  sow  beside  all  waters,  and  bring  thither  the  feet  of  the  ox  and  the  ass."

1  Russell,  i.  74;  Buckingham,  i.  224.  ">  •  Topog.  of  Thebes,'  214.  n  Psalm  cxxvi.  5,  6.

Chap.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— OCTOBER.

cccxliii

been  stated.  Some  of  the  vegetables  which  have  been  named  and  described  under  preceding
months  are  again  named  in  this,  as  being  still,  from  the  produce  of  the  second  crop,  good  for
food.  These  are  mostly  roots  arid  cucurbitacese.  The  most  ample  lists  of  these  and  other
classes  of  cultivated  vegetables  noticed  in  this  month,  may  be  found  in  Addison's  '  Palmyra,
and  Damascus.'

We  now  again  mention

[Cotton  Plant.]

Plants. — Of  the  cotton-plant  some  notice  has  alrendybeen  taken
it  for   the  sake  of  introducing  the  fol-
lowing   further    information   which   the
Report  of   Dr.  Bowring   has   since   af-
forded.

He  states  that  the  cotton  of  Syria  can
seldom  compete  with  that  of  other  coun-
tries, in  price,  as  well  as  from  its  infe-
riority of  quality.

The  cotton  of  northern  Syria  being
produced  from  the  annual  plant,  is
subject  to  great  vicissitudes.  The  qua-
lity, although  generally  fine,  is  of  short
staple,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  crops
are  of  a  quality  much  inferior  to  the
Souboujas  grown  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Smyrna.  But  there  is  a  small  quan-
tity grown  near  Aleppo  equal  to  the  best
Souboujas.  It  is  seldom  sent  to  the
English  markets,  where  it  is  suited  to
only  the  most  ordinary  purposes,  such  as
the  wicks  of  candles;  but  is  for  the  most  part  shipped  to  the  Italian,  French,  and  German
ports.

In  1836  there  was  an  almost  total  failure  of  the  crops  of  northern  Syria.  An  importation
consequently  took  place  from  Nablous  (Shechem)  in  Palestine,  the  quality  of  which  is  very
superior  to  that  of  Aleppo,  although  that  is  the  best  in  northern  Syria.  From  the  Nablous
district,  it  is  calculated  that  from  4500  to  5000  cantars  are  the  annual  produce,  whose  value  at
the  place  of  growth  is  from  800  to  900  piastres  the  cantar.  It  is  calculated  that  about  three-
fourths  of  this  fine  crop  is  exported  (chiefly  to  Marseilles),  and  one-fourth  consumed  in  the
country.     Acre  and  Jaffa  also  produce  some  quantities  of  cotton.

It  is  calculated  that  the  whole  produce  of  cotton,  in  northern  and  southern  Syria,  is  between
30,000  and  35,000  cantars,  of  an  average  value  of  about  35,000/.  Of  this  the  districts  of
Acre  and  Nablous  furnish  about  2200  tons.  But  the  production  might  be  indefinitely
increased  by  additional  capital  and  labour.

In  the  three  last  years  there  was  an  export  of  cotton  into  Mesopotamia,  in  consequence  of
the  destruction  of  the  crops  by  the  locusts  in  that  quarter.

The  use  to  which  the  consumption  of  cotton  is  applied  in  Syria  is  principally  in  the  spinning
of  cotton  yarn  of  an  ordinary  quality,  with  which  coarse  clothes  are  woven  for  under  garments,
drawers,  shirts,  sheets,  mattress  coverings,  stockings,  and  a  variety  of  other  articles  of  ordinary
quality.  But  for  the  better  kinds  the  consumption  has  decreased  by  the  introduction  of  our
(English)  cotton  yarn,  and  principally  by  the  importation  of  the  grey-domestics,  or  long
cloths,  which  is  one  of  the  great  articles  of  British  manufactured  goods  imported. a

To  the  same  source  we  are  indebted  for  the  following  notice  of  another  important  article
of  Syrian  produce — Tobacco.     The  consumption  of  this  in  Syria  is  universal,  both  by  males

a  See  '  Report  on  Syria,'  14,  15,  58,  65,  from  which  the  statement  now  given  is  collected  and  condensed.

cccxliv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

and  females.  It  is  impracticable  to  obtain  anything  like  an  approximate  or  correct  return  of
the  quantity  produced  in  Syria,  but  it  is,  after  the  produce  of  wheat,  one  of  the  greatest  in
importance.  It  is  grown  almost  in  every  part,  but  principally  in  the  Aleppo,  Latakia,  Tripoli,
and  Mount  Lebanon  districts,  where  the  finest  qualities  are  obtained.  It  is  almost  all  con-
sumed for  smoking,  though  that  produced  in  the  gardens  of  Aleppo  is  made  into  snuff.
Considerable  exportation  of  tobacco  takes  place  from  Latakia,  and  some  from  Tripoli  and  other
parts  to  Egypt;  and  these,  with  its  universal  consumption  throughout  Syria,  must  give,  without
a  specific  return,  an  idea  of  the  importance  of  this  article  of  produce.  No  tobacco  is  received
in  Syria  from  Europe  or  from  any  other  country  ;  neither  is  any  portion  of  that  produced  in
Syria  exported  to  any  country  of  Europe.11  In  Palestine  itself,  tobacco  plantations  occur  in
almost  every  quarter.b

NOVEMBER.

Weather. — This  must  be  accounted  as  one  of  the  rainy  months,  although  with  frequent
intervals  of  very  fine  weather.  The  rain  usually  falls  in  heavy  showers,  and  when  one  or  more
such  showers  fall  in  one  day,  the  day  is,  in  Dr.  Russell's  register  for  Aleppo,  called  "rainy;"
and  it  would  appear  that  the  number  of  such  rainy  days  rarely  exceed  seven.  It  is  very  uncom-
mon to  see  snow  even  in  northern  Syria  ;  but  after  the  middle  of  the  month,  when  the  weather  is
serene,  the  mornings  are  slightly  frosty.  The  winds,  which  are  variable  and  seldom  strong,  are
generally  from  the  northerly  or  easterly  quarters.  The  greatest  height  of  temperature  indicated
by  the  thermometer  at  Aleppo  is  65°,  the  least  44°,  and  the  greatest  variation  of  the  thermo-
meter in  one  day  is  8°.  The  mercury  throughout  the  month  falls  gradually  from  60°  to  50°  ;
the  difference  in  the  same  day  varies  from  5°  to  2°;  and  there  is  no  difference  in  rainy
weather.

In  Palestine  and  the  country  east  and  north-east,  it  sometimes  does  not  commence  to  rain
until  the  early  part  of  this  month.  The  first  rain  was  experienced,  in  different  years,  by
Gumpenberg  at  Jerusalem,  on  the  1st;  by  Addison  on  the  3rd,  at  Palmyra;  by  Des  Harpes
at  Tyre,  on  the  4th,  after  nine  months  in  which  not  a  drop  of  rain  had  fallen ;  by  Korte  on
the  11th,  between  Urfah  and  Aleppo  ;  Cotovic  travelled  in  rainy  weather  on  the  14th  and  16th
(near  Shechem)  ;  but  on  the  17th  he  found  that  no  rain  had  fallen  on  the  mountains  of  Gilboa
and  Hermon.c  The  description  given  by  Addison  of  the  commencement  of  the  rains  is  so
graphic  that  we  cannot  refrain  from  introducing  it  below.d     It  was  however  in  the  desert.

The  heat  of  the  day  has  now  much  diminished ;  but  on  bright  days  the  power  of  the  sun  is
still  very  considerable.  But  the  nights  are  cold,  and  uncomfortable  for  those  who  travel  in
the  night ;  even  the  days  are  somewhat  cold  when  the  sky  is  overcast."5

Russell  remarks  that  the  transition  from  the  autumn  to  winter  is  slower  than  from  spring  to

a  '  Report  on  Syria,'  17-

b  Consult  Nau,  17;  Mariti,  ii.  190 ;  136;  Burckhardt,  18,  21,  80,178,224,284,391,410,489;  Buckingham,  'Arab  Tribes,'
533;  Clarke,  212,  423.

c  Gumpenburg,  i.  443;  Addison,  ii.  324;  Des  Harpes,  441 ;  Korte,  187,278,  380;  Cotovic,  335—337.

d  "  It  was  a  strange  and  wild  day, — the  wind  was  every  moment  increasing  and  whirling  the  sand  in  eddying  columns  through  the

air,  while  dark  threatening  clouds  were  collected  all  around  the  mountain  range  on  the  outskirts  of  the  desert Suddenly

a  hurricane  of  wind  swept  along,  and  filled  the  whole  atmosphere  with  a  dense  fog  of  sand Every  object  ten  yards

distant  was  shrouded  from  view;  then  came  a  sudden  lull,  and  the  sand  (which  the  wind  had  raised)  was  seen  falling  down
in  showers.  The  long  line  of  columns  (at  Palmyra)  was  scarcely  again  visible,  when  a  sudden  flash  of  forked  lightning  darted
down  among  them,  instantaneously  followed  by  a  burst  of  thunder  that  made  the  tottering  walls  tremble,  and  large  warm  drops
of  rain  spattered  on  the  stones.  Again  the  wind  swept  by,  now  driving  clouds  of  sand,  now  scattering  them,  and  opening  an
uninterrupted  view  across  the  desert,  which  was  covered  with  a  dark  sombre  leaden  tint  reflecting  back  the  gloomy  colour  of  the
dark  thunder-clouds  that  hung  above  it.  The  forked  lightning  darted  in  every  direction,  and  loud  peals  of  thunder  revibrated
from  different  quarters  at  the  same  time.  The  rain  poured  in  torrents  and  beat  down  the  sand,  and  the  whole  scene  was  truly
sublime."

Again,  the  night  following  : — "  We  had  an  awful  night  of  it.  The  rain  came  down  in  one  universal  deluge  of  water,  the  whole
place  was  flooded.  .  .  .  The  lightning  was  such  as  I  never  before  saw,  flash  followed  after  flash  so  instantaneou^y  that  it  was  one
continued  blaze  of  light,  in  which  the  columns,  the  rutus,  the  towers,  backed  by  black  clouds,  presented  a  sublime  appearance  ;
and  the  view  over  the  desert,  as  flash  after  flash  gleamed  over  the  wide  solitary  waste,  was  the  strongest  and  wildest  imaginable.
The  wind  had  died  away,  the  black  clouds  hung  motionless,  and  the  peals  of  thunder  followed  one  another  in  such  quick  succes-
sion as  to  keep  up  one  continued  roll." — '  Damascus  and  Palmyra,'  ii.  324,  325.

c  Cotovic,  334,  367 ;  Gumpenburg,  444.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— NOVEMBER.  cccxlv

summer.  The  cold  does  not  increase  suddenly,  the  rain  falls  in  showers  less  heavily,  but  of
longer  continuance ;  and  the  sky,  during  the  fair  intervals,  is  oftener  cloudy.

Trees. — From  the  preceding  statement  respecting  the  weather,  the  reader  will  be  prepared
to  expect  that  the  leaves  fall  from  the  trees  much  later  than  with  us.  In  fact  the  leaves  con-
tinue on  the  trees,  for  the  most  part,  through  November,  and  fall  in  the  early  part  of  December.*
Of  particular  trees  there  is  little  to  notice  that  has  not  been  said  under  preceding  months.
The  fig-tree  is,  however,  laden  with  fruit  ;b  and  as  it  is  in  connection  with  this  tree  that  the
only  fact  we  know  in  the  treatment  of  trees  by  the  ancient  Hebrews  occurs,  while  we  have
reached  the  season  in  which  such  operations  are  performed,  some  notice  of  the  subject  may
not  be  misplaced.

In  the  parable  of  the  fig-tree  which  had  for  three  years  been  barren,  and  which  the  pro-
prietor therefore  doomed  to  be  cut  down,  the  gardener  is
represented  as  praying  for  delay  until  he  should  dig  about  it
and  dung  it.c  To  this  Lightfoot  appends  from  the  Talmud
the  following  short  hints  :  "  They  lay  dung  to  moisten  and
enrich  the  soil ;  dig  about  the  roots  of  the  trees ;  pluck  up
the  suckers  ;  take  off  the  leaves ;  sprinkle  ashes ;  and  smoke
under  the  trees  to  kill  vermin."  The  process  of  digging  is
too  obvious  to  need  further  explanation.  We  may  observe,
however,  that  the  Hebrews  doubtless  sometimes  treated  their
trees  as  did  the  Egyptians,  in  whose  sculptures  we  frequently
see  trees  surrounded  at  the  base  of  the  stem  with  a  circular

ridge  of  earth,  which,  being  lower  in  the  centre  than  at  the  circumference,  retained  the  water,
and  directed  it  more  immediately  towards  the  roots.  The  annexed  engraving  exhibits  this
treatment  according  to  the  Egyptian  mode  and  our  mode  of  representing  it.

The  use  of  manures  is  a  subject  of  somewhat  more  importance.  The  Hebrews  could  not  have
brought  this  usage  from  Egypt,  where  manures  are  never  used  and  would  be  useless  :  but  they
doubtless  adopted  and  preserved  the  customs  which  existed  among  the  previous  inhabitants  of
the  country.  That  manures  were  used  by  the  Israelites,  it  perhaps  requires  no  reference  to
Scriptural  texts  to  prove ;  but  as  it  has  not  been  our  habit  to  state  anything  without  proof,  we
may  refer  not  only  to  the  passage  which  has  already  been  adduced,  but  to  that  passage  in  which
Moab  is  threatened  to  be  trodden  down,  "even  as  straw  is  trodden  down  for  the  dunghill, "d
which  shows  also  that  rotted  straw  was,  as  with  us,  used  with  manure  in  dunghills.  Of
dunghills  we  read  often  ;e  as  well  as  of  the  draught-house  ;f  and  there  was  a  particular  gate  at
Jerusalem  called  the  Dung  Gate,  at  which  the  dung  was  carried  out.s

The  Israelites  had  comparatively  few  horses,  and  few  swine,  two  sources  of  excellent  strong
manure.  The  chief  of  their  animals  were  oxen,  camels,  asses,  sheep  and  goats.  The  dung  of
the  cow  and  camel  was  used  to  a  considerable  extent  for  fuel,  and  the  dung  of  the  sacrifices
was  directed  to  be  burnedh — all  circumstances  tending  to  diminish  the  supply.  If  the  "  dove's
dung,"  mentioned  in  2  Kings  vi.  25,  were  really  such,  it  was  probably  preserved  as  a  manure
for  melons,  for  which  it  is  invaluable.  It  is  also  an  excellent  manure  for  flax.  The  deposit
from  the  annual  overflowings  of  the  Jordan  must  have  formed  a  good  manure,  or  rather  top-
dressing  to  the  cultivated  fields  upon  its  banks.  That  salt  was  used  for  manure  is  evident ;
and  from  comparing  the  passages  which  afford  this  evidence,1  it  would  seem  that  the  salt  was
sometimes  sown  by  itself  in  the  land,  and  sometimes  mixed  in  the  dung-hill  to  promote  putre-
faction, and  to  contribute  its  saline  particles  to  the  mass.

From  other  sources  we  learn  that  a  dunghill  in  a  public  place  exposed  the  owner  to  the
payment  of  whatever  damage  it  might  occasion;  and  any  one  might  remove  it  as  a  nuisance. k

a  Russell,  i.  69.  b  Burckhardt,  100.  c  Luke  xiii.  7.  u  rSa.  xxv.  10.

*  1  Sam.  ii.  8  ;  Ezra  vi.  11 ;  Sam.  iv.  5  ;  Dan.  ii.  5 ;  iii.  99.  f  2  Kings  x.  27.

8  Neh.  ii.  13;  iii.  13,  14;  xii.  31.  h  Exod.  xxix.  14.

'  Matt.v.  13;  Luke  xiv.  34,  35.  k  Mishna,  Bava  Kama,  iii.  sec.  3.

vol.  i.  2  y

cccxlvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

Dung  might  not  during  the  seventh  year  be  transported  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  fields
intended  to  be  manured.51  It  was  indeed  permitted  to  fold  cattle,  for  the  sake  of  their  manure,
upon  the  lands  that  required  it,  in  the  Sabbatic  year,  under  certain  restrictions  ;b  and  it  is  from
this  only  that  we  learn  that  the  practice  existed  among  the  Jews,  who  would  seem  more  generally
to  have  folded  their  sheep  within  walled  enclosures,0  the  occasional  clearance  of  which  must
have  afforded  a  principal  supply  of  manure.  A  fresh  (or  previously  uncultivated)  land  might
be  sown  immediately  after  the  termination  of  the  Sabbatic  year ;  but  this  authorization  did  not
extend  to  lands  on  which  cattle  had  been  thus  folded. d  It  would  seem  that  gardens  (except  a
few  old  rose-gardens)  were  not  allowed  within  Jerusalem,  on  account  of  the  manure  they  would
have  required;  and  "because  of  the  stench"  thus  produced,  as  well  as  because  of  that  arising
from  the  weeds  thrown  out  from  gardens.e  From  another  passage  of  the  Talmud f  we  learn
the  curious  fact  that  the  surplus  blood  of  the  sacrifices  offered  in  the  Temple,  that  is  to  say,
the  blood  which  was  poured  out  at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  after  the  altar  had  been  duly  sprinkled,
was  conducted  thence  by  a  subterraneous  channel  to  the  outside  of  the  city,  and  was  sold  to
the  gardeners  as  manure  for  their  gardens.  In  other  words,  the  gardeners  were  allowed  to  use
it  on  paying  the  price  of  a  trespass  offering,  without  which  it  could  not  be  appropriated  to  any
common  use  after  having  been  dedicated  at  the  altar.

We  suppose  that  the  existing  customs  of  the  country  in  this  matter  are  much  the  same  as
those  we  have  described,  with  the  exception  of  those  which  resulted  from  the  peculiar  institutions
of  the  Hebrews.  But  we  possess  no  positive  information  with  respect  to  the  present  practices  :
and  it  is  singular  that  in  this  and  many  other  matters,  we  are  far  better  acquainted  with  the
practices  of  the  ancient  than  of  the  modern  inhabitants  of  Palestine.

The  Vine. — The  vintage  is  continued  in  some  quarters  into  this  month;  and  the  grape
may  still  be  occasionally  seen  in  the  vine.s

Grain. — The  ploughing  and  sowing  commenced  in  October  is  continued  in  this  month,
which,  after  all,  is  apparently  the  month  peculiarly  characterised  by  these  operations.11

Esculent  Vegetables. — From  the  beginning  of  November  to  the  end  of  March,  the
markets  are  supplied  with  cabbage,  rapecole,  spinach,  beet,  endive,  raddish,  red-beet,  carrot,
and  turnip.1

Plants. — The  gathering  of  the  cotton  continues  up  to  the  beginning  of  this  month.k

DECEMBER.

Weather. — This  is  also  a  rainy  month ;  but  the  weather  in  the  intervals,  being  often  cloudy
or  foggy,  is  far  less  pleasant  than  in  November.  The  greatest  number  of  rainy  days1  mentioned
in  Dr.  Russell's  register  is  16  ;  the  smallest  6;  but  the  ordinary  number  is  8  or  9.  There  is
always  (at  Aleppo)  more  or  less  of  frosty  weather  in  December,  and  sometimes  a  little  snow  falls
towards  the  middle  of  the  month,  which  is  the  time  that  the  cold  weather  generally  commences.
The  winds,  as  in  the  preceding  month,  are  for  the  most  part  easterly  or  northerly.  The  greatest
height  of  the  thermometer  is  55°,  and  the  least  40° ;  the  greatest  difference  in  any  one  day  is
5°.  The  usual  morning  station  of  the  mercury  in  December  is  46° ;  the  difference  in  the
afternoon,  when  it  does  not  rain,  is  commonly  3°.

The  above  is  Dr.  Russell's  statement  respecting  the  weather  at  Aleppo,  which  we  are  careful
to  specify,  because  it  appears  to  us  that  the  winter  temperature  is  somewhat  colder  at  Aleppo
than  in  most  parts  of  Palestine.     This  we  gather  from  various  slight  data — such  as  that  the

a  Mishna,  Sheevith,  iii.  1.  b  Mishna,  Sheevith,  iii.  sec.  4.  c  John  x.  1 — 5.

d  Mishna,  Sheevith,  iv.  2.  e  Mishna,  Bava  Kama,  cap.  7-  ad  fin.  and  Gloss.

f  Mishna,  Jom;i,  fol  58,  2.  K  Egmont  and  Heyman,  ii.  348  ;  D'Arvieux,  vi.  462 ;  Korte,  45.

h  Korte,  187;  Egmont  and  Heyman,  ii.  348.  >  Russell,  i.  91.  k  Des  Hayes,  440.

1  What  for  the  purposes  of  the  registration  is  considered  a  rainy  day,  was  explained  last  month.

Chap.  VII.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS— DECEMBER.  cccxlvii

orange-tree  requires  protection  in  winter  at  Aleppo — which  we  know  it  does  not  on  the  coasts
of  Palestine,  or  at  Damascus,  although  there  are  parts  in  the  interior  where  it  would  probably
not  live  through  the  winter.  This,  however,  proves  no  more  than  that  there  are  farts  of
Palestine  some  degrees  less  cold  in  winter  than  Aleppo.

Dr.  Russell  says,  in  another  place,  that  the  rigour  of  the  winter  is  supposed  to  commence
about  the  20th  December.  The  natives  make  an  alteration  in  their  clothing  immediately  after
the  second  rains ;  but  few  of  them  use  fires,  and  then  only  in  the  depth  of  winter,  when  the
season  happens  to  be  unusually  severe.  Not  to  add  any  further  testimony  about  rain,  we  may
mention  that  different  travellers  in  the  first  three  weeks  of  this  month  describe  the  weather  as
occasionally  fine  and  the  air  warm  in  different  parts  of  Palestine.  Gumpenberg,  at  Jerusalem,
on  the  6th,  10th,  1 1th,  and  16th,  experienced  weather  which  he  describes  as  almost  equal  to  that
of  May  in  our  latitudes  ;a  but  from  that  up  to  the  22nd  and  27th  the  weather  was  alternately
warm  and  cold,  and  after  that  decidedly  cold.  The  cold  at  the  end  of  the  month,  in  some  of
the  more  elevated  quarters,  is  shown  by  the  fact  recorded  by  Schulze,  of  two  young  men  who
were  frozen  to  death  at  Nazareth.b

Trees,  as  remarked  already,  do  not  lose  their  leaves  until  the  beginning  of  December.

The  Vine. — Korte  affirms  that  grapes  even  yet  remain  on  the  vine  in  many  parts  of
Palestine.

Grain. — The  ploughman  and  the  sower  are  still  at  work.

Esculent  Vegetables. — Various  kinds  of  pulses  are  sown  in  this  month.  Sugar-canes
are  cut  down  this  month  in  Cyprus,0  and  probably  therefore  in  Syria.  Dr.  Bowring,  in
noticing  the  partial  culture  of  this  reed  at  Beirout,  remarks  that  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt
the  aptitude  of  the  soil  for  its  culture,  in  many  parts  of  the  country  .d

Plants — The  rains  have  called  forth  the  power  of  life  in  various  plants,  which  had  been
scorched  by  the  drought  of  summer.  This  is  peculiarly  the  case  with  the  bulbous  plants,
some  of  which  commence  to  flower  towards  the  end  of  December.  The  plants  of  this  class
mentioned  in  January  are  of  the  number.  Monconys  saw  anemones  in  flower  on  the  last  day
of  December  in  a  green  meadow  near  Tripoli  ;e  and  Rauwolff  found  violets  in  blossom  at
Aleppo.f  The  grass  and  herbs  which  had  been  burnt  up  by  the  continued  drought,  are  also
quickened  by  the  rains,  and  give  a  verdant  aspect  to  the  lately  brown  and  desolate  plains.
And  now  or  before  the  Arabs  descend  with  their  flocks  from  the  mountains,  and  hasten  to  the
"  green  pastures"  of  the  plains  and  deserts.

Fuel. —  Since  we  have  now  reached  the  season  of  cold,  we  may  very  suitably  introduce
some  notice  of  the  sorts  of  fuel  now  and  formerly  employed  in  the  country.

The  recent  discovery  of  coal  in  Lebanon  has  before  been  noticed  in  this  work.  We  have
now  the  pleasure  of  adding  the  further  and  more  recent  information  supplied  by  Dr.  Bowring's
'  Report :' —

"  I  visited  the  coal-mines  on  Mount  Lebanon,  which  the  pasha  is  working.  The  difficulty
of  access  and  consequent  cost  of  transport  must  make  the  undertaking  one  of  very  doubtful
result.  The  descent  is  long  and  precipitous  from  the  village  of  Cornail,  and  the  mines
appeared  in  a  very  unsafe  state,  for  our  candles  were  frequently  extinguished,  and  the
oppression  of  the  atmosphere  was  great.  The  galleries  enter  the  mountain  horizontally.  The
quantity  of  coal  is  considerable,  but  rather  of  a  sulphureous  quality.  The  number  of  workmen
is  114,  who  are  paid  3  piastres  each=7^oL  per  day,  and  who  work  in  two  relays,  both  day
and  night.     The  whole  of  the  operations  were  under  the  direction  of  an  Englisman  (Mr.

■  Gumpenberg,  Th.  i.  446,  447 ;  Monconys,  ii.  82,  UO.  b  Schulze,  v.  350.  c  Cotovic,  137.

d  'Report,'  17.  e  Monconys,  ii.  3.  f  Rauwolff,  118.

2y2

cccxlviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VII.

Bretell),  but  he  has  been  superseded  by  a  Turk,  who  appeared  to  have  but  little  knowledge
or  experience  to  fit  him  for  the  discharge  of  his  duties.  The  quantity  of  coal  extracted  in
1837  was  14,700  cantars  of  217  okes,  each  making  about  4000  tons."

Coal  has  certainly  not  at  any  previous  time  been  in  use  in  any  part  of  Syria.  In  the  want
of  this  substantial  article  of  fuel,  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  and  indeed  of  most  of  the
Western  Asiatic  countries,  are  driven  to  the  sparing  use  of  fires  in  winter,  and  to  the
employment  of  any  article  that  can  be  used  for  fuel,  which  is  not  too  valuable  to  be  so  appro-
priated. It  is  true  that  Palestine  is  now,  and  was  still  more  in  ancient  times,  a  wooded
country  as  compared  with  many  others — with  Egypt  for  instance.  But  still,  in  these  old-
established  countries,  wood  to  be  used  for  fuel  is  not  much  to  be  expected — the  trees  which  do
grow  being  too  valuable  for  their  timber  or  their  fruit  to  be  so  appropriated  ;  and  the  yearly
waste  of  their  twigs  and  branches  cannot  go  very  far  in  such  uses.  However,  wood,  either
in  its  crude  form,  or  as  charcoal,  is  still,  and  was  anciently,  chiefly  employed  in  the  towns,
except  by  the  poorer  classes.  But  the  truth  is,  that  fires  are  used  but  very  inadequately  in
winter, — so  inadequately  that,  speaking  from  some  experience  of  Eastern  countries,  we  would
venture  to  say  that  an  Englishman  is  likely  to  suffer  far  more  from  cold  in  the  mildest  winter
climates  of  Western  Asia  than  in  his  own  land.  Warm  in-door  clothing,  and  crowding
around  miserable  and  unwholesome  braziers  of  charcoal,  are  the  chief  remedies.  Open  fires
of  wood  or  aught  else,  or  even  chimneys,  are  rarely  found  save  in  the  kitchens,  and  among
the  poorer  classes  and  the  peasantry,  who  must  warm  themselves  with  the  same  fires  at  which
they  cook  their  victuals.  These  usages  are  ancient.  The  use  of  the.  brazier  and  of  charcoal
is  clearly  intimated  in  the  Scriptures,  as  the  reader  will  perceive  who  recollects  that  by
"  coal,"  which  often  enough  occurs  in  our  version,  is  always  to  be  understooda  either  charcoal,
or  the  glowing  embers  of  a  wood  fire.  Russell  states  that  the  quantity  of  raw  wood  burnt  at
Aleppo  is  very  small  as  compared  with  that  of  charcoal. b     Wood  is  sold  by  weight.

Brushwood  is  very  extensively  employed  where  it  can  be  obtained,  particularly  in  places
bordering  on  rivers.  Even  where  other  fuel  is  not  difficult  to  obtain  this  is  preferred  for
heating  ovens.  Thorns  and  such  matters  are  employed  for  those  culinary  purposes  which
require  haste,  particulaily  for  boiling,  which  illustrates  Solomon's  allusion  to  "  the  crackling
of  thorns  under  a  pot;"c  and  the  other  references  to  fires  of  thorns.d

In  treating  of  the  various  kinds  of  grain,  etc.,  under  the  month  of  September,  we  had  con-
stant occasion  to  mention  the  use  of  the  stalks  for  fuel.  In  fact,  in  the  prevailing  scarcity  of
fuel,  the  stalks  of  all  plants  that  can  be  made  available,  and  have  no  use  of  greater  importance,
are  carefully  and  anxiously  collected  for  fuel, — the  withered  stems  of  herbs  and  flowers,  the
tendrils  of  the  vine,  the  small  branches  of  various  woody  shrubs,  and  various  other  matters,
even  to  the  parings  of  fruit,  are  collected  for  fuel,  and  are  much  used  in  heating  baths  and
ovens.  Our  Saviour,  after  directing  the  admiring  attention  of  his  auditors  to  "  the  lilies  of  the
fields,"  manifestly  includes  them  in  the  destiny  of  "  the  grass  of  the  fields,  which  to-day  is,
and  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven."e

The  dried  dung  of  animals  is  also  much  used  for  fuel,  particularly  in  cookery.  In  many
parts  it  is  quite  the  principal  fuel  of  the  peasantry  and  the  inhabitants  of  small  towns ;  and
towards  the  approach  of  winter,  the  traveller  will  note  large  heaps  of  it,  piled  up  in  the  court-
yards, or  on  the  roofs  of  the  cottages,  bearing  evidence  of  the  diligence  with  which  the  females
had,  during  the  past  months,  laid  in  their  stock  of  winter  fuel.

It  is  the  business  of  the  children,  and  particularly  of  the  young  girls,  to  make  this  collection.

They  go  forth  into  the  roads,  haunt  the  resting-places  of  travelling  parties,  and  frequent  the
neighbourhood  of  stables,  etc.,  to  pick  up  whatever  animal  dung  may  fall  in  their  way.  What-
ever they  obtain  they  deposit  in  their  baskets  to  take  to  the  women,  who  make  it  up  into  cakes.
Our  cut  (copied  from  the  great  work  on  Egypt)  exhibits  the  process  followed  in  that  country,
which  is  the  same  precisely  that  we  have  had  occasion  to  notice  in  different  parts  of  Western

a  The  brazier  is  the  original  of  ihe  word  "  hearth,"  in  Jer.  xxxvi.  22  ;  also  in  Zech.  xii.  6.

*>  Russell,  i.  38.  c  Eceles.  vii.  6.  <*  Psalm  lviii.  9;  cxviii.  12;  Ish.  xxxiii.  12.

*  Matt.  vi.  28—30.

Chai>.  VII.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  MONTHS-DECEMBER.

cccxlix

.    ■  ■    -

[Collecting  Dung  fur  Fuel.j

Asia.  Here  are  two  females,  who  carry  upon  their  heads  their  baskets  made  of  date-leaves,
full  of  what  they  have  collected ;  a  third  makes  the  dung-cakes,  by  breaking  up  the  dried
dung,  and  preparing  it  with  a  little  water,  chopped  straw,  and  dust.  It  is  then  made  into
thin  and  round  cakes,  which  are  stuck  up  against  the  wall  of  the  cottage  until  perfectly  dry.
A  cottage,  with  its  walls  thus  garnished,  is  a  very  common  spectacle,  and  offers  to  a  European
eye  an  appearance  more  singular  than  inviting.  Nevertheless  this  is  a  very  good  article  of
fuel — a  fact  of  which  our  own  peasantry  are  not  ignorant.  The  dung-cakes,  when  well  ignited,
give  a  light  flame,  and  strong  heat,  without  much  smoke,  and  without  so  strong  a  smell  as
might  be  imagined.  It  gives  forth  a  strong  heat  long  after  the  mass  is  reduced  to  ashes.  It
is  this  quality  which  makes  dried  cow-dung  useful  to  our  own  peasantry  in  baking  their
bread. a  It  is  preferred  for  the  same  use  by  the  peasantry  of  Egypt  and  Asia,  and  the  principal
passage  of  Scripture  which  refers  to  the  employment  of  animal  dung  for  fuel  points  to  its  use
in  baking  bread. b

a  We  allude  to  the  custom  in  the  south-west  of  England,  where  the  peasantry  bake  their  loaves  upon  the  hearth,  covered  by  an
inverted  iron"  crock,"  over  and  around  which  burning  cow-dung,  &c.  is  piled  From  the  long  retention  of  the  heat  in  this  fuel,
large  loaves  are  thus  baked  exceedingly  well.

b  Ezek.  iv.  15.

APPENDIX.

We  shall  probably  find  no  place  more  suitable  than  the  present  for  the  introduction  of  some
particulars  respecting  the  present  condition  of  Syria,  which  is  of  importance  to  preserve  in  the
present  work,  but  which  have  been  received  (through  Dr.  Bowring's  '  Report,')  too  late  to  be
incorporated  in  the  previous  pages.

Population. — A  note  on  this  subject  has  been  given  at  p.  cccxxviii.  The  population  of  Syria  is
there  computed  at  a  million  and  a  half,  as  the  average  of  different  estimates.  Then,  as  the
computed  superficies  of  Syria  is  50,000  square  miles,  this  gives  thirty  inhabitants  to  the  square
mile.     Mr.  Consul  Moore,  although  he  reckons  the  population  at  two  millions,  remarks  : —

"  Syria  is  a  country  whose  population  bears  no  proportion  to  its  superficies ;  the  inhabitants
may  be  considered,  on  the  most  moderate  calculation,  as  reduced  to  a  tithe  of  what  the  soil  could
abundantly  maintain  under  a  wiser  system  of  administration.  The  actual  number  of  inhabitants
cannot  be  given  with  any  degree  of  accuracy.  A  census  is  unknown  here,  and  information
derived  from  other  sources  fallacious.  It  is  chiefly  from  personal  observation  that  any  correct
information  can  be  collected."

The  population  of  the  towns  in  Syria  exceeds  in  all  proportion  that  of  the  country,  owing  to
the  greater  security  which  the  towns  afford  to  the  inhabitants.  Mr.  Moore  supplied  Dr.  Bowring
with  the  following  estimate  of  the  population  of  some  of  the  towns  of  Syria ;  but  he  considered

this  estimate  as  merely  approximative: —

10,000

5,000

2,000

1,500

Damascus  from    .

.       100,000  to  110,000

Jerusalem

Aleppo  from

60,000  to    85,000

Latakia

Hamali

44,000

Nazareth

Tripoli

15,000

Bethlehem

Classes  of  Inhabitants.  Mohammedans. — Of  the  different  classes  composing  the  population
of  Syria,  the  Mohammedans  are  the  most  numerous.  Dr.  Bowring's  information  led  him  to  con-
clude that  they  comprise,  probably,  three-fourths  of  the  whole  ;  they  occupy  a  considerable  part
of  the  agricultural  districts,  are  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  secondary  towns  and  villages,
and  fill  the  high  places,  with  some  few  exceptions,  in  the  superordinate  and  principal  cities.
They  no  longer  possess  the  peculiar  immunities  or  privileges  which  formerly  belonged  to  then-
race  ;  in  fact,  the  right  of  being  enrolled  in  the  armies  of  the  government,  which  was  once  their
greatest  pride  and  honour,  has  become  their  greatest  grievance.  The  Mussulman  population
are  seldom  associated  with  the  progress  of  arts  or  industry,  and,  though  possessing  the  influence
which  belongs  to  the  ruling  authorities,  are  rarely  instrumental  in  the  creation  of  the  capital  or
the  diffusion  of  civilization.

Christians. — Most  of  the  commercial  establishments  are  either  in  the  hands  of  the  Christian
or  Jewish  population.  The  Mussulmans  exclaim  loudly  against  the  taxes  to  which  they  are
subjected,  and  above  all  against  the  conscription.  The  Christian  merchants  in  Syria  complain
of  the  heavy  imposts  to  which  they  are  subjected,  but  say  that  their  general  condition  is  much
improved  under  Ibrahim  Pasha's  government ;  and  especially  state  that  they  are  subject  to  no
vexations  on  account  of  their  religious  opinions  or  rites.  The  taxes,  though  very  serious  in
amount,  are  equitably  levied,  and  the  irregularities  and  extortions  which  were  formerly  so
frequent,  are  now  of  rare  occurrence.  With  the  exercise  of  their  religious  usages,  however
openly  exhibited,  there  is  now  no  interference,  still  less  is  there  any  interference  with
their  opinions.  There  are  in  Mount  Lebanon  some  districts  which  are  wholly  occupied  by
Christians.

Jews.—  The  Jews  in  Syria  are  numerous ;  the  great  majority  of  them  are  poor,  but  in  some  of
the  larger  towns  they  are  among  the  most  opulent  of  the  inhabitants.  This  is  the  case  at
Damascus  and  Aleppo,  where  many  of  the  consuls  belong  to  the  Hebrew  nation,  living  in  con-
siderable splendour,  and  exercising  very  great  influence.  Dr.  Bowring  visited  some  of  the
Jewish  families,  and  found  the  females  adorned  with  a  profusion  of  diamonds,  and  surrounded
by  the  delicacies  and  luxuries  of  the  highest  orders  of  society.  The  wealthiest  among  them  are
bankers  and  money-lenders,  and  the  very  high  rate  of  interest  which  is  paid  soon  augments  the
capital  employed,  and,  as  expenditure  is  seldom  on  a  large  scale,  the  accumulation  of  property
becomes  rapid.  There  are  a  few  villages,  such  as  that  of  Djobar,  for  example,  near  Damascus
(close  to  Elijah's  cave),  in  which  the  Rabbi  told  Dr.  Bowring  the  population  consisted  of  1000
persons,  and  that  they  were  all  of  them  Hebrews.  The  synagogue  had  been  robbed  a  short
time  before  he  visited  the  place,  but  they  did  not  attribute  the  robbery  to  any  religious  animosity.
On  inquiry  whether  they  had  any  persecution  or  oppression  of  which  to  complain,  they  answered
that  the  government  behaved  towards  them  with  perfect  tolerance.

APPENDIX.  cccli

Armenians.— There  are  a  large  body  of  Armenians  in  Syria,  particularly  in  Aleppo  and  the
towns  of  the  north.  They  are  among  the  most  active  of  the  inhabitants,  and  are  to  be  found  in
all  grades  of  society,  from  rich  bankers  and  merchants  to  domestic  servants  and  coffee-house
keepers.  Their  wives  and  families  are  for  the  most  part  in  Armenia,  with  whom  they  preserve
a  regular  correspondence,  and  with  whom  there  are  so  many  pecuniary  transactions,  generally
in  the  transmittal  of  money  to  Armenia,  that  there  are  a  considerable  number  of  Armenians  in
Syria  whose  principal  business  it  is  to  negotiate  or  cash  the  bills  which  are  drawn  on  Aleppo
from  Armenia.  The  Armenians,  though  so  much  disposed  to  wander,  frequently  return  home
for  a  few  months,  and  again  set  out  on  their  travels,  but  look  to  their  country  as  the  place  of
their  final  settlement.  On  the  whole,  they  are  the  most  respectable  class  for  punctuality  and
honesty, — generally  trustworthy  and  trusted.  The  irregular  profits  they  make  are  tolerably  well
defined  ;  for  example,  an  Armenian  servant  always  adds  something  to  the  market-price  of  every
article  she  purchases  for  her  master ;  it  is  a  recognised  usage,  of  which  nobody  complains,  unless
the  added  charge  is  exorbitant.  The  Armenian  would  not  hesitate  to  mention  the  amount  of
overcharge.

Inhabitants  of  Mount  Lebanon. — The  inhabitants  of  Mount  Lebanon  are  an  active  and
laborious  race,  who  turn  to  good  account  such  parts  of  their  soil  as  are  suited  to  agricultural
production.  Their  personal  bearing  is  far  more  proud  and  independent  than  that  of  the
Syrians  in  general.  In  many  parts  of  the  mountain-range  the  land  is  laid  out  in  terraces,  much
resembling  the  almost  horticultural  cultivation  of  Tuscany  and  Lucca.  The  agricultural  instru-
ments are  rude ;  the  plough  is  ordinarily  drawn  by  a  pair  of  oxen,  the  peasant  being  very
dexterous  in  its  guidance  over  the  rugged  surface.  Large  quantities  of  mulberry-trees  grow  at
various  elevations.  There  is  also  an  abundance  of  olive-trees,  some  vineyard-grounds,  much
wheat  and  maize,  and  many  gardens  filled  with  vegetables.  There  is  no  part  of  Syria  in  which
there  is  so  obvious  an  activity — none  in  which  the  inhabitants  appear  so  prosperous  or  so  happy.
There  was  formerly  a  considerable  manufactory  of  gold  and  scarlet  cloth  at  Deir  el  Kamr  (the
Druse  capital),  but  it  exists  no  longer.

Druses. — The  Druses  still  wear  a  garment  in  which  much  gold  is  mixed  with  the  woollen
tissue,  and  which  was  understood  to  be  a  domestic  manufacture.  Looms  are  sometimes  seen  in
their  cottages,  and  they  thus  mingle  (but  not  generally)  the  manufacturing  with  the  pastoral  life.
They  have  also  a  manufacture  of  the  high  silver  ornaments  (or  horns)  which  the  women  wear
on  their  heads,  and  which  are  the  distinguishing  badge  of  wifehood.  With  but  few  exceptions,
almost  every  individual  Druse,  as  indeed  all  the  male  population  of  Lebanon,  are  proprietors  of
land,  and  are  engaged  more  or  less  with  agriculture.  The  manner  in  which  some  of  the  water-
courses are  constructed,  and  are  still  kept  in  order,  does  great  credit  to  the  sagacity  of  the
Druses.  There  are  streams  that  flow  many  miles  along  the  sides  of  the  hills,  that  have  been
conducted  through  mountains  perforated  for  their  passage,  carried  over  wide  valleys  by
admirable  aqueducts,  and  which  irrigate  large  tracts  of  land  in  their  progress.

Arabs. — The  Arab  tribes  dwell,  for  the  most  part,  either  in  the  Desert  or  on  the  exterior  ridge
of  Eastern  Syria.  There  is  of  late  years  rather  a  tendency  among  them  to  engage  in  agricultural
pursuits ;  and  if  taxation  were  light,  and  they  could  obtain  security  for  person  and  property,  in
a  generation  or  two  Dr.  Bowring  thinks  their  predatory  and  wandering  life  would  be  exchanged
for  that  of  the  peasant.

Agricultural  Produce. — The  agricultural  produce  of  Syria  is  far  less  than  might  be  expected
from  the  extensive  tracts  of  fertile  lands  and  the  favourable  character  of  the  climate.  In  the
districts  where  hands  are  found  to  cultivate  the  fields,  production  is  large,  and  the  return  for
capital  is  considerable ;  but  the  want  of  population  for  the  purposes  of  cultivation  is  most
deplorable.  Regions  of  the  highest  fertility  remain  fallow,  and  the  traveller  passes  over
continuous  leagues  of  the  richest  soil  which  is  wholly  unproductive  to  man.  Nay,  towns  sur-
rounded by  lands  capable  of  the  most  successful  cultivation  are  often  compelled  to  import  corn
for  the  daily  consumption.

The  principal  articles  of  produce  have  occurred  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  pages.  Dr.
Bowring  has  a  large  statement  on  the  subject,  from  which  the  following  list  is  drawn : — Cotton  ;
silk ;  wool ;  goat's  wool ;  olive-oil  and  olives  ;  wine ;  madder ;  indigo  ;  sugar ;  cochineal —
Ibrahim  Pasha  has  lately  introduced  the  cochineal  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Tripoli.  The
cactus,  upon  which  the  insect  feeds,  thrives  very  well  in  that  district,  and  there  appears  every
prospect  of  success.  Tobacco ;  hemp  ;  bees'-wax  ;  scammony,  which  is  scarcely  ever  obtained
pure,  being  adulterated  at  almost  every  stage ;  soap,  of  which  that  of  Nablous  (Shechem)  is
highly  esteemed  in  the  Levant ;  barilla ;  sponge ;  iron  ;  coal ;  salt,  an  article  of  great  consump-
tion in  Syria  ;  and  saltpetre.

ccclii  APPENDIX.

To  these  more  important  articles  of  export  may  be  added  wheat,  barley,  maize,  millet,  lentils,
sesame-seed,  and  other  produce,  consumed  principally  by  the  inhabitants.  The  production  of
which  the  increased  cultivation  is  most  obvious  is  the  mulberry-tree,  for  the  use  of  the  silkworm,
which  may  be  attributed  to  the  demand  for  silk  in  every  part  of  manufacturing  Europe  ;  but  a
considerable  increase  has  also  taken  place  in  the  cultivation  of  the  vine,  and  plantations  have
been  also  made  for  the  extension  of  the  growth  of  the  olive-tree.

Tenure  of  Lands. — When  Syria  was  invaded  by  the  sultan  Selim,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira
922  (a.d.  1514),  all  the  lands  and  personal  property  fell  to  the  conqueror ;  but  the  ruinous
effects  of  this  general  confiscation  being  apparent,  a  law  was  established,  that  whoever  should
plant  or  build  became  proprietor  on  paying  the  miri  a  peppercorn  rent,  then  first  established.
Such  land  as  at  that  time  remained  waste  is  still  the  property  of  the  government,  and  is  annually
farmed  to  the  highest  bidder.  In  Mount  Lebanon  almost  every  male  inhabitant  is  a  small
proprietor  of  land.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Beirout  there  are  also  a  great  number  of  land-
holders, who,  for  the  most  part,  cultivate  the  white  mulberry-tree.  Large  proprietors  there
are  few,  except  among  the  emirs  of  Mount  Lebanon,  some  of  whom  have  extensive  lands,  which
they  either  cultivate  for  their  own  account,  or  let  out  to  farming  tenants.

Manufactures. — Aleppo  and  Damascus  alone  retain  a  few  relics  of  the  manufactures
for  which  Syria  was  once  renowned.  Of  the  manufactures  in  the  two  cities  mentioned,
those  of  silk  and  cotton  are  the  chief;  there  is  also  a  considerable  manufacture  and  em-
ployment of  gold  and  silver  thread.  In  Palestine  a  great  number  of  people  get  their  living
by  working  crosses,  beads,  rosaries,  and  amulets,  and  mother-of-pearl  shells,  which  are  brought
generally  from  the  Red  Sea,  and  engraved  with  religious  subjects,  chiselled  in  relief.  These
usually  represent  saints,  or  some  objects  of  devotion  associated  with  the  Holy  Land.  Among
them  are  models  of  the  holy  sepulchre  in  wood,  inlaid  with  mother-of-pearl ;  drinking-cups
from  the  deposits  of  the  Jordan,  with  verses  from  the  Bible  engraved  on  them,  being  nearly  as
black  as  ebony,  and  taking  a  fine  polish.  Of  these,  and  other  similar  articles  there  was  formerly
a  large  sale  in  the  market-place  of  Bethlehem,  and  in  many  parts  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  the  Terra-
Santa  monks  have  lately  taken  the  trade  from  the  peasantry,  whom  they  are  said  to  have
menaced  with  excommunication  if  they  sold  such  relics  to  travellers.  The  monopoly  of  the
trade  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  monks,  and  they  obtain  monopoly  prices.

Condition  of  the  Labouring  Classes. — On  this  subject  the  British  Consul  at  Beirout  reports :

"  If  left  to  themselves  and  allowed  unmolested  to  turn  to  the  best  account  the  natural  fertility
and  riches  of  the  country,  the  condition  of  this  class  would  be  highly  favourable.  But  this  can-
not be  considered  as  the  case  where  their  services  may  and  are  called  for  as  often  as  the  govern-
ment require  them,  and  for  which  they  are  always  inadequately  paid ;  they  are  likewise  fre-
quently sent  from  one  part  of  the  country  to  another  wholly  without  their  consent.

"  The  fellah,  or  peasant,  in  Syria,  earns  little  more  than  a  bare  subsistence."

Dr.  Bowring  himself  states  that  in  Syria  a  great  portion  of  the  labour  is  done  by  females.
They  are  constantly  seen  carrying  heavy  burdens,  and,  as  in  Egypt,  a  large  portion  of  their  time
is  employed  in  fetching  water  from  the  wells  for  domestic  use.  They  bring  home  the  timber  and
brushwood  from  the  forests,  and  assist  much  in  the  cultivation  of  the  fields.  The  Christian  women
of  Palestine  go  unveiled.    They  are  a  robust,  and,  generally  speaking,  a  very  handsome  race.

Foreign  Trade. — The  foreign  trade  of  Syria  has  considerably  increased  of  late  years  (under
the  government  of  Ibrahim  Pasha).  The  English  trade  has  made  more  progress  than  all  the
rest ;  and  the  trades  of  Tuscany  and  Greece  have  also  made  considerable  progress.  The  French
and  Sardinian  trades  have  diminished ;  and  this  is  ascribed  to  the  preference  given  by  the
Syrians,  indiscriminately  to  all  sorts  of  British  manufacturers.

In  1835  the  value  of  the  exportations  was  29,270,200  piastres,  the  importations  48,210,600,
leaving  a  difference  against  Syria  of  about  twenty  millions  of  piasters,  or  a  million  of  dollars,
which  she  must  pay  in  hard  money,  or  in  ingots  of  gold  or  silver,  &c.

Revenue. — The  accounts  furnished  by  the  Syrian  government,  whether  of  revenue  or  expen-
diture, can  only  be  considered  as  approximative.  However,  the  revenue  for  1835  is  stated  at
about  640,000/.,  for  the  year  following  696,000/. ;  and  Mr.  Consul  Werry  (Aleppo)  was  led  to
conclude  that  it  has  since  increased  to  840,000/.

Expenditure.— This  much  exceeds  the  revenue.  The  ascertained  expenditure  is  118,773,000
piasters,  or  about  1,197,000/. ;  and  this  is  supposed  to  be  raised  by  other  expenses  to  not  less
than  130,000,000  of  piasters,  about  1,300,000/.,  leaving  a  deficit  of  about  50,000,000,  or  500,000/.
per  annum  to  be  supplied  from  the  resources  of  Egypt.

CHAPTER    VIH.

ZOOLOGY.

J  ■  ■  •.,

[Canu'ls.]

There  is  some  difficulty  in  dealing  with  the  zoology  of  so  small  a  country  as  Palestine,  or
even  as  Syria.  There  are,  properly  speaking,  no  animals  but  such  as  are  also  common  in  some
other  countries,  and  most  of  them  in  Europe.  To  describe  the  forms,  or  to  report  the
characteristics,  of  such  animals  as  occur  in  the  country,  would  be  a  work  of  great  superero-
gation, since  the  same  details  would  be  equally  applicable  to  the  same  animals  in  other
countries.  And  while  the  animals  are  the  same  as  elsewhere  occur,  it  is  not  to  be  expected
that  within  so  contracted  a  region,  many  of  them  should  exhibit  any  very  peculiar  or  dis-
tinguishing characteristics,  which  might  be  adduced  as  more  particularly  applicable  to
Palestine.  Under  this  view,  it  might  perhaps  be  really  the  best  course  merely  to  enumerate
the  animals  which  are  found  in  the  country,  leaving  the  reader  to  seek  in  books  of  natural
history  for  the  descriptions  and  details.  But  it  is  probable  that  a  large  portion  of  our  readers
would  disapprove  of  this,  and  the  work  might  seem  incomplete  without  such  information  as
is  usually  given  under  similar  circumstances ;  and  we  have  therefore  devoted  the  present
chapter  to  such  details  respecting  the  animals  of  the  country  as  we  have  been  able  to  collect,
avoiding,  however,  as  far  as  possible,  the  production  of  such  facts  or  details  as  equally  apply
to  the  same  animals  in  all  other  countries  where  they  exist.

vol.  i.  2  z

cccliv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

After  the  statements  contained  in  the  introductory  chapter,  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  apprise
the  reader  that  the  sketch  on  which  we  are  about  to  enter  has  no  necessary  connection  with
what  is  called  the  Natural  History  of  the  Bible.  It  is  our  purpose  only  to  give  some  par-
ticulars respecting  the  animals  which  actually  have  been  noticed  in  Palestine ;  but  when  the
identity  of  the  species  which  at  any  time  engages  our  notice  with  a  species  mentioned  in  the
sacred  books  is  obvious  or  established  on  sufficient  grounds,  we  shall  have  much  satisfaction  in
pointing  out  the  circumstance,  and  in  availing  ourselves  of  the  information  which  the  con-
nection supplies.

Since  some  plan  is  necessary,  we  shall  enumerate  the  species  which  engage  our  notice  in
the  order  exhibited  in  Cuvier's  Regne  Animal.

MAMMALIA.

The  Bat  was  known  among  the  Hebrews  by  the  significant  name  of  p7J"iy  attaleph,  or
"  the  flier  in  darkness"a  from  its  nocturnal  activities.11  A  thing  consigned  to  desolation  or
oblivion  is  said  to  be  "  cast  to  the  moles  and  to  the  bats"  with  a  reference  to  the  partialities  of
the  animal  for  dark  caverns  and  ruined  or  desolated  buildings.  Yet  bats  are  far  more  common
in  towns  than  in  our  colder  climes.  After  sunset  they  are  observed  flitting  about  the  court-
yards of  houses,  the  bazaars,  and  streets,  in  considerable  numbers,  when  the  swallows,  which
fill  the  air  towards  evening,  have  retired.  An  observation  which  we  made  ourselves  beyond
the  Euphrates  is  probably  applicable  in  Syria.  The  bats  there  establish  themselves  freely  in
inhabited  rooms,  where  they  cluster  in  considerable  numbers  to  the  ceiling  by  day,  and  where
they  even  hybernate.  The  room  in  which  the  writer  usually  sat  was  vaulted  in  numerous  coves,
uniting  at  the  apex,  which  was  always  in  winter,  and  always  except  for  a  portion  of  the  night
in  summer,  occupied  by  a  dense  cluster  of  some  ten  or  twelve  bats.  The  room  had  six
windows,  four  of  which  were  glazed,  but  the  other  two  had  only  bars  and  shutters — the  former
sufficiently  wide  asunder  to  allow  the  bats  to  pass  in  and  out.  The  clustered  mass,  being
nearly  of  the  same  colour  as  the  walls,  attracted  little  notice ;  but  one  who  watched  it  closely
soon  became  apprised  of  its  nature  by  observing  a  head  occasionally  thrust  out,  or  a  leg  with
which  the  animal  scratched  itself.  It  was  very  difficult  to  disturb  them,  or  to  compel  any  of
them  to  detach  themselves  from  the  mass ;  and  when  they  did  so,  they  almost  immediately
flew  back  and  settled  themselves  again.  Their  presence  in  a  room  was  attended  with  little
other  inconvenience  than  was  occasioned  by  what  dropped  from  them,  and  by  which,  indeed,
their  inhabitance  was  first  detected.

Russell  notices  only  two  varieties  of  the  bat  in  Syria.  One  of  these  is  the  common  bat  ;c
the  other  he  does  not  name.  It  is  white,  and  the  ears  are  larger  than  those  of  the  other;  but
as  this  is  true  of  several  species,  the  description  does  not  enable  us  to  identify  it.

Hedgehogs  are  found  abundantly  in  the  fields,  and  are  employed  only  for  medicinal
purposes.  The  use  of  the  flesh  is  prescribed  by  the  native  doctors  in  lingering  disorders
occasioned  by  sudden  frights.  Buffon  doubts  that  hedgehogs  ascend  trees,  as  also  that  they
employ  their  prickles  to  bear  away  grapes ;  on  which  Russell  remarks,  "  I  have  never  seen
them  on  trees,  but  I  have  certainly  seen  them  transporting  grapes  upon  their  prickles  as  well
as  mulberries."  This  we  are  not  prepared  to  deny ;  but  seeing  that  hedgehogs  are  insecti-
vorous, it  might  be  questioned  whether  the  grapes  and  mulberries  did  not  adhere  to  their
prickles  by  accident.  The  natives  regard  the  hedgehog  and  porcupine  as  of  the  same  species.
The  animal  in  Syria  is  of  our  common  species.d

Moles  occur  in  the  commons,  fields,  and  gardens,  and  are  commonly  destroyed  on  account  of
the  damage  they  commit.  Their  extreme  abundance  on  the  plain  of  the  coast  is  noticed  by
Hasselquist  who  declares  that  he  had  never  seen  any  ground  so  cast  up  by  moles  as  in  the
plains  between  Rama  and  Jaffa.     There  was  scarcely  a  yard's  distance  between  each  mole-

a  The  word  occurs  in  Lev.  xi.  19  ;  Deut.  xlv.  18  ;  Isa.  ii.  20;  Baruch  vi.  21.

*>  The  animal  is  well  defined  in  the  passage  which  interdicts  the  use  of  it  for  food : — "  Moreover,  the  attaleph,  and  every  creeping
thing  thatflieth,  shall  be  unclean  unto  you  "  (Deut.  xiv.  18, 19).

c  Vespertilio  Murinus.  d  Erinareus  F.uropceus.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

ccclv

hill."  The  Arabic  name  is  khuld,  the  identity  of  which  with  the  Hebrew  "pn  choled,
suggests  that  the  animal  named  in  Lev.  xi.  29,  and  there  translated  "  weasel,"  is  really  the
mole,  rather  than  the  word  so  translated  in  the  succeeding  verse.

Bears  appear  to  have  been  in  ancient  times  rather  common  in  Palestine,b  and  to  have  been
much  dreaded  by  the  inhabitants  for  their  ferocity.  From  the  passages  cited  in  the  note  it  would
appear  that  they  infested  the  roads,  and  even  the  neighbourhood  of  towns.  They  have  now
become  rare.  The  name  of  the  animal  scarcely  ever  occurs  in  modern  travels,  but  more
frequently  in  those  above  two  or  three  centuries  old.  The  bear  is  now  almost  confined  to  the
mountains,  and  their  environs,  particularly  those  of  Lebanon.  The  existence  of  bears  in  the
mountains  of  Palestine,  and  in  the  country  about  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,  is  noticed  by
Seetzen.  La  Roque  states  that  in  his  time  they  were  sufficiently  abundant  upon  the  higher
Lebanon  mountains,  from  which  they  descended  by  night  in  search  of  prey,  to  occasion  serious
apprehension  to  travellers.  More  definite  information  is  supplied  by  Hemprich  and  Ehren-
burg,  who  in  their  Symbolcc  Physicce  furnish  a  figure  of  a  female  bear  killed  by  them  near
Bischerre  in  Lebanon ;  the  annexed  engraving  is  copied  from  their  figure.  This  animal  was
neither  old  nor  young,  and  mea-
sured from  the  nose  to  the  tip  of  .^v,^  ^
the  tail  about  four  feet  two  inches,
the  tail  being  six  inches.  The  sto-
mach was  empty.  The  travellers
saw  the  animal's  den  (where  there
was  much  bear's  dung),  formed  by
large  fragments  of  calcareous  rock
which  appeared  to  have  been  casu-
ally thrown  together.  The  flesh
was  tasted,  and  found  to  be  sapid,
but  the  liver  was  sweet  and  nau-
seous. These  naturalists  supply
the  further  information,  that  during
summer  the  bears  of  Lebanon  re-
main in  the  vicinity  of  the  snows,
but  descend  in  winter  to  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  gardens  and  vil-
lages. The  Syrian  bear  frequently
preys  on  animals ;  but  for  the  most
part  feeds  on  vegetables.  The  fields
of  cicer  arietanus  (chick-pea)  and
of  other  crops  are  often  laid  waste  by  it.  The  gall  of  the  bear  is  held  in  much  esteem  :  the
skins  are  sold,  and  so  is  the  dung  (under  the  name  of  bar-ed-dub) — the  latter  being  used  as  a
medicine  for  diseases  of  the  eye,  both  in  Syria  and  in  Egypt.

The  Syrian  bear  is  described  as  of  an  uniform  fulvous  white  (sometimes  variegated  with
fulvous)  ;  ears  elongated,  forehead  but  slightly  arched,  fur  woolly  beneath,  with  long  straight
or  but  slightly  curled  hair  externally,  a  stiff  mane  of  erected  hairs,  about  four  inches  long,
between  the  shoulders.  Russell  does  not  appear  to  have  known  that  there  were  native  bears
in  Syria,  as  he  only  remarks  that  "  the  bear,  baboon,  and  several  species  of  apes,  which  are
occasionally  shown  in  town  [Aleppo],  are  brought  from  Barbary  and  other  distant  parts."

Polecats  are  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  villages,  but  are  rarely  seen  in  towns.  The
skin  is  of  no  value  in  Syria,  as  the  people  have  not,  as  in  Europe,  any  means  of  divesting  it  of
its  unpleasant  smell.

Dogs. — Since  the  dog  was  anciently  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  an  unclean  beast,  as  it  is  now
by  the  Moslems,  it  happens  that  Palestine  is  the  country  in  which  this  animal  has  the  longest

a   Hasselquist,  120.

b  1  Sam.  xvii  34,  36,  37 ;  2  Sam.  xvii  8;  2  Kings  ii.  24  ;  Prov.  xvii.  12;  xviii.  14;  Isa.xi-7;  lix.ll;  Lam.iii.10;  Hos.  xiii
8 ;  Amos  v.  19.

2  z  2

[Syrian  Bear  —Ursus  Syriacus.}

ccclvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

been  refused  that  entire  domestication  with  man  which  he  has  enjoyed  in  most  other  lands :
in  other  words,  the  treatment  of  the  dog  has,  almost  always  in  Palestine,  been  such  as  it  has
only  in  other  countries  been  subject  to  since  the  propagation  of  the  Moslem  faith.  And  since
the  ideas  concerning  dogs  have  been  much  the  same  with  the  ancient  Jews  and  the  modern
Moslems,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  existing  practices  of  the  latter  illustrate  the  ancient
practices  of  the  former.  Among  both  we  trace  the  despised  but  not  maltreated  dog  of  the
streets ;  and  among  both  we  discover  that,  with  every  predisposition  to  do  without  them,  certain
breeds  of  the  dog  have  forced  their  services  upon  man  from  the  indispensable  nature  of  their
help  in  hunting  and  in  guarding  the  flocks.

The  Street,  or  Bazaar  Dog. — Having  observed  considerable  differences  in  the  species  of  dogs
which  infest  the  towns  in  different  parts  of  Western  Asia,  the  present  writer  was  induced  to  make

some  inquiry  on  the  subject  of  Lieut.
Col.  C.  Hamilton  Smith,  and  on  this
high  authority  is  enabled  to  state  that
"  The  street  or  bazaar  dog  of  Western
Asia  is  a  mixed  race;  at  Constantinople
and  in  Natolia  bearing  more  the  cha-
racter of  lean  and  shabby  curs,  and  as
we  proceed  southward  and  to  Egypt,
assuming  more  and  more  the  form  of
mongrel  greyhounds  and  ill-grown
lurchers.  This  is  natural,  for  they
follow  the  caravans.  There  are  of
this  kind  several  packs  that  regu-
larly leave  Cairo,  and  are  Hadjis
quite  as  holy  as  the  bipeds,  for  they
come  back  and  start  again  the  next
season.  I  believe  these  (pilgrim)
dogs  are  found,  when  at  home,  in  the
tombs  of  the  Mameluke  princes  at
Cairo.  A  great  number  are  nearly
destitute  of  hair,  and  the  whole  Egyp-
tian tribe  of  them  is  liable  to  want  a
part  of  their  teeth.  I  have  no  doubt
that  these  dogs  existed  already  in  the
time  of  Moses,  and  are  indicated  in
Exodus  (xxii.  31),  where  they  are  said
to  feed  on  carcases  outside  of  the
camp."

The  condition  of  these  dogs  is
the  same  in  all  Mohammedan  towns,  and,  as  we  have  suggested,  was  the  same,  doubtless,
among  the  ancient  Jews.  Their  numbers  in  the  principal  towns  of  Western  Asia  are  very
great ;  and  they  seem  greater  in  proportion  than  they  really  are,  from  the  fact  that  all  which
the  town  contains  are  seen  in  the  streets ;  none  being,  as  in  Europe,  harboured  in  courts  and
houses.  Indeed,  the  Moslems  of  the  dominant  sects  count  themselves  defiled  if  a  dog  but
touches  their  garments, — a  fact  which  seems  perfectly  well  known  to  the  animals  themselves —
at  least  they  know  that  they  are  not  to  come  in  contact  with  the  clothes  of  persons  in  the  street;
and  the  careful  attention  with  which  they  avoid  doing  this,  even  in  the  most  crowded  streets}
is  truly  admirable.  Through  this  mutual  avoidance,  the  defiling  contact  occurs  too  rarely  to
occasion  much  annoyance  to  the  inhabitants  from  the  abounding  presence  in  their  streets  of
animals  which  they  consider  unclean.  Indeed,  dogs  are  not  by  any  means  excluded  from  a
participation  in  the  kindness  which  the  Turks,  at  least,  exhibit  towards  all  animals.  Some
charitable  persons  make  a  regular  allowance  to  the  butchers  and  bakers,  to  make  a  daily  or

[Street  Dogs.    After  Laborde.]

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccclvii

periodical  distribution  of  food  among  the  dogs  of  the  district.  The  fact  that  they  are  to  receive
such  donations  soon  becomes  well  known  to  the  dogs,  who  repair  with  great  punctuality  to
receive  them  at  the  appointed  times.  At  Constantinople  there  was  formerly  a  government
officer,  whose  business  it  was  to  see  the  dogs  fed  at  the  public  expense.  Many  persons  have
left  money  by  their  wills  for  providing  food  for  a  certain  number  of  dogs.  The.  animals  litter
generally  in  the  bye  streets  and  in  obscure  corners;  and  we  have  noticed  some  small
provision  for  the  comfort  of  the  mother  and  her  young,  in  the  shape  of  a  little'straw,  or  even  a
rude  construction  of  boards  :  food  also  is  sometimes  placed  near  them  at  such  times.  They
are  protected  by  public  opinion,  which  on  different  occasions  has  strenuously  opposed  all  plans
contemplated  by  the  government  for  their  removal  or  destructions  Yet,  with  all  this,  the
peculiar  and  distinguishing  unfitness  of  the  dog  to  be  anything  less  than  the  real  companion  of
man,  and  the  object  of  his  care,  is  evinced  by  the  generally  miserable  condition  of  the  street
dogs  of  Western  Asia.  From  living  constantly  in  the  dusty  streets,  and  from  feeding  on  all
kinds  of  offal,  the  skin  of  those  dogs  becomes  foul  and  sordid,  and  from  the  supply  of  food
being  generally  inadequate  to  their  wants,  their  appearance  is  lean,  starved  and  gaunt ;  and,
considering  that  a  large  proportion  are  eaten  up  with  a  kind  of  mange,  which  sometimes
degenerates  into  a  sort  of  leprosy,  they  exhibit  upon  the  whole  a  truly  forlorn  and  battered
appearance.  Considering  the  heat  of  the  summer,  climate,  and  the  thirst  which  the  dogs  then
suffer,  it  seems  strange  that  they  are  not  subject  to  hydrophobia.  Indeed,  some  distrust  as  to
the  popular  ideas  connected  with  that  dreadful  disease  might  be  deduced  from  the  fact  that
hydrophobia  is  least  known  in  the  warmest  climates.  In  Constantinople  cases  of  this  disease
sometimes  occur,  although  they  are  exceedingly  rare  ;  but  they  become  increasingly  infrequent
as  we  advance  southward,  and  in  Egypt  are  altogether  unknown.

The  dogs  divide  the  town  which  they  inhabit  into  quarters,  the  right  of  inhabiting  and
prowling  over  which  is  jealously  guarded  by  the  animals  born  in  it.  They  make  common
cause  against  any  presumptuous  interloper,  who  seldom  escapes  without  severe  punishment.
Franks,  whom  they  distinguish  by  their  dress,  and  particularly  the  hat,  they  seem  to  regard
as  much  interlopers  as  strange  dogs,  and  the  Moslems  are  edified  and  amused  by  the  antipathy
they  express.  Travellers  tell  much  of  the  danger  to  Europeans  from  the  street  dogs.  This
does  not  consist  with  our  own  experience,  nor  has  any  instance  come  to  our  knowledge.  At
night,  indeed,  they  are  apt  to  be  troublesome,  and  a  stout  staff  may  not  be  found  superfluous  ;
but  by  day  a  stranger  is  liable  to  little  molestation.  Russell  says  that  the  street  dogs  at  Aleppo
bark  and  howl  very  loudly  during  the  night.  In  the  Psalms  (lix.  6,  14,  15)  there  are  allu-
sions to  the  "noise  "  of  the  dogs  when  prowling  about  the  towns  at  night  in  search  of  food :
but  that  there  were  also  barkless  dogs,  such  as  are  not  now  uncommon  in  Western  Asia,  seems
to  be  evinced  by  the  metaphorical  allusion  to  "dumb  dogs  that  cannot  bark"  (Isa.  lvi.  10).

In  warm  climates  the  street  dogs  render  considerable  service  by  the  clearance  which  they
make  of  the  offal  and  carcases  of  dead  animals,  which  the  inhabitants  leave  in  the  streets  or  throw
into  them.  If  not  prevented,  they  will  devour  human  bodies  under  such  circumstances;  and
the  expedition  with  which  this  work  is  performed  cannot  be  more  strikingly  evinced  than  in
the  Scriptural  instance  of  Jezebel,  the  whole  of  whose  body,  except  the  skull,  hands,  and  feet,  was
devoured  by  the  street  dogs  within  a  very  little  while  after  her  death.  The  manner  in  which
the  dogs  licked  up  the  blood  of  her  son  Ahab  will  also  occur  to  the  recollection  of  the  reader  ;
and  these,  with  other  instances  and  allusions,  render  it  probable  that  the  dogs  were  anciently  as
common  in  the  towns  of  Palestine  as  at  the  present  day.

Another  service  which  they  render  without  being  taught,  is  the  guardianship  of  our  property,
which  they  spontaneously  assume.  "  During  the  night,"  remarks  Sonnini,  "  they  are  the
terror  of  thieves.  Upon  the  wharfs,  boats,  and  timber,  and  in  the  interior  of  towns,  goods
are  entrusted  to  their  vigilance.  An  admirable  instinct,  a  natural  inclination  to  make  them-
selves useful  to  man,  induces  them  to  assume  a  superintendence  which  nobody  confides  to  them,

a  This  allies  particularly  to  Constantinople,  where  (he  number  of  (logs  is  reckoned  at  40,000.     See  •  Brewer's  Residence  at
Constantinople,'  p.  J2-.

ccclviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

nobody  points  out  to  them,  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  approach  the  property  which  these
voluntary  guardians  have  taken  under  their  care."

Hunting  dogs  have  an  advantage  over  the  street  dogs, — they  have  owners,  and  are  objects  of
care  and  attention ;  although  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  more  bigoted  Moslems  and
constant  inhabitants  of  large  towns,  do  not  much  attend  to  the  distinction  in  their  favour-
Except  by  such,  the  hunting  dogs  are  not  considered  unclean — at  least  not  to  the  extent  that
contact  with  them  produces  such  ceremonial  defilements  as  render  ablutions  necessary.  In
this  case,  therefore,  the  dog,  from  the  indispensable  nature  of  his  services  in  hunting,  has  forced
himself  into  a  respectable  position,  and  compelled  man  to  accept  his  services  and  society,  in
spite  of  the  strong  prejudices  against  him.  Against  this  Moses  had  no  law.  In  fact  he  had
none  against  dogs  in  general,  more  than  against  any  other  animal  declared  unfit  for  food  or
sacrifice — and  in  that  sense  only  unclean.  Even  this  exclusion  of  the  dog  is  not  by  name,  but
by  its  being  cut  off  by  a  line  or  rule  which  excludes  a  large  number  of  animals  without  naming
them.  The  law  in  itself  does  not  declare  the  dog  more  unclean  than  the  ass,  of  whose  services  the
Hebrews  freely  availed  themselves.  The  peculiar  disrepute  of  the  dog  among  that  people  must
therefore  be  referred  to  other  causes — and  may  possibly  be  founded  on  the  inferences  deduced
from  the  passage  which  declares  "  the  hire  of  a  harlot  and  the  price  of  a  dog"  (Deut.  xxiii.  18)
to  be  inadmissible  offerings.  It  is  possible  that  this  passage  rather  refers  to  men  stigmatised  as
dogs  from  their  vile  propensities,  than  to  the  animal  itself.  But  even  if  literally  understood,  it
intimates  that  dogs  were  private  property,  and  objects  of  value  to  be  bought  and  sold.  With
respect  to  hunting  dogs  in  particular,  we  are  aware  of  no  passage  which  expresses  the  use  of
them ;  but  their  use  in  hunting  is  implied  in  the  passage  which  precludes  such  game  as  was  in
itself  fit  for  food  to  be  used  as  such  if  "torn  of  dogs."  This  shows  that  dogs  were  used  in
hunting,  and  that  game  seized  by  them  might  be  eaten,  but  not  if  they  had  mangled  it.  This
was  less  a  stigma  on  the  dog,  than  a  consequence  of  the  law  against  eating  blood.  If  mangled
and  killed  by  the  dog,  the  game  would  be  less  completely  exsanguinated  than  the  law  required;
but  if  the  dog  seized  and  detained  the  game,  without  killing  it  before  the  huntsman  was  able
to  kill  it  with  the  knife,  it  was  clean  and  lawful  food.  It  is  thus  we  understand  the  passage  ;
and  our  understanding  is  deduced  from  the  actual  Moslem  law  on  this  subject,  which,  with
many  other  laws,  is  obviously  framed  on  the  practices  of  the  Jews,  and  which  therefore
embody  Jewish  interpretations  of  the  Mosaical  law.a

Before  we  proceed  to  speak  of  species,  we  introduce  a  cut,  exhibiting  the  different  species  of  dogs
exhibited  in  the  Egyptian  monuments.  This  is  very  interesting,  as  affording  a  collection  of  dogs,
most  of  which,  probably  all,  were  known  to  the  ancient  Hebrews.  We  hardly  need  mention  that
the  Egyptians  were  so  far  from  showing  the  Jewish  feeling  as  to  dogs,  that  they  paid  much  atten-
tion to  them,  were  careful  of  the  breeds,  of  which  they  had  several  fine  ones,  and  admitted  them
to  the  full  benefits  of  domestication.     Indeed,  it  would  appear  that  dogs,  or  some  kinds  of  dogs,

B  The  following  are  the  dicta  of  Mohammed,  which  in  a  great  degree  determine  the  treatment  of  dogs  among  Moslems.  They
are  collected  from  the  authentic  traditions  contained  in  the  Mischat-ul-Masabih : —

' '  Ibu-Omar  said,  the  Prophet  of  God  said,  '  Whoever  keeps  a  dog,  except  for  the  protection  of  7iis  cattle,  and  except  for  hunting
and  fir  guarding  his  corn-fields,  his  rewards  [in  the  future  life]  will  be  diminished  to  the  extent  of  one  kirat.'  Jabir  said,  'The
Prophet  of  God  ordered  me  to  kill  dogs,  till  I  came  to  a  village  woman  with  her  dog  following  her,  and  I  killed  it.  After  that
his  highness  forbade  killing  dogs,  and  said,  '  Kill  only  black  dogs  having  white  spots  upon  their  eyes  :  for  verily,  this  kind  of  dog
is  the  devil.'  AbdullahbinMughaffal  said,  the  Prophet  of  God  said, '  If  these  dogs  were  not  a  herd  of  the  herds,  I  would  certainly
kill  them  all;  but  now  kill  only  the  black  ones  among  them.'  "

In  another  place  we  have  more  particularly  the  rules  which  regulate  the  use  of  hunting  dogs : —

"  Adi-ibn-Hatim  said,  the  Prophet  of  God  said  to  me,  '  When  you  send  your  dog  in  pursuit  of  game,  repeat  the  name  of  God,
as  at  slaying  an  animal  :  then  if  the  dog  holds  the  game  lor  you,  and  you  find  it  alive,  then  slay  it :  but  if  the  dog  has  eaten  of
it,  then  do  not  you  eat  it,  for  the  dog  has  taken  it  to  himself.  Then  if  you  find  another  dog  along  with  yours,  aud  the  game  killed,
do  not  eat  of  it ;  for  verily  you  cannot  know  which  of  the  dogs  killed  it :  and  if  the  other  dog  killed  it,  it  may  be  so,  that  when  he
was  let  loose  alter  the  game,  the  name  of  God  was  not  repeated.'  Adi-ibn-Hatim  said,  I  said,  'O  Messenger  of  God,  I  let  loose
my  trained  dogs  after  game.'  His  highness  said,  '  Eat  of  the  game  which  your  dogs  have  kept  tor  you,  aud  ha\e  not  eateu  of.'
I  said,  '  Although  the  dogs  have  killed  it?'     His  highness  said,  *  Although  it  shall  be  killed.'  "

Various  dicta  relating  to  dogs  may  be  picked  out  of  the  large  book  containing  these  traditions.  Here  are  two  : — "  Abuhura  rah
said,  the  l'rophet  said,  '  When  a  dog  drinks  in  the  vessel  of  any  one  of  you,  then  you  must  wash  it  seven  times.'  "  Aud  in  one
tradition  it  is  mentioned  that  ike  first  cleaning  should  be  with  earth  On  another  occasion  Mohammed  affirmed  that  angels  wuuld
not  enter  a  house  which  contained  a  dog — a  declaration  which  certainly  ofi'eis  a  very  serious  bar  to  the  domestication  of  dogs  ill
Moslem  countries.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

ccclix

[Dogs  of  Ancient  Egypt.]

were  regarded  with  superstitious  veneration.  The  death  of  a  dog  was  bewailed  with  great  lamenta-
tions, and  the  remains  of  many  were  embalmed.  The  mummies  of  some  of  them  are  still  found,
and  are  mostly,  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  says,  those  of  the  fox-dog ;  meaning,  we  presume,  the
greyhound  which  forms  fig.  3  of  the  cut  at  ccclxvi.  This  fox-dog,  and  the  hound  (c)  are
of  the  most  frequent  occurrence  on  the  monuments,  and  the  author  just  named  thinks  it
reasonable  to  conclude  that  the
former  (the  fox-dog)  was  the
parent  stock  of  the  modern  red
wild  dog  of  Egypt,  which  is  so
common  at  Cairo  and  other
towns  of  the  lower  country.
That  represented  in  fig.  b  was
a  favourite  domestic  dog,  and
appears  to  have  been  the  one
which  was  the  most  frequently
admitted  by  the  Egyptians  into
their  parlours,  or  selected  as
the  companion  of  their  walks.
There  was  also  a  short-legged
dog  (rf),  not  unlike  our  turn-
spit, which,  comparatively  ugly
as  it  is,  appears  to  have  been
at  one  period  a  favourite  in  the
house,  e,  we  take  to  have  been
a  watch  and  street  dog.  A  dog
not  unlike  it  was  the   Roman

house-dog,  as   shown  by  the  an-  [Roman  House-dog.     From  Pompeii.]

o

O

O

O

o    o

M
o

<^

ccclx

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

nexed  engraving  after  a  mosaic  at  Pompeii ;  and  we  may  infer  that  the  most  common  dog  of
Palestine  was  of  this  sort,  from  the  allusion  made  by  Solomon  to  the  crooked  or  curled  tail.
The  remainder  are  hunting-dogs,  and  bring  us  back  to  the  class  now  under  our  notice.  The
hound  (c)  and  greyhound  (a)  are  unequivocally  hunting-dogs ;  and  the  other  (/)  we  infer  to
be  such  from  seeing  it  sometimes  in  attendance  on  the  huntsman.

The  Hound  in  that  cut  deserves  much  attention.  The  likeness  is  given  with  spirit  and  character
as  those  of  animals  usually  are  by  the  Egyptians.  Col.  Hamilton  Smith,  in  his  instructive  work
on  dogs,  considers  it  obvious  that  all  breeds  of  hounds  with  round  and  long  drooping  ears,  are
originally  descended  from  one  race,  if  not  from  a  distinct  species  of  dog  allied  to  the  Lycaon,
and  derived  from  the  East.  He  regards  the  pendulous  ear  as  a  gradual  result  of  domestication,
and  adduces  the  figures  on  the  Egyptian  monuments  in  evidence  of  the  extreme  antiquity  of
that  domestication  in  Egypt — long,  very  long,  before  hounds  with  deflected  ears  were  known  in

[An  Egyptian  Hunt.]

To  the  left  of  A  was  a  chasseur  in  his  chariot,  shooting  with  the  bow,  now  defaced ;  a,  a,  a,  a,  gazelles  ;  b,  hares  ;  c,  female  hyaen
with  its  young  ;  d,  foxes ;  e,  hyaena  arrived  at  the  top  of  a  hill,  and  looking  back  towards  the  chasseur ;  /,  jiovcupine ;  g,  ibex
k,  hounds  ;  i,  ostrich,  defaced  ;  ft,  the  oryx  ;  I,  wild  oxen.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

ccclxi

Greece.  The  same  eminent  zoologist  gives  a  figure  of  the  Oriental  hound,  being  from  a
drawing  of  a  Persian  specimen.  The  hound  of  the  Egyptian  monuments  he  regards  as  essen-
tially the  same  as  this,  and  thinks  it  was  introduced  into  Egypt  from  that  country.  "  It  is
now,"  he  remarks,  "  probably  impossible  to  fix  on  the  oldest  form  of  the  hound ;  but  if  we
commence  with  the  Elymean  (or  Persian)  and  take  the  figure  of  a  leash-hound  in  the  Egyptian
pictures  for  a  type,  and  the  blood-hound,  which  is  of  most  ancient  estimation  in  the  West,  the
dog  which  in  sagacity,  power,  and  olfactory  acuteness,  stood  for  ages  pre-eminent  over  the
whole,  we  find  them  sufficiently  similar  to  each  other,  while  the  more  delicate  perceptions  of
several  gun -dogs,  although  we  think  them  superior,  are  a  result  of  comparatively  later  care  and
training."

The  present  and  ancient  hound  of  Syria  does  not,  to  our  knowledge,  differ  from  that  of
Persia,  or  that  figured  on  the  Egyptian  monuments.  The  ancient  Hebrews  doubtless  employed
this  hound  in  hunting,  after  the  same  mode  as  the  Egyptians.  A  hunt  with  hounds  is  shown
in  the  preceding  very  curious  engraving,  which  is  the  more  interesting  from  its  spirited  repre-
sentation of  the  various  animals  which  were  objects  of  the  chase  to  that  people.  Of  the  hunts
of  the  Egyptians,  the  following  valuable  information  is  given  by  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  : —

"  The  Egyptians  frequently  coursed  with  dogs  in  the  open  plains,  the  chasseur  following  in
his  chariot,  and  the  huntsman  on  foot.  Sometimes  he  only  drove  to  cover  in  his  car,  and
having  alighted,  shared  in  the  toil  of  searching  for  the  game,  his  attendants  keeping  the  dogs
in  slips,  ready  to  start  them  as  soon  as  it  appeared.  The  more  usual  custom,  when  the  dogs
threw  off  in  a  level  plain  of  great  extent,  was  for  him  to  remain  in  his  chariot,  and,  urging  his
horses  to  their  full  speed,  endeavoured  to  turn  or  intercept  them  as  they  doubled,  discharging
a  well-directed  arrow  whenever  they  came  within  its  range.

The  dogs  were  taken  to  the  ground  by  persons  expressly  employed  for  that  purpose,  and  for
all  the  duties  connected  with  the  kennel,  the  Kvvaywyoi  of  the  Greeks,  and  were  either  started
one  by  one  or  in  pairs  in  the  narrow  valleys  or  open  plains ;  and  when  coursing  on  foot,  the
chasseur  and  his  attendant  huntsman,  acquainted  with  the  direction  and  sinuosities  of  the  torrent
beds,  shortened  the  road  as  they  followed  across  the  intervening  hills,  and  sought  a  favourable
opportunity  for  using  the  bow,  or  marked  with  a  watchful  eye  the  progress  of  the  course  in  the
level  space  before  them.  For  not  only  was  the  chasseur  provided  with  a  bow,  but  many  of
those  also  who  accompanied  him ;  and  the  number  of  head  brought  home  was  naturally  looked
upon  as  the  criterion  of  his  good  day's  sport.

Having  with  eager  haste  pursued  on  foot,  and  arrived  at  the  spot  where  the  dogs  had  caught
their  prey,  the  huntsman,  if  alone,  took  up  the  game,  tied  its  legs  together,  and  hanging  it  over
his  shoulders,  once  more  led  by  his  hand  the  coupled  dogs,  precisely  in  the  same  manner  as

the  Arabs  are  wont  to  do  at  the  present  day.
This,  however,  was  generally  the  office  of  persons
who  followed  expressly  for  the  purpose,  carry-
ing cages  and  baskets  on  the  usual  wooden  yoke,
and  who  took  charge  of  the  game  as  soon  as  it
was  caught ;    the  number  of  these  substitutes  for

Carrying  home  Game  (an  Oryx),  with  coupled  Hou;.ds.]
VOL.  I.

[Bringing  home  Live  Game — Gazelle,  Porcupines,  Hare.]

3  a

ccclxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

our  game  cart  depending  of  course  on  the  proposed  range  of  the  chase,  and  the  abundance  they
expected  to  find.  Sometimes  an  ibex,  oryx,  or  wild  ox,  being  closely  pressed  by  the  hounds,
and  driven  to  an  eminence  of  difficult  ascent,  faced  round  and  kept  them  at  bay  with  its  for-
midable horns,  and  the  spear  of  the  huntsman,  as  he  came  up,  was  required  to  decide  the  suc-
cess of  the  chase.

It  frequently  happened,  when  the  chasseur  had  many  attendants,  and  the  district  to  be  hunted
was  extensive,  that  they  divided  into  parties,  each  taking  one  or  more  dogs,  and  starting  them
on  whatever  animal  broke  cover  :  sometimes  they  went  without  hounds,  merely  having  a  small
dog  for  searching  the  bushes,  or  laid  in  wait  for  the  larger  and  more  formidable  animals,  and
attacked  them  with  the  lance.

Besides  the  bow,  the  hounds,  and  the  noose,  they  hunted  with  lions,  which  were  trained
expressly  for  the  chase,  like  the  cheetah  or  hunting  leopard  of  India ;  but  there  is  no  appearance
of  the  panther  having  been  employed  for  this  purpose,  and  the  lion  was  always  the  animal
they  preferred.  It  was  frequently  brought  up  in  a  tame  state,  and  many  Egyptian  monarchs
are  said  to  have  been  accompanied  in  battle  by  a  favourite  lion,  as  we  learn  from  the  sculpture
of  Thebes  and  other  places,  and  from  the  authority  of  Diodorus.

The  bow  used  for  the.  chase  was  very  similar  to  that  employed  in  war :  the  arrows  were  fre-
quently the  same,  with  metal  heads ;  but  some  were  tipped  with  stone,  which  are  represented  in
the  hunting  scenes  of  Beni  Hassan  and  in  many  of  those  at  Thebes.  The  method  of  drawing
the  bow  was  also  the  same;  though, as  already  observed,  the  chasseurs  sometimes  pulled  the
string  only  to  the  breast,  instead  of  the  more  perfect  and  more  usual  method  of  raising  it,  and
bringing  the  arrow  to  the  ear;  and  occasionally  one  or  more  spare  arrows  were  held  in  the
hand,  to  give  greater  facility  in  discharging  them  with  rapidity  on  the  "  swift  antelopes  and
wild  oxen."

Greyhounds.  The  information  supplied  us  by  Col.  Hamilton  Smith,  to  the  effect  that  the
street-dogs  of  Western  Asia  approach  nearer  to  the  greyhound  the  further  we  advance  to  the
south — that  is,  into  Egypt — has  already  been  adduced.  Tiiis  statement  elucidates  some  of  the
observations  which  are  contained  in  his  published  work,--1  respecting  greyhounds — "  A  race  of
which  there  exist  representations  above  3000  years  old ;  one  that,  with  little  intermixture,
forms  the  aggregate  of  the  semi-wild  unowned  street  dogs  of  Egypt  and  south-western  Asia,
bears  a  stamp  of  originality  we  cannot  justly  assume  to  be  the  offspring  of  crosses,  or  of  a
migration  to  a  climate  which  produced  its  present  very  distinct  form  of  body,  and  still  greater
singularity  of  head."  And  again  :  "  Looking  for  the  original  residence  of  this  race,  and  finding
that  in  Egypt  it  existed  in  its  present  form  at  the  dawn  of  history,  not  only  as  a  coursing  dog,
but  also  that  it  formed  already,  and  probably  had  long  before  constituted,  a  relinquished  semi-
feral  race,  living  unowned,  and  totally  upon  its  own  industry,  it  might  be  assumed  that  Egypt
is  the  country  whence  this  dog  was  first  carried  to  other  regions."  But  he  is  of  opinion,
nevertheless,  that  its  structure  and  qualities  evince  that  it  was  intended  to  be  the  hunting-dog
of  open  plains.  Without  following  Col.  Smith  in  tracing  the  origin  of  the  greyhound,  we
return  with  him  to  Egypt,  where  he  remarks,  "It  is  not  impossible  that  an  original,  inde-
pendent species,  with  the  above  form  and  instinct,  followed  the  moving  nations  in  troops  from
a  voluntary  impulse,  hung  around  their  camps,  as  it  did  during  the  march  of  the  Israelites
towards  Palestine,  and  was  only  rarely  and  partially  domesticated  among  the  southern  nations,
whose  religious  tenets  in  general  still  repel  all  contact  with  dogs."

The  same  zoologist,  when  he  comes  to  notice  the  Arabian  or  Bedouin  greyhound,  describes
it  as  a  large  and  very  fierce  species,  not  perfectly  pure,  but  greatly  valued,  and  used  by  the
wandering  tribes  not  only  for  coursing  antelopes,  but  to  watch  their  tents  and  cattle.  They
have  much  strength  of  jaw,  and  are  rufous,  or  white  clouded  with  tan  colour.  The  race  of
Arabia  Petrsea,  figured  in  silhouette  by  Laborde,  is  smaller  than  this,  with  a  long  hairy  tail,
in  the  form  of  a  brush,  and  with  erect  pointed  ears.  The  whole  animal  much  resembles  the
ancient  Egyptian  effigies,  and  also  the  present  wild-dog  of  Egypt,  the  deeb  of  the  natives,  and

a  •  Dogs.  Canidoe  or  Genus  Canis  of  Authors.     By  Lieut.  C  >1.  Chas.  Hainiliori  Smith,  K.H.  and  K.W.  F.R   and  L..S.,'  forming
vols.  ix.  and  x.  of  .lardine's  '  Naturalist's  Library.'

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

ccclxiii

[Greyhound  of  Arabia  Petraea.     From  au  original  Drawing  by
Col.  C.  Hamilton  Smith.]

thous  anthus  of  Col.  Hamilton  Smith,
to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  an-
nexed representation  of  this  fine  grey-
hound, which  we  take  to  be  that  with
which  the  ancient  Hebrews  were  best
acquainted,  and  the  same  or  very  si-
milar to  that  of  their  own  country.
Laborde  himself,  who  coursed  hares
much  with  this  greyhound  while  at
Akaba,  remarks  that  it  is  "  slender  in
form  and  fleet  in  movement,  strongly
resembling  those  which  are  seen  in
Egyptian    paintings.      Russell's    de-

scription   of    the    greyhound    in    the

northern  neighbourhood  of  Aleppo  is

very  indistinct.     It  appears  to  agree

with  this,  or  is  perhaps  a  variety  of  it.

He  says  that  although  reckoned  fleet,

it  can  seldom   come  up  with  a  hare,

unless  assisted  by  a  hawk.

The  Shepherd's  Dog.  The  afflicted

Job  speaks  of  those  "  whose  fathers  he

would  have  disdained  to  set  with  the  clogs  of  his  fiock  ;"    and  as  Job  appears  to  have  lived

about  the  time  of  Jonah,  this  carries  up  the  use  of  the  shepherd  or  watch-dog  to  a    very

early  date ;  historical  probabilities  as   strong  almost  as  facts  would  take  the  date  to  much

more  ancient  times.     Soon  after  men
v    v  found  a  profit  in  attending  to  flocks

and  herds,  the  use  of  the  dog  must
have    been    discovered ;    and    on    the
highest  authority  we  learn  that  man
became  "  a  keeper  of  sheep  "  almost
as  soon  as  "  a  tiller  of  the  ground."
We  will  not  contend,  with  some,  that  a
dog  attended  the  walks  of  Adam  in
Paradise ;    but  that  Abel,  the  first   of
shepherds,  had  his  dog,  is  very  likely.
The  prevalent   form  of  the   shep-
herd-dog of  Western  Asia — including
Syria    and    Palestine,   is  that    of  the
Turkman  watch-dog,  for  a  figure  of
which  we  are  indebted  to  the  kind-*
ness  of  Col.  C.  Hamilton  Smith,  who
in  his  book  (where  it  is  not  figured)
describes   it   as  a  large,  rugged,  and
fierce  race,  equalling  the  wolf  in  sta-
ture, shaped  like  the  Irish  greyhound,
and  with  equally  powerful  jaws.    The
ears   are  erect,  the  tail  rather  hairy,
their  colour  a  deep  yellowish  red,  "  and  so  like  a  Natolian  wolf,  that  a  friend  being  present  in
Asia  Minor  at  a  wolf  hunt,  allowed  one  to  pass  out  of  a  brake,  because  he  mistook  him  for  one
of  the  Turkman  dogs."     Dr.  Russell  describes  it  only  as  "  a  stouter  and  better  looking  animal

It  is  of  use  not  only  in  keeping  the  flock  together,  but  in  defending  it

3a2

[Turkman  Watch  Dog.     From  an  original  Drawing  by  Col  C.
Hamilton  Smith.]

than  the  bazaar  dog."

ccclxiv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

from  the  fox,  or  in  giving  an  alarm  in  the  night  when  attacked  by  more  formidable  beasts  of
prey.  He  is  kept  under  strict  command,  and  except  when  sent  after  stragglers,  usually  keeps
close  to  the  shepherd,  who,  it  may  be  remarked,  always  marches  before  his  flock,  leading  and
not  driving  it  along. a

To  the  Wolf and  its  characteristics  there  are  numerous  allusions  in  the  Scriptures.  That  it
lives  upon  rapine,  is  violent,  cruel,  blood-thirsty,  voracious  and  greedy ;  that  it  is  the  great
enemy  of  sheep,  seeks  its  prey  by  night,  and  is  very  sharp  of  sight — are  facts  which  might  be
learned  from  the  sacred  books.  It  was  obviously  common  in  Palestine  in  former  times ;  and
although  not  now  of  very  frequent  occurrence,  there  is  no  part  of  Syria  or  Palestine  in  which
it  is  not  found.  It  keeps  to  the  woods  and  open  country,  and  seldom  ventures  so  near  to  the
towns  as  the  fox  ;  but  the  villages  as  well  as  the  flocks  often  suffer  from  their  depredations.
Morison  numbers  them  among  the  wild  animals  of  Samaria.  Seetzen  names  them  among  the
animals  common  near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan.  Lord  Lindsay  saw  a  wolf  near  Mount
Carmel,  and  Monro  in  the  plains  of  Philistia.  Thevenot  says  they  are  frequent  in  the  deserts
of  Arabia  Petraea ;  but  Burckhardt  affirms  they  are  scarce  in  Sinai.b  This  may  be  explained
by  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  who  observes  that  the  wolf  and  hyaena  are  seldom  met  with  in  unfre-
quented districts,  (or  in  Egypt,  at  any  great  distance  from  the  Nile)  where  they  would  suffer
for  want  of  food,  and  are  therefore  principally  confined  to  the  mountains  lying  at  the  most  a
few  miles  from  the  edge  of  the  cultivated  land.  Once  only  he  met  with  the  wolf  on  the  coast
of  the  Red  Sea,  and  few  even  of  the  watering-places  in  the  interior  of  the  desert  are  frequented
by  it  or  the  hyaena.c

The  same  author  informs  us  that  the  wolf  is  not  gregarious  in  Egypt ;  which  observation
may  probably  be  extended  to  Palestine,  as  we  remember  of  no  traveller  seeing  more  than  one  at
a  time  in  that  country.  A  similar  extension  may  be  allowed  to  his  other  remark,  cited  with
approbation  from  Denon,  relative  to  the  comparative  sizes  of  the  animals  common  to  Egypt
and  Europe — that  the  former  are  always  smaller  than  our  own  species ;  "  and  this,"  he  adds,
"  is  exemplified  by  none  more  strongly  than  the  hare  and  the  wolf"

There  is  an  animal  of  which  travellers  in  Arabia  and  Syria  hear  much,  under  the  name  of
the  Sheeb,  which  the  natives  believe  to  be  a  breed  between  a  leopard  and  a  wolf.  They
describe  it  as  being  scarcely  in  its  shape  distinguishable  from  a  wolf,  but  with  the  power  of
springing  like  a  leopard,  and  attacking  cattle.  Its  bite  is  said  to  be  mortal,  and  to  occasion
raving  madness  before  death.  In  1TT2  Dr.  Freer  saw  and  measured  the  forepart  and  tail  of
one  of  these  animals,  and  supplied  Dr.  Russell  with  the  description  which  he  has  inserted  in
his  book.d  The  animal  was  one  of  several  that  followed  the  Basrah  caravan  from  Basrah  to
the  neighbourhood  of  Aleppo.  Many  persons  in  the  caravan  had  been  bitten,  some  of  whom
died  in  a  short  time  raving  mad.  It  was  also  reported  that  some  persons  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Aleppo  were  bitten,  and  died  in  like  manner  ;  but  the  Doctor  saw  none  of  them  himself.
Dr.  Russell  imagines  that  the  sheeb  might  be  a  wolf  run  mad.  But  this  is  a  hazardous
assumption,  as  it  is  doubtful  that  canine  madness  exists  in  Western  Asia ;  and  unless  we
conclude  with  Col.  Hamilton  Smith  that  the  sheeb  is  probably  the  same  as  the  thous  acrnon,
or  the  wild  wolf  dog  of  Natolia,  it  is  best  to  await  further  information  on  the  subject.  Burck-
hardt says  that  little  doubt  can  be  entertained  of  the  existence  of  this  animal,  and  explains  its
fabulous  origin  (between  a  wolf  and  leopard)  by  stating  that  the  Arabs,  and  especially  the
Bedouins,  are  in  the  common  practice  of  assigning  to  every  animal  that  is  rarely  met  with,
parents  of  two  different  species  of  known  animals.

Jackals  are  far  more  numerous  in  Palestine  than  either  wolves  or  foxes.     To  quote  from

a  Tliis  is  noticed  repeatedly  in  John  x.  See  in  particular  verse  4—*'  When  he  putteth  forth  his  own  sheep  he  goeth  before  them,
and  the  sheep  follow  him;  for  they  know  his  voice."     See  also  verses  3,  5.

b  Morison,  222;  Seetzen,  16;  Lindsay,  ii.  78;  Thevenot,  pt.  i.  p.  164;  Burckhardt,  584 ;  Russell,  ii.  184.

c  '  Ancient  Egyptians,'  iii.  29.

d  '  Nat.  Hist,  of  Aleppo,'  ii.  185.  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  mentions  the  sheeb  and  another  unknown  animal,  the  aboomungar,  in
such  a  manner  as  to  apply  to  the  latter  what  he  intended  to  state  of  the  former.  Burckhardt's  statemeut  respecting  the  sheeb
(•  Syria,'  p.  534)  supplies  the  power  of  correction.

Chap.  VIII]

ZOOLOGY.

ccclxv

[Jackals.]

the  account  of  these  animals  given  in  Col.  H.  Smith's  '  Canidse' : — "Jackals  form  a  group  of
crepuscular  and  nocturnal  canines,  never  voluntarily  abroad  before  dark,  and  then  hunting  for
prey  during  the  whole  night;  entering  the  streets  of  towns  to  seek  for  offals;  robbing  the
hen-roosts ;  entering  out-houses ;  examining  doors  and  windows ;  feasting  upon  all  dressed
vegetables  and  ill-secured  provisions ;  devouring  all  the  carrion  they  find  exposed,  and  digging
their  way  into  sepulchres  that  are  not  carefully  protected  against  their  activity  and  voracious-
ness; and,  in  the  fruit  season,  in  common  with  foxes,  seeking  the  vineyards,  and  fattening
upon  grapes.  They  congregate  in  great  numbers,  sometimes  as  many  as  two  hundred  being
found  together,  and  they  howl  so  incessantly,  that  the  annoyance  of  their  voices  is  the  theme
of  numerous  apologues  and  tales  in  the  literature  of  Asia.  This  cry  is  a  melancholy  sound,
beginning  the  instant  the  sun  sets,  and  never  ceasing  till  after  it  has  risen.  The  voice  is
uttered  and  responded  to  by  all  within  hearing,  in  an  accent  of  every  possible  tone,  from  a
short  hungry  yelp  to  a  prolonged  crescendo  cry,  rising  octave  above  octave  in  the  shrillness,
and  mingled  with  dismal  whinings,  as  of  a  human  being  in  distress."  Such  dismal  howlings
of  the  jackals  have  attracted  the  notice  of  travellers  in  all  parts  of  Palestine.  Russell  says
they  have  been  known  to  destroy  infants  in  Syria,  although  the  damage  they  inflict  is  usually
confined  to  the  poultry-yards  and  the  gardens  in  the  outskirts  of  the  suburbs.  They  are  silent
by  day,  and  never  then  appear  in  troops,  although  solitary  individuals  are  often  met  with  in
the  gardens,  and  always  run  away  as  if  afraid.  The  colour  of  the  animal  is  a  dirty  yellow,
with  brown  ears.  A  detailed  description  of  the  Syrian  jackal  is  given  in  Col.  H.  Smith's
'  Canidae.'  It  is  singular  that  although  these  animals  abound  in  Syria,  there  are  none  in
Egypt.

Interpreters  have  been  much  divided  as  to  whether  jackals  or  the  foxes  were  the  animals
of  whom  three  hundred  were  obtained  by  Samson  in  order  to  set  fire  to  the  standing  corn  of
the  Philistines,  by  means  of  fire-brands  fastened  between  the  tails  of  every  pair.  The  original
word  7^1^,  shual,  has  been  considered  to  have  much  analogy  with  the  proper  native  name,
shikal,  which  the  animal  now  bears.  The  question  is  difficult  to  decide.  Hasselquist  says
that  jackals  are  more  numerous  than  foxes  in  Palestine,  particularly  near  Jaffa,  Gaza,  and  in
Galilee  :  "  I  leave  others  to  determine  which  of  these  two  animals  was  the  fox  of  Samson.  It
was  certainly  one  of  them."

ccclxvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

t  -  '

[Syrian  Fox.a     From  a  Drawing  by  Col.  C.  H.  Smith.]

Of  the  Syrian  Fox  we  are  enabled
to  annex  a  figure  from  a  drawing
furnished  by  Col.  C.  H.  Smith.  It
is  of  the  size  of  the  English  cur-fox,
but  the  ears  are  considerably  wider
and  longer.  Foxes  are  common  in
Palestine.  They  are  very  abundant
in  the  stony  country  about  Bethlehem,
and  sometimes  make  great  havock
among  the  goats.  They  are  also  nu-
merous near  the  convent  of  "  St.
John  in  the  Desert"  about  vintage
time,  for  they  are  very  destructive  to
the  vines  unless  closely  watched.  This
propensity  of  the  foxes  to  injure  the
vines  is  alluded  to  by  Solomon.b  The
Syrian  fox  is  a  burrowing  species, — a
fact  to  which  Jesus  Christ  alluded,
when,  to  indicate  the  poverty  of  the
condition  to  which  he  had  descended,
he  said,  "  The  foxes  have  holes,  and
the  birds  of  the  air  have  nests,  but
the  Son  of  Man  hath  not  where  to  lay
his  head."c  The  craft  of  the  animal  also  supplies  various  allusions  in  the  sacred  writings.
False  prophets  are  so  stigmatised  ;d  and  our  Saviour  called  Herod,  the  tetrarch  of  Galilee,
a  fox,e  in  allusion  to  the  wily  and  tortuous  policy  of  that  bad  man.  The  fur  of  the  fox  is
valued  in  Syria  for  common  purposes,  but  the  animal  is  rarely  hunted  for  the  sake  of  its  skin.

Hycenas  are  not  rare  in  Syria
and  Palestine;  and  the  numerous
fables  concerning  them,  which
are  now  exploded  in  Europe,  are
there  articles  of  popular  belief.
The  species  (called  by  the  na-
tives Dubbah)  which  is  found
in  Syria  and  Arabia  is  declared
by  Col.  C.  H.   Smith   to  be  the

same  with  the  hyaena  of  Persia  and  India  [Kaftaar  and  Hoondar  of  those  countries].  It
is  not  larger  than  a  powerful  dog,  and  has  the  snout  fuller  and  shorter  than  in  some  other
species ;  the  ears  are  long  and  pointed ;  the  colour  is  a  dirty  white,  with  black  bars.

Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  makes  it  known  that  the  peasants  of  ancient  Egypt  "  deemed  it  a  duty
as  well  as  an  amusement,  to  hunt  and  destroy  the  hyaena,  and  those  animals  which  were
enemies  of  the  fields  or  flocks ;  and  they  shot  them  with  the  bow,  caught  them  in  traps,  or
by  whatever  means  their  dexterity  or  ingenuity  could  suggest.  For  though  the  hyaena  is  a
carnivorous  animal,  it  is  not  less  hostile  to  the  crops  than  to  the  flocks,  when  pressed  with
hunger;  and  the  ravages  they  are  known  to  commit  in  the  fields  of  Indian  corn  and  other
produce  make  the  peasants  of  modern  Egypt  as  anxious  as  their  predecessors  to  destroy  them,
whenever  they  have  the  opportunity  or  courage  to  attack  them."  In  Syria  they  are  equally
hated  and  pursued,  and  for  the  same  reasons ;  although  it  is  probable,  as  Dr.  Russell  thinks,
that  much  of  the  mischief  ascribed  to  them  is  committed  by  jackals,  foxes,  and  wolves.  This
same  writer  informs  us  that  the  hyaenas  may  be  distinguished  at  a  considerable  distance  by
their  walking  as  if  lame.  They  retreat  when  pursued,  and  do  not  attack  the  human  species
unless  highly  provoked,  perhaps  urged,  by  hunger.  It  is  in  the  night  that  they  chiefly  prowl
or  venture  to  approach  the  village  burial-grounds,  although  they  are  sometimes  also  seen  in

a  Monro,  i.  88.  b  Sol.  Song.  ii.  15.  c  Luke  ix.  53.    g°r,  a  lion's  whelp.h  2.
"VSDj  chephir,  a  young,  or  newly
weaned  lion,  able  to  leave  the  mo-
ther and  seek  prey  for  itself.1  3.
"Htf,  ari,  a  full  grown,  strong  lion,
and  therefore  the  name  for  a  lion  in
the  general,  indeterminate  sense. k
4.  jTW,  shachal,  a  lion  in  his
prime,  also  one  of  darker  colour
than  ordinary.1  5.  "STM,  shachts,  a
staid  and  still  powerful  lion.™  6.
"O?,  lebiy  an  old  lion;11  the  feminine
of  which  Wlb,  lebia,  is  the  name

[Lion  of  Arabia  and  Persia.]

a  Eccles.  xiii.  18.
e  Isa.  xi.  6.

b  •'»  Mariti,  ii.  327  :  he  calls  it  a  tiger,  as  does  Rauwolff  (70),  who  saw  it  in  Lebanon.  c  Isa.  xi .  16.

d  Jer.  v.  6.  e  Hos.  xiii.  7-  f  Hab.  i.  8.  g  Jer.  xiii.  23.  "  Sol.  Song  iv.  8.

'  Such  :is  Nimrah,  Num .  xxxii.  3  ;  Beth-Nimrah,  v.  36,  and  Josh.  xiii.  27 ;  waters  of  Nimra/i,  Isa.  xv.  6  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  34.

k  See  Russell,  ii   188,  189.

VOL.   I.  3  1)

ccclxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VOL

and  its  complete  domestication  in  Egypt  would  suggest  that  it  could  not  well  but  be  domesticated
among  the  Hebrews  also,  and  that  they  did  not  overlook  its  merits  and  services,  with  which
they  could  not  but  be  acquainted,  and  of  which  they  had  great  need.  Indeed,  there  is  the  positive,
although  indirect  testimony  of  Josephus,  who  names  cats  among  the  animals  which  were  eaten
by  the  people  of  Jerusalem  during  the  siege  of  that  city  by  the  Romans.  The  cat  was  one  of
the  sacred  animals  of  the  Egyptians,  more  than  equally  with  the  dog.  The  natural  death  of  one
was  an  occasion  of  general  mourning  in  the  house  in  which  it  took  place,  and  the  killing  of  one
was  a  capital  crime,  and  sufficient,  indeed,  to  produce  a  popular  tumult.  It  seems,  from  the
paintings,  that  when  the  Egyptian  sportsmen  went  out  in  boats  to  take  water-fowl,  they  were
sometimes  attended  by  a  favourite  cat,  and  from  the  readiness  with  which  it  is  represented  to
have  seized  the  game,  the  artist  intended  to  show  that  those  animals  acted  as  retrievers,  or
were  trained  to  catch  the  birds,  being  let  out  of  the  boat  into  the  thickets  which  grew  at  the
water's  edge.  Making  every  allowance  for  the  great  skill  attributed  to  the  Egyptians  in
taming  and  training  animals,  it  is  difficult,  as  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  remarks,  to  believe  that
the  cat  could  on  any  consideration  be  induced  to  take  the  water  in  quest  of  a  fallen  bird.a

At  the  present  day,  the  cat  is  as  much  liked  by  the  Moslems  of  Egypt  and  Syria  as  the  dog
is  contemned.  They  are  sensible  indeed  that  the  dog  is  capable  of  superior  virtues  and
services ;  but  the  cleanliness,  the  delicacy,  and  the  luxurious  softness  of  the  cat  recommends  it
to  higher  favour  and  attention.  There  are  cats  in  almost  all  houses  :  in  the  abodes  of  the  rich
they  are  much  indulged :  they  are  admitted  to  the  best  apartments,  and  partake  in  the  indolent
repose  of  their  owners,  who  delight  in  stroking  their  soft  down.  In  short,  the  cats  are  much
more  favourably  treated  than  the  mass  of  the  race  in  this  and  other  European  countries ;  even
the  dogs  are  at  peace  with  them,  and  boys  do  not  molest  them  ;  one  consequence  of  which  is,
that  they  are  really  more  gentle  and  familiar  than  with  us,  and  exhibit  little  of  that  suspicious
and  spiteful  character  which  they  bear  in  Europe.

It  should  be  added,  that  in  many  towns  there  are  large  numbers  of  unowned  cats,  which  at
night  prowl  about  over  the  house-tops,  and  descend  from  them  into  the  areas  of  houses,  and  by
day  shelter  in  various  obscure  retreats.  In  towns  where  there  are  Franks  who  believe  the  plague
to  be  contagious,  such  cats  as  make  thair  appearance  during  the  prevalence  of  the  visitation
are  shot  without  mercy,  as  it  is  believed  that  by  access  from  the  house-tops,  from  which  they
cannot  be  excluded,  they  introduce  the  contagion  in  their  fur.  We  do  not  know  that  these
facts  — even  as  to  the  existence  of  such  semi-wild  cats  in  oriental  towns — have  been  noticed  by
any  travellers.  It  should  be  stated  however,  that  these  are  simply  the  refuse  (for  the  kittens
are  not  destroyed)  of  the  house  cat,  abandoned  to  their  own  resources.  For  the  support  of
these  cats  funds  have  sometimes  (as  in  the  case  of  street  dogs)  been  bequeathed  by  charitable
persons,  in  consequence  of  which  large  numbers  are,  in  the  large  cities,  daily  fed  in  certain
public  places  well  known  to  the  animals  themselves.

The  beautiful  Persian  cat  is  known  in  Syria,  but  only  as  a  domestic  rarity,  and  it  can  hardly
be  considered  a  native  of  the  country.  But  there  is  a  native  breed  between  it  and  the  common
cat,  which  we  only  know  through  the  mere  mention  of  it  by  Dr.  Russell.b

The  Water  Ratc  is  found  throughout  Syria,  near  the  rivers,  and  inflicts  its  share  of  damage
on  the  husbandman.  But  the  most  injurious  to  him  of  all  the  inhabiting  muridae,  is  the  Short-
tailed  Field  Mouse  ;d  and  this  we  may  therefore  conclude  to  be  the  animal  whose  devastations
have  often  proved  so  ruinous  in  that  country  to  the  hopes  of  the  husbandman.  And  this  may
also,  we  conclude,  be  considered  the  "  mouse  "  whose  injuries  to  the  standing  crops  the
prophets  and  other  sacred  writers  commemorate.  Such,  probably  were  the  mice,  which,  in
conjunction  with  the  locusts,  destroyed  in  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century  all  the  crops  for
four  successive  years.e  Burckhardt  acquaints  us  that  the  province  of  Hamah  (Hamath)  is
the  granary  of  Northern  Syria,  though  the  harvest  never  yields  more  than  ten  for  one,  "  chiefly

a  Wilkinson,  iii.  42.  b  Nat.  Hist,  of  Aleppo,  li.  180.  c  Mas  amphibius,  Linn.

rt  Pennant's  name :  same  as  the  Mils  terreati  is  of  Linnaeus,  tlte  Meadow-mouse  of  Shaw.  e  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,  823.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

ccclxxi

in  consequence  of  the  immense  num-
bers of  mice,  which  sometimes  wholly
destroy  the  crops."  Afterwards  he.
repeats  the  same  statement  with  re-
ference to  the  crops  of  the  Haouran.a
Unfortunately  he  did  not  see  the  ani-
mal, and  we  incline  to  think  that
different  field-mice  may  be  intended,13
of  which  the  one  under  notice  is  the
most  abundant  and  most  destructive.
However,  the  predominance  in  num-
bers and  injuriousness  ascribed  in  this
article  to  the  short-tailed  field  mouse,
is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Palestine.
The  notorious  devastations  in  the
young  plantations  of  the  Deane  and
New  forests  in  1812,  1813,  were
chiefly  by  this  destructive  arvicole,
which  was  found  to  be  fifty  to  one  as
compared  to  its  long-tailed  congener.
In  the  former  of  these  forests,  30,000
(of  both  species)  were  caught  in  the
year  ending  March  1814,  besides  that
a  much  larger  number  were  taken
from  the  pitfalls  by  various  animals
and  birds.

The  Dormouse  c  has  as  good  pre-
tensions to  be  reckoned  among  the  squirrels

[The  Dormouse  j

[Short-tailed  Field  Mouse.]

as  among  the  mice ;  in  habits  it  comes  nearer
to  the  squirrel,  although  its  dentition
refers  it  to  the  mice.  It  sleeps  dur-
ing most  of  the  day  and  hybernates
in  the  winter ;  and  although  these
are  habits  common  to  many  other
animals,  it  is  from  them  that  it  ob-
tains its  popular  designation.  It
feeds  chiefly  on  fruits  and  nuts,  and
hence  is  in  Syria  more  injurious  to
the  gardens  than  to  the  fields.  The
same  observation  applies  to  the  Greater
Dormouse,A  which  exists  in  consider-
able numbers.

Those  cosmopolites,  the  common
Rat  and  Mouse,  abound  in  Syria.
Most  of  the  houses  are  infested  by
them,  and    the   natives,  who  seldom

take    the    trouble    of

traps,6

a  Syria,  146,  277-  ,

b  The  reason  for  this  conclusion  is,  that  in  connection  with  the  latter  statement,  Burckhardt  gives  H<-A  farah,  as  the  native
name  of  these  mice  :  and  this  is  a  general  name  for  all  field-mice.

c  Musavellanarius,  Linn.,  Myoxusavcllanarius.  d  Mus  Quercinus,  Linn.;  Lerot,  Button.

e  The  trap  that  is  used  is  a  heavy  frame  of  wood,  the  base  being  a  square  trough  containing  the  bait,  over  which  is  suspended
(by  a  string  connected  with  the  bait)  a  heavy  block  of  wood,  which  falls  when  the  bait  is  attacked,  and  generally  kills  the  animal
on  the  spot ;  at  least  we  never  ourselves  found  one  in  the  trap  in  the  morning  that  was  not  dead  and  cold.  They  are  often  caught
by  the  neck  in  attempting  to  spring  out.

3b  2

ccclxxii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

J

i\  r

sometimes  lay  arsenic  for  their  destruction  ;  but  accidents  having  arisen  from  the  water  in
which  the  poisoned  animals  have  drunk,  this  dangerous  method  is  seldom  used  in  families
where  there  are  children.  As  already  mentioned,  few  of  the  houses  are  unprovided  with  a  cat,
and  mice  are  also  destroyed  by  the  house-serpents.

Returning  to  the  Field  Mice,  it  may  be  said  that  collectively  they  commit  dreadful  havoc  in
the  cultivated  fields  in  those  years  when  there  is  little  or  no  frost  in  winter.  For  this  reason
the  Bedouins  and  peasants  are  encouraged  to  destroy  them  by  a  price  upon  the  head  of  every
one  produced  dead.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Jerboa  is  very  rarely  found  among  the
animals  produced  for  this  premium.  Some  have  thought  this  the  mouse  (that  is,  the  field-mouse)
of  the  Scriptures.  The  greater  numbers  and  more  extensive  ravages  of  the  short-tailed  field-
mouse  may  render  this  doubtful ;  and  that  it  is  not,  as  others  think,  the  shaphan  of  the  sacred
books,  we  shall  have  another  opportunity  of  showing.

The  Jerboa  of  Palestine  and  Syria,  and  of  the  bordering  deserts,  is,  we  have  no  doubt,  the

same  species  as  in  Egypt,  of  which
we  annex  the  figure  of  Hemprich
and  Ehrenburg.  A  very  ample  ac-
count of  the  animal  is  given  by
Sonnini,a  to  which  we  may  refer
those  who  desire  full  information.
The  jerboa  possesses  the  longest
hind-legs  of  any  quadruped  in
existence,  while  the  fore-legs  are
disproportionably  short.  They  are
miniature  kangaroos,  without  the
pouch.  The  fore-feet  seem  merely
of  use  to  rest  upon  the  ground  and
to  convey  food  to  the  mouth;  for  if
the  animals  are  frightened,  or  wish
to  proceed  at  a  quick  rate,  they  stand
upon  their  hind-legs  only,  and  take
prodigious  leaps,  of  four  or  five  yards  at  a  time,  with  tail  horizontally  extended.  The  tail  is
necessary  to  this  mode  of  progression,  and  those  who  are  deprived  of  it  are  unable  to  leap,  or
even  to  maintain  themselves  in  the  erect  position  which  seems  natural  to  the  perfect  animal.
The  jerboa  feeds  after  the  manner  of  a  squirrel,  by  the  aid  of  its  fore-feet,  which  in  fact  serve
the  purpose  of  hands.

The  animal  is  about  the  size  of  a  large  rat,  although  its  long  hind-legs  and  extended  tail
give  it  of  course  a  much  more  conspicuous  appearance.  The  body  is  short,  well  covered
with  long,  soft,  and  silky  hair,  externally  of  a  fawn  colour,  with  blackish  zig-zag  stripes ;  these
tints  being  rather  dusky,  are  set  off  by  the  fine  shining  white  of  the  belly.  The  male  is  some-
what smaller  than  the  female,  and  the  tints  of  the  hair  less  deep ;  but  the  difference  is  incon-
siderable. For  other  details  respecting  the  figure  and  conformation  of  this  remarkable  animal
we  must  refer  to  books  of  natural  history.

The  jerboas  live  in  society,  and  in  burrows  which  they  make  in  the  open  plains  with  their
teeth  and  nails.  It  is  even  said  that  they  make  their  way  through  the  soft  stone  they  some-
times encounter  under  the  soil.  They  are  properly  nocturnal  animals,  but  are  not  uncommonly
seen  in  the  day-time  near  the  openings  of  their  burrows.  They  are  exceedingly  shy,  and  on
the  least  noise,  or  the  sight  of  any  object  they  deem  suspicious,  retire  hastily  to  their  holes.
They  can  only  be  killed  by  surprise.  The  Arabs  contrive  to  take  them  by  stopping  up  all
the  avenues  to  their  burrows  but  one,  by  which  they  force  them  to  come  out.  They  are
skinned,  dressed,  and  eaten  by  that  always  hungry  people,  nor  do  the  inhabitants  of  towns
object  to  them.     Sonnini  had  heard  that  the  flesh  was  not  very  palatable ;  and  Russell  heard

•.;..,;a>~.-T? ->■* :

[Egyptian  Jerboa.]

a  Voyages,  chap.  xi.

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccclxxiii

that  it  was  well  tasted:  neither  took  the  trouble  to  ascertain.     The  skin  is  used  as  a  common
fur.

The  Jerboa  does  not  hybernate  in  the  warm  climate  of  Egypt.  Sonnini  suspected  it  must
do  so  in  more  northern  climes  :  this  conjecture  has  been  confirmed  by  Pallas;  and,  according
to  Russell,  a  partial  hybernation  takes  place  even  in  Northern  Syria.  His  captured  jerboas
began  to  grow  sleepy  towards  the  approach  of  winter,  and  slept  two  or  three  days  together
without  eating;  they  then  had  a  waking  interval  of  two  or  three  days,  and  in  the  night  were
as  lively  as  usual.  In  the  depth  of  winter,  they  sometimes  remained  asleep  for  eight  days
together,  without  tasting  food,  and  without  apparent  signs  of  life,  their  limbs  being  quite  stiff,
and  their  bodies  cold  to  the  touch.  If  brought  near  the  fire  in  this  state,  they  sometimes
revived,  and  at  others  exhibited  only  slight  signs  of  returning  sensibility.

Sonnini  fed  his  jerboas  on  wheat,  rice,  walnuts,  and  all  kinds  of  fruit :  Russell  fed  some  of
his  for  six  months  successively  with  dry  biscuit,  others  with  green  lucern,  or  ripe  fruit,  and  they
throve  well  on  both.  Those  belonging  to  the  latter  observer  were  never  known  to  drink,  nor  did
they  exhibit  any  inclination  for  water,  when,  for  the  sake  of  experiment,  it  was  placed  in
their  cage  during  the  summer  heats.  They  are  thus  qualified  to  inhabit  deserts  destitute  of
water.  In  a  single  night  they  will  gnaw  through  thick  boards  of  the  herdest  wood,  which
made  it  necessary  that  their  cages  should  be  wholly  of  metal,  or  the  wooden  parts  covered  with
tin.  Sonnini  notices  their  mild  and  tranquil  disposition  :  there  were  no  quarrels  among  those
that  he  kept,  and  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  handled  without  repugnance ;  but  he  affirms
that  their  gentleness  was  neither  amiable  nor  interesting,  and  appeared  to  be  the  effect  of  cold
and  complete  indifference  bordering  on  stupidity,  unaccompanied  as  it  was  by  any  testimonials
of  joy,  fear,  or  gratitude.

The  burrows  of  the  jerboas  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  plains  and  deserts,  and  various
travellers  complain  of  the  inconvenience  of  the  numerous  holes  to  their  cattle.  This,  however,
less  frequently  occurs  in  Palestine  than  in  the.  bordering  deserts.  In  particular,  almost  every
traveller  across  the  desert  from  Damascus  to  Palmyra — from  the  first  discoverers  of  the  ruinsa
down  to  Addison — take  notice  of  these  burrows.  The  last-named  traveller  described  the  soil
of  the  vast  plain  upon  which  the  traveller  enters  after  quitting  the  last  inhabited  village  as
every  where  burrowed  by  the  jerboa,  in  some  parts  completely  honey-combed,  which  renders
riding  dangerous,  as  the  ground  gives  way  under  the  feet  of  the  dromedaries.  He  says  that
some  of  the  animals  were  so  tame  as  to  sit  up  in  their  holes,  and  watch  the  party  as  it  passed.
It  was  October,  and  he  adds,  "  how  the  little  animals  exist  at  this  season  of  the.  year  appears
to  me  passing  strange,  as  the  herbage  is  all  burnt  up,  and  there  is  no  water."  As  to  water,
we  have  seen  that  they  do  not  need  that,  and  we  presume  that  at  the  season  indicated  they
live  upon  the  roots  of  plants.b

The  Hamster  is  common  enough  in  Syria,  although  far  less  so  than  the  field-mouse.  It  is
very  injurious  in  the  gardens.  Dr.
Russell  on  dissecting  one,  found
the  pouch  on  each  side  stuffed
with  young  French  beans,  arranged
lengthways  so  exactly  and  close  to
each  other  that  it  appeared  strange
by  what  mechanism  it  had  been  ef-
fected ;  for  the  membrane  which
forms  the  pouch,  although  muscu-
lar, is  extremely  thin,  and  the  most
expert  fingers  could  not  have  packed
them  in  more  regular  order.     When  [Hamster.]

they  were  laid  loosely  on  the  table

a  See  Philos.  Transacts.,  xix.  131.

b  The  above  notice  of  the  jerboa  is  drawn  chiefly  from  Sonnini  and  Russell,  as  before  cited,  with  further  matter  from  -various
travellers.

ccclxxiv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

they  formed  a  heap  three  times  the  size  of  the  animal's  body.  From  this  some  idea  of  their
ravages  may  be  formed.  Although  in  this  instance  beans  formed  its  plunder,  the  animal  is
equally  destructive  to  corn,  of  which,  as  well  as  of  grain,  it  forms  a  yearly  store  in  its  burrow.
As  much  as  two  bushels  of  good  cleaned  grain  may  commonly  be  found  in  each  magazine.
The  animal  is  fierce  and  fearless,  unless  before  the  pole-cat,  which  is  its  greatest  enemy.
The  common  Porcupine*  exists  in  Syria  and  Palestine,  although  it  does  not  appear  to  be  very

common.    Specimens  are  sometimes

|_Porcupine.]

caught  and  brought  to  the  towns
by  the  peasants,  and  are  usually
retained  as  curiosities  in  the  kitchen.
The  inhabitants  entertain  the  popu-
lar belief,  now  known  to  be  erro-
neous, of  the  porcupine's  power  of
ejaculating  its  quills  with  force
against  an  enemy ;  although,  of
course,  no  one  can  be  found  who
has  seen  it.  No  mention  of  this
animal  can  be  detected  in  the
Scriptures.  It  is  often  represented
in  the  Egyptian  sculptures,  from
which  it  appears  to  have  been
sought  after  as  game.b  The  cap-
tured animals  were  brought  home
alive  :  their  ultimate  destiny  is  not
known — perhaps  for  the  table,  for
the  flesh  of  this  animal  is  not
unpalatable :  it  is  eaten  in  Italy,
The  porcupine  is  not  now  found  in

and  sold  in  the  markets  of  Rome  and  other  places.
Egypt.

Hares  are  rather  common  in  Syria.  Russell  says  that  there  are  two  sorts,  differing  con-
siderably in  point  of  size.  "  The  largest  is  the  Turkman  hare,  and  chiefly  haunts  the  plains ;
the  other  is  the  common  hare  of  the  desert ;  both  are  abundant."  Which  of  these  is  distinctively
the  Syrian  hare,  as  figured  in  the  following  cut,  we  do  not  well  know,  but  believe  it  is  the
latter.  It  will  be  seen  that  it  somewhat  differs  from  our  common  species  in  its  head  and  tail.
Its  colour  also  is  lighter,  according  to  a  just  observation  of  Sonnini,  that  the  colour  of  the  hair
changes  and  grows  darker  in  proportion  as  the  climate  becomes  less  sultry.  In  Africa  their
fur  is  nearly  grey,  lighter  at  the  Cape  Verd  than  in  Egypt,  where,  however,  they  have  no  shade
of  that  fawn  or  rufous  colour,  which  gives  the  hares  of  Greece  a  nearer  resemblance  to  those  of
northern  countries.  Sir.  J.  G.  Wilkinson  states  that  the  hares  of  Egypt  have  longer  ears  than
our  own,  and  that  they  are  of  smaller  size.  The  first  is  a  circumstance  which  we  fail  to
detect  in  the  Syrian  example ;  but  it  is  exhibited  by  the  Egyptian  artists,  as  shown  in  the  cuts
at  pp.  ccclx,  ccclxi.  The  hare  is  not  now  hunted  as  by  the  ancient  Egyptians — perhaps  because
it  is  to  the  Moslems  as  to  the  Jews,  an  interdicted  article  of  food.  This  is  no  great  loss  to  the
natives,  as  the  hare  in  Egypt,  Syria,  and  other  warm  climates  is  far  from  being  as  good  eating
as  ours.  Like  the  flesh  of  many  other  animals  in  southern  countries,  that  of  the  hare  is  less  firm
and  savoury  than  in  Northern  Europe ;  it  is  also  less  highly  coloured,  and,  like  almost  every
species  of  game  in  warm  climates,  wants  that  peculiar  flavour  which  is  its  principal  recom-
mendation. Perhaps  it  is  from  this  difference  in  the  flesh  of  the  hare  that  it  has  been  con-
sidered unwholesome,  and  its  use  forbidden  in  the  East.  It  should  be  remarked,  however,
that  the  Arabs,  Kourds,  Turkmans,  and  other  nomades  or  semi-nomades,  eat  with  very  little
scruple  such  hares  as  fall  into  their  hands.

Hystrix  cristata.

b  See,  for  instuncp,  the  cuts  at  pp.  ccclx,  ccclxi.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

ccclxxv

Europeans  in  the  East  hunt  the
hare,  although  the  natives  do  not.
They  do  not  hunt  it  after  the  Euro-
pean fashion,  on  account  of  the  com-
parative inefficiency  of  the  dogs ;
but  adopt  the  method  in  which  the
Orientals  themselves  hunt  many  ani-
mals— that  is,  with  the  assistance  of
the  hawk.  Of  this  hunt  Russell  gives
the  description,  which  will  he  found
in  the  note  below.a  The  Arabs,  in
their  deserts,  chase  them  on  foot,  and
throwing  their  short  sticks  at  them
with  great  precision,  sometimes  knock
them  down.b

We  learn  from  the  same  author
that  the  hares  in  Syria  are  exceed-
ingly apt,  when  hard  run,  to  take
refuge  in  holes  of  the  earth,  or  of
rocks,  which  is  very  uncommon  in
our  climate.  When  they  do  this,
they  are  usually  suffered  to  escape,
but  sometimes  endeavours  are  made,
with  success,  to  drag  them  forth.  It
is  not  supposed  that  the  hares  burrow,
or  that  these  holes  were  made  by
them,  but  only  that  they  screen  them

occasionally  as  places  of  refuge.  Hares  are  only  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  an  example  of  the
operation  of  the  rule  which  excluded  particular  classes  of  animals  from  being  used  by  the
Israelites  as  food.c

We  do  not  find  that  any  traveller  notices  Rabbits  in  Palestine.  They  may  exist ;  but,  if  so,
they  are  very  rare.  Russell  describes  them  as  scarce  in  the  vicinity  of  Aleppo.  Some  are  there
bred  in  the  houses  for  the  use  of  the  Franks ;  but  the  Turks  seldom  or  never  eat  them,  and  the
Jews  hold  them  to  be,  like  the  hare,  one  of  the  animals  forbidden  by  Moses.  In  fact  the
rule  which  excludes  the  hare  certainly  excludes  the  rabbit  also.  The  fur  of  the  white  rabbit  is
much  used  at  Aleppo ;  but  that  of  the  black,  of  which  the  best  were  in  Russell's  time  imported
from  England,  bears  a  double  price,  and  is  in  great  request  among  people  of  the  law.

The  Coney  of  our  public  version  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  |9t£f,  shaphan,  of  the  original,
has  been  conceived  by  Bochart  and  others  to  be  the  Jerboa.     Shaw  was  rather  disposed  to

[Syrian  Hare— Lepus  Syriacus.~\

a  "The  company,  consisting  of  twenty  or  thirty  horsemen,  servants  included,  draw  up  in  a  line  at  the  distance  of  six  or  eight
feet.  Near  each  end  of  the  line,  which  is  termed  the  Barabar,  two  brace  of  greyhounds  are  led  by  footmen,  and  advanced  a  little
befure  the  centre  :  the  falconer  rides.  It  should  be  remarked  that  the  dog  leaders  are  surprisingly  adroit  in  finding  a  hare,  and  are
encouraged  by  a  reward  if  they  give  proper  notice,  which  is  done  by  calling  out  deliberately,  "  Yatoo  I"  ("  She  sleeps  !  ")  In  this
order  the  Barabar  marches  slowly,  and  as  soon  as  the  hare  is  put  up,  one,  or  a  brace,  of  the  nearest  hounds  are  slipped,  and  the
falconer,  galloping  after  them,  throws  off  his  hawk.  Such  of  the  company  as  choose  follow,  the  others  remain  standing  in  the
Barabar,  to  which  the  sportsmen  return  when  the  chase  is  over.  The  hare  cannot  run  long  where  the  hawk  behaves  properly,  but
sometimes,  getting  the  start  of  the  do^s,  he  gains  the  next  hill  and  escapes.  It  now  and  then  happens,  when  the  hawk  is  fierce
and  voracious  in  an  unusual  degree,  that  the  hare  is  struck  dead  at  the  first  stroke  :  but  that  is  very  uncommon  ;  for  the  hawks
preferred  for  hare-hunting  are  taught  to  pounce  and  buffet  the  game,  not  to  seize  it :  they  rise  a  little  between  each  attack,  to
descend  again  with  fresh  force.    In  this  manner  the  game  is  confused  and  retarded  till  the  greyhounds  come  in."

The  same  wTiter  gives  the  following  account  of  the  mode  in  which  the  hare  is  dressed  by  the  Arabs  : —

"  A  hole  dug  in  the  ground  is  furnished  with  such  dry  brushwood  as  the  desert  affords,  and  upon  this,  when  thoroughly  kindled,
the  hare  is  laid  without  any  preparation,  or  even  removing  the  flue  or  entrails.  When  the  fire  has  ceased  blazing,  the  earth  that
had  been  dug  out  and  laid  round  the  edges,  being  now  thoroughly  heated,  is  raked  over  the  hare,  which  is  thus  left  covered  up
until  sufficiently  roasted.  Its  own  gravy  with  a  little  salt  composes  the  sauce,  and  the  dish  is  said  by  those  who  have  eaten  it  to
be  excellent."

b  Skinner,  ii.  65.  c  Lev.  xi.  6.     Deut.  xiv.  7-

ccclxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

ascribe  the  name  to  an  animal  called  the  wabber,  and  this  conclusion  has  since  been  taken  up
by  Brace  and  others,  and  supported  by  evidence  not  easily  shaken.  The  Scripture  notices
indicate  that  the  shaphan  chews  the  cud  ;a  that  it  dwells  among  mountains  and  rocks  ;b  that  it
is  gregarious,  gentle,  and  sagacious  ;c  all  which  agrees  with  the  wabber,  but  not  with  the
jerboa,  and  still  less  with  the  rabbit.

The  wabber  is  frequent  in  Arabia  Petraea  and  Sinai,  and  is  found  in  Palestine.  Laborde
has  a  figure  of  it;  but  by  some  strange  oversight  it  is  described  under  the  name,  of  a  gazelle.
Correcting  this  mistake,  his  account  will  stand  as  follows : —

"  Hussein  and  Bicharie,  two  of  our  guides,  set  out  upon  an  excursion,  their  guns  on  their
shoulders,  saying  '  that  they  would  go  hunt  the  wabber,'  an  animal  commonly  met  with  in
this  part  of  the  mountain.  Ascending  the  valley  they  proceeded  to  the  right,  and  in  the  course
of  a  few  hours  they  returned,  bringing  with  them  something  wrapped  up  in  their  cloaks.  We
saw  by  the  glee  displayed  in  their  faces  that  they  had  not  been  unlucky.  They  immediately
produced  four  wabbers  which  they  had  found  in  their  lair,  being  the  whole  family — the  father
and  mother,  and  two  little  creatures  a  fortnight  old.  These  creatures,  who  are  very  lively  in
their  movements,  endeavoured  to  bite  when  they  were  caught.  Their  hair  is  a  brown  yellow,
which  becomes  pale  as  long  as  the  animals  grow  old.  In  appearance,  on  account  of  the  great
vivacity  of  their  eyes,  the  head  being  close  to  the  shoulders,  and  the  buttocks  being  drawn  in,
and  without  a  tail,  they  resemble  a  guinea-pig.  Their  legs  are  all  of  the  same  height,  but  the
form  of  their  feet  is  peculiar ;  instead  of  nails  or  claws  they  have  three  toes  in  front  and  four
behind,  and  they  walk  like  rabbits  on  the  whole  length  of  the  foot.  The  Arabs  call  it  El
Wabber,  and  know  no  other  name  for  it.  It  is  common  in  this  part  of  the  country,  [about  the
head  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf],  and  lives  upon  the  scanty  herbage  with  which  the  rain  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  springs  supplies  it.  It  does  not  burrow  in  the  earth,  its  feet  not  being  calculated
for  that  purpose ;  but  it  conceals  itself  in  the  natural  holes,  or  clefts,  which  it  finds  in  the
rocks."

Bruce,  whose  character  as  a  traveller  and  a  naturalist  rises  with  the  lapse  of  time,  also
noticed  the  animal  in  the  Sinai  Peninsula.  He  had  previously  become  acquainted  with  it  in
Ethiopia,  and,  as  an  Ethiopian  animal,  describes  it  under  the  name  of  Ashkuko.  He  also
notices  its  abundance  in  the  Lebanon  mountains,  and  says  the  species  seemed  to  him  alike  in  all
these  places,  unless  that  those  of  Ethiopia  were  superior  in  size  and  fatness.  Accordingly,  the
name  of  Hi/rax  Syriacus  has  been  given  to  the  species  inhabiting  those  quarters.  That  of  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope  has  been  erected  into  a  separate  species  [Hyrax  Capensis],  and  Col.
Hamilton  Smith  has  formed  another  South  African  species  under  the  name  of  Hyrax  arboreus,
from  its  inhabiting  the  hollows  of  decayed  trees.  But  the  differences  between  these  three
species  is  exceedingly  small.  The  Syrian  Hyrax  is  brownish  grey  above,  has  the  lower  parts
white — a  yellowish  tint  intervening  between  the  two  colours ;  the  head  and  feet  are  more  grey
than  the  body.  The  animal  is  about  a  foot  long,  by  eleven  inches  high.  Bruce  describes  it  as
a  gregarious  animal,  and  says  that  frequently  several  dozens  of  them  may  be  seen  sitting  on
the  great  stones  at  the  mouths  of  caves,  warming  themselves  in  the  sun,  and  coming  out  to
enjoy  the  freshness  of  a  summer  evening.  They  do  not  stand  upright  upon  their  feet,  but  seem
to  steal  along  as  in  fear,  their  belly  being  nearly  close  to  the  ground,  advancing  a  few  steps
at  a  time,  and  then  pausing.  "They  have  something,"  he  adds,  "  very  mild,  feeble-like  and
timid  in  their  deportment,  are  gentle,  and  easily  tamed,  although  when  roughly  handled  at  first,
they  bite  very  severely."  Bruce  further  informs  us  that  the  name  of  Ashkoko,  which  the  animal
bears  in  Amhara,  is  probably  derived  from  the  singularity  of  the  long  herinaceous  hairs,  which,
like  small  thorns,  grow  about  the  back,  and  which  in  Amhara  are  called  Ashkok.

Jerome  appears  to  have  had  this  animal  in  view  when  he  describes  the  Hebrew  shaphan  as
an  animal  not  larger  than  a  hedgehog,  resembling  a  mouse  and  a  bear  [the  latter  perhaps  from
the  form  of  its  feet],  whence  in  Palestine  it  was  called  apKrofivg  (arctomys),  the  "  bear-mouse."
He  adds  that  they  were  very  numerous  in  these  countries,  and  that  they  dwelt  in  caverns  of  the

a  Lev.  xi.  5.  b  Psalm  civ.  18.  c  Prov.  xxx.  26.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

ccdxxvii

[The  Wabber — Hyrax  Syriacus.']

rock  and  caves  of  the  earth.  The  ancient  translators  of  the  Scripture  seem,  from  their  variance,
to  have  been  uncertain  with  respect  to  the  shaphan.  All  the  alternatives  may  be  seen  in
Bochart,  who,  in  a  long  dissertation,  adduces  various  passages  from  Arabian  authors  relating
to  this  animal,  and  seems  to  have  collected  from  them  that  it  was  a  sort  of  Field-Rat.  In
modern  times,  Dr.  Shaw  notices  the  Hyrax  under  (as  he  says)  the  native  name  of  Daman
Israel,  and  mentions  it  as  an  animal  of  Lebanon,  but  common  in  other  parts  of  Palestine.  The
name  appears  to  have  been  mistaken — the  real  one  being  Ganam  Israel,  or,  "  Israel's  lamb," —
the  reason  of  which  name  it  is  difficult  to  conjecture,  unless  from  its  abundance  among  the  rocks
of  that  stony  wilderness  in  which  the  Israelites  wandered  for  forty  years.  Shaw  also  cites
Prosper  Alpinus,  who  had  before  spoken  of  this  animal,  describing  it  as  "  a  small  creature  not
unlike  a  rabbit,  which  they  call '  the  lamb  of  the  Children  of  Israel.'  "  Shaw  declared  his  belief
in  the  preferable  claims  of  the  "  daman  "  to  the  jerboa,  whose  claims  Bochart  had  advocated.
This  opinion,  together  with  the  (wrong)  name  was  adopted  and  made  popular  by  Buffon ;  and
with  the  support  it  subsequently  received  from  Bruce,  has  become  a  very  general  conclusion,
which  we  have  not  ourselves  the  least  inclination  to  dispute.

It  happens  that  this  small  animal,  which  has  thus  been  made  of  considerable  interest  to  the
Biblical  student,  is  also  of  uncommon  interest  to  the  zoologist,  from  the  peculiarity  of  its  organi-
zation. A  cursory  view  of  its  external  form  would  seem  to  suggest  their  relationship  to  the
Rodentia,  among  which  they  have  accordingly  been  classed.  But  Cuvier  found  in  this  small
creature  a  powerful  example  of  the  necessity  of  depending  upon  anatomy  rather  than  upon  the
relations  of  external  form,  for  determining  the  true  position  of  animals ;  for  by  means  of  anatomy
he  had  obtained  abundant  evidence  that  the  true  place  of  this  animal  was  in  what,  with  mere
reference  to  external  form  might  seem  the  astonishing  and  anomalous  position,  among  the
Pachydermata,  between  the  tapir  and  the  rhinoceros.

vol.  i.  3  c

ccclxxvhi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

Hogs  in  a  tame  state  are  not  kept  in  Palestine,  unless  a  few  by  foreigners.  This  is  because
the  Moslems  abstain  from  and  abominate  pork  as  an  article  of  food  to  the  full  as  much  as  the
Jews  do  or  ever  did.  There  does  not  appear  any  reason  in  the  Law  of  Moses  why  the  hog
should  be  held  in  such  peculiar  abomination.  There  seems  nothing  to  have  prevented  the
Jews,  if  they  had  been  so  inclined,  to  rear  pigs  for  sale,  or  for  the  use  of  the  lard.  In  the
Talmud  there  are  some  indications  that  this  was  actually  done  ;  and  it  was  probably  for  such
purpose  that  the  herds  of  swine  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament  were  kept,  although  it  is
usual  to  consider  that  they  were  kept  by  the  foreign  settlers  in  the  land.  Indeed,  the  story
which  accounts  for  the  peculiar  aversion  of  the  Hebrews  to  the  hog,  and  which  will  be  duly
noticed  in  the  historical  portion  of  this  work,  assumes  that  it  did  not  originate  until  about  130
years  before  Christ,  and  that  previously  some  Jews  were  in  the  habit  of  rearing  hogs  for  the
purposes  indicated.  Pork  is  said  to  have  been  also  interdicted  to  the  ancient  Egyptians ;  and
yet  paintings  exhibit  herds  of  those  animals  under  the  care  of  a  swine-herd.

Wild  boars  are  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Scripture,  and  they  are  still  found  in  Palestine
and  the  neighbouring  countries — chiefly  in  the  hills,  from  which  they  descend  occasionally  into
the  valleys  and  plains  and  sometimes  approach  very  near  to  the  towns,  the  gardens  which  surround
the  towns  being  a  great  attraction  to  them.  They  abound  in  Mount  Tabor.  In  places  where  there
are  European  settlers  the  wild  hogs  are  shot  by  the  peasants,  who  lie  in  wait  for  them  near  the
fountains,  or  the  streams  to  which  they  come  at  night  to  drink,  and  placing  the  carcases  on  asses,
carry  them  to  the  town  for  sale  to  the  Franks.  They  are  generally  bought  whole  by  one  person,
who  distributes  it  among  his  friends.  A  hog,  dead  or  alive  (for  we  have  known  young  hogs
taken  and  brought  for  sale  alive),  is  commonly  taken  for  sale  to  the  Consul ;  but  in  some  places
where  Franks  are  numerous  in  the  town,  and  the  hogs  too  numerous  without  for  the  carcases
to  be  always  purchased  by  the  same  persons,  they  are  often  publicly  exposed  for  sale.  Dr.
Russell  tells  us  that  this  was  the  case  in  Aleppo  in  his  time.  The  wild  hog  is  said  to  feed
chiefly  on  liquorice  root,  which  grows  in  abundance  in  many  of  the  eastward  plains,  and  in
the  proper  season,  that  is  in  the  autumn  and  beginning  of  winter,  the  flesh  is  delicious,  very
fat,  and  easily  digestible.  Prosper  Alpinus  affirms  the  flesh  of  the  hog  in  Egypt,  also,  is  more
light  and  delicious  than  in  Europe.  The  same  writer  remarks  that  in  Egypt  most  of  the
Moslems  kept  young  swine  in  their  stables  from  a  notion  that  their  presence  was  of  service  to
the  horses,  and  that,  as  they  did  not  eat  the  flesh,  they  were  at  all  times  glad  to  exchange  a
hog  of  a  year  old  for  a  young  pig.  The  English  reader  notes  with  some  surprise  that  the
wild  boar  is  described  in  the  Psalms  (lxxx-  13)  as  injurious  to  the  vines.  That  it  is  so,  is  but
too  well  known  in  the  East.a

The  Horse.  Some  points  in  the  Scriptural  history  connected  with  the  horse  have  been
noticed  in  the  other  portion  of  the  present  work.  As  it  may  be  of  use,  we  have  however  pro-
duced in  a  noteb  (taken  chiefly  from  Jahn)  the  substance  of  all  our  Scriptural  information  on
the  subject.

a  The  Rev.  J.  Hartley  relates  an  anecdote  in  point.  His  friend,  the  Kev.  Mr.  Leeves,  was  proceeding' in  the  dusk  of  the  evening
from  Constantinople  to  Therapia.  Passing  a  vineyard,  he  observed  an  animal  of  large  size  rushing  forth  from  among  the  vines,
crossing  the  road,  and  taking  to  flight  with  great  precipitation.  •*  The  Greek  syrogee,  who  was  riding  first,  exclaimed  '  Toupoivi,
Tovpouvi,' — '  Wild  boar!  Wild  boar !' — and  really  it  proved  a  wild  boar,  who  was  retreating  from  the  vineyards  to  the  wood.
'  What  has  the  wild  boar  to  do  in  the  vineyard?'  inquired  Mr.  Leeves.  '  Oh  !'  said  the  syrogee,  '  'tis  the  custom  of  wild  boars  to
frequent  the  vineyards,  and  to  devour  the  grapes.'  And  it  is  astonishing  what  havoc  a  wild  boar  is  capable  of  effecting  during  a
single  night.  What  with  eating,  and  what  with  trampling  under  foot,  he  will  destroy  a  vast  quantity  of  grapes." — Hartley's
'  Researches  in  Greece,'  234.

t>  The  nomades  of  recent  ages  value  this  animal  much  more  than  those  of  an  earlier  period  did.  It  is  very  late  before  the
presence  of  the  horse  among  the  Bedouins  is  indicated ;  but  we  find  them  early  and  constantly  among  the  Egyptians  [Gen.  xlvii.
17 ;  xlix.  17  ;  Exod.  ix.  3 ;  xiv.  6 — 28  ;  Job  xxxix.  19].  That  country  was  always  celebrated  for  those  animals  [1  Kings  x.  28  ;
Isa.  xxxi.  1 ;  xxxvi.  9  ;  Ezek.  xvii.  5] .  Joshua  encountered  chariots  and  horses  in  the  north  of  Palestine — but  was  directed  to
render  the  horses  he  captured  useless,  by  cutting  their  hamstrings  :  for  while  they  could  be  of  little  comparative  advantage  in  the
mountains  of  Palestine,  the  pride  and  confidence  connected  with  the  early  use  of  the  horse  was  uncongenial  to  the  first  principles
of  the  theocratic  institution  [Josh.  xi.  4—9  ;  comp.  Jndg.  iv.  15  ;  v.  22,  28].  A  short  time  afterwards  the  Philistines  conducted
chariots  in  battle  [Judg.  i.  19;  ]  Sam.  xiii.  5].  Anciently  horses  were  exclusively  used  for  the  purposes  of  war  [Prov.  xxi.  31].
Hence  they  are  opposed  to  asses,  which  were  used  in  times  of  peace  [Zech.  ix.  9].  The  Hebrews  first  paid  attention  to  the  breed-
ing of  horses  in  the  time  of  Solomon.  The  hundred  which  were  reserved  [2  Sam.  viii.  4  ;  1  Chron.  xviii.  4]  were  destined  for  the
use  of  David  himself,  whose  example  was  imitated  by  Absalom  [2  Sam.  xv.  1].  The  Psalmist  frequently  alludes  to  the  mode  of
governing  horses,  and  to  equestrian  armies  [Psalm  xxxii.  9;    xxxiii.  17;  lxvi.  12;  lxxvi.  6 ;  cxlvii.  10],     Solomon  carried  on  a

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccclxxix

Captain  Franklanda  states  that  the  horse  of  Syria  is  generally  about  fifteen  hands  high,
strong  and  active,  mostly  of  Syrian  dams  by  Arabian  sires ;  the  price  varying  from  400  to
1000  piastres.  "  They  are  hardy,  well  tempered,  and  sure  footed,  have  seldom  any  disorder,
and  live  to  a  great  age.  They  become  exceedingly  attached  to  the  groom,  and  will  follow  him
as  a  dog  follows  his  master."  Burckhardt  informs  us  that  there  are  three  breeds  of  horses  in
Syria  : — the  true  Arab  breed,  the  Turkman,  and  the  Kourdy;  which  last  is  a  mixture  of  the
two  former.

The  Turkman  horses  being  of  a  larger  size,  or  stronger  make,  and  more  martial  appearance,
and  when  dressed,  displaying  the  Turkish  trappings  to  more  advantage,  are  preferred  by  the
Osmanlis  to  the  Arab  horses.  They  are  taught  to  walk  gracefully  in  a  crowd,  to  set  off  at
once  full  speed,  to  turn  on  either  hand  at  the  gentlest  touch  from  the  rider,  and  to  stop  short
instantly  when  he  pleases.  But  the  horses  in  Syria  are  not  in  general  so  well  broke  in  the
menage,  or  have  such  splendid  action  as  those  of  Cairo.

The  Arabian  horses  are  of  more  slender  make,  and — it  may  startle  some  to  learn — in  appear-
ance less  showy ;  but  they  are  beautifully  limbed,  more  hardy,  and  reckoned  much  fleeter.
The  esteem  they  are  held  in  by  the  Arabs  themselves,  the  scrupulous  care  taken  to  preserve
the  purity  of  the  breeds,  and  the  reluctance  with  which  the  Arabs  consent  to  part  with  their
mares,b  are  circumstances  often  mentioned  by  travellers.

This  singular  attention  to  the  breed  of  the  horses  still  subsists  in  some  parts  of  Arabia ;  but
in  the  confines  of  the  desert,  where  the  Europeans  are  settled,  the  spirit  of  avarice  predominates,
and  the  native  integrity  of  an  Arab,  unable  to  resist  temptation,  is  transformed  into  the  low
cunning  of  a  jockey.0     In  general,  the  Arabs  will  not  part  with  their  best  horses — these  are

great  trade  in  Egyptian  horses  [1  Kings  x.  28 ;  2  Chron.  i.  16,  17].  A  horse  was  estimated  at  about  one  hundred  and  fifty,  and  a
chariot  at  six  hundred  shekels.  In  the  time  of  Ezekiel  the  Tyrians  purchased  horses  in  Togarmah  or  Armenia  [Ezek.  xxvii.  14] .
The  Hebrews  after  the  time  of  Solomon  were  never  destitute  of  chariots  and  cavalry.  The  rider  used  neither  stirrup  nor  saddle,
but  sat  upon  a  piece  of  cloth  thrown  over  the  back  of  the  horse.  The  women  rarely  rode  horses;  but  whenever  they  did,  they  rode
in  the  same  manner  as  the  men.  Horses  were  not  shod  with  iron  before  the  ninth  century :  hence  solid  hoofs  were  esteemed  of
great  consequence  [Amos  vi.  12  ;  Isa.  v.  28].    The  bridle  and  the  curb  were  used  lor  horses  and  mules  [Psalm  xxxiii.  9].

a  '  Travels  to  and  from  Constantinople,'  ii.  167.

b  We  cannot  resist  introducing  the  following  passage  from  the  Rev.  V.  Monro's  '  Summer  Ramble  in  Syria.'  On  the  visit  to
the  river  Jordan  one  of  the  Arab  escort,  "  a  great  ruffian,  was  mounted  en  a  white  mare  of  great  beauty.  Her  large  fiery  eye
gleamed  from  the  edge  of  an  open  forehead,  and  her  exquisite  little  head  was  finished  with  a  pouting  lip,  and  expanded  nostril.
Her  ribs,  thighs,  and  shoulders  were  models  of  make,  with  more  bone  lhan  commonly  belongs  to  the  Syrian  Arab  ;  and  her  stately
step  received  .additional  dignity  from  that  aristocratic  set  on  and  carriage  of  the  tail  which  is  the  infallible  indication  of  good

family Having  inquired  her  price,  I  offered  the  sum,  whereupon  the  dragoon  asked  one-third  more.     After  much  bating  and

debating  I  acceded,  and  he  immediately  stepped  back  in  the  same  proportion  as  before.  This  is  invariably  the  practice  with  the
Arabs.  It  has  happened  to  me  repeatedly  in  hiring  horses,  that  if  the  terms  have  been  agreed  upon  without  two  days  being
occupied  in  the  treaty,  they  imagine  more  might  have  been  obtained,  fly  from  the  bargain,  and  increase  their  demand.  I  there-
fore discontinued  my  attempts  to  deal.  The  Arab  said  he  loved  his  mare  better  than  his  own  life  ;  that  money  was  of  no  use  to
him,  but  that  when  mounted  upon  her  he  felt  rich  as  a  pasha.  Shoes  and  stockings  he  had  none,  and  the  net  value  of  his  dress
and  accoutrements  might  be  calculated  at  something  under  seventeen  pence  sterling."

D'Arvieux  has  an  interesting  chapter  upon  Arabian  horses,  in  the  course  of  which  he  mentions  that  there  are  partnerships  in
valuable  mares.  "A  Marseilles  merchant,"  he  goes  on  to  say,  "was  thus  partner  in  a  mare  with  an  Arab  whose  name  was
Ibrahim  Abou  Vouasses.  This  mare,  whose  name  was  Touysse,  besides  her  beauty,  her  youth,  and  her  price  of  twelve  hundred
crowns,  was  of  the  first  noble  race.  That  merchant  had  her  whole  genealogy,  with  her  descent  both  on  the  sire  and  mother's  side
back  for  five  hundred  years,  all  from  public  records.  Ibrahim  made  frequent  journeys  to  Rama  to  inquire  news  of  that  mare,
which  he  loved  extremely.  I  have  many  a  time  had  the  pleasure  to  see  him  cry  with  tenderness,  while  he  was  kissing  and
caressing  her :  he  would  embrace  her,  would  wipe  her  eyes  with  his  handkerchief,  would  rub  her  with  his  shirt  sleeves,  and
would  give  her  a  thousand  blessings  during  whole  hours  that  he  would  be  talking  to  her  : — '  My  eyes ! '  would  he  say  to  her,  '  my
soul !  my  heart !  Must  I  be  so  unfortunate  as  to  have  thee  sold  to  so  many  masters,  and  not  be  able  to  keep  thee  myself  ?  I  am
poor,  my  gazelle  !  You  know  well  enough,  my  sweet,  that  I  have  brought  thee  up  like  my  child,  I  never  beat  thee,  never  chid
thee  :  but  did  cherish  thee  as  the  apple  of  mine  eye.  God  preserve  thee,  my  dearest!  Thou  art  beautiful !  thou  art  sweet  1  thou
art  lovely  !  God  defend  thee  from  the  evil  eye  !'  And  so  he  would  go  on  saying  a  thousand  things  like  these.  He  then  embraced
her,  kissed  her  eyes,  and  went  backwards  bidding  her  the  most  teuder  adieus."

D'Arvieux  adds,  that  this  reminds  him  of  an  Arab  of  Tunis,  who  would  not  deliver  up  a  mare  which  had  been  bought  for  the
stud  of  the  king  of  France.  *'  When  he  had  put  the  money  in  his  bag,  he  looked  wistfully  upon  his  mare,  and  began  to  weep.
'  Shall  it  be  possible,'  said  he,  '  that  after  having  bred  thee  up  in  my  house  with  so  much  care,  and  after  having  had  so  much
service  from  thee,  I  should  be  delivering  thee  up  in  slavery  to  the  Franks  for  thy  reward  ?  No !  I  never  will  do  it,  my  darling  !•
And  with  that  he  threw  down  the  money  upon  the  table,  embraced  and  kissed  his  mare,  and  took  her  home  with  him  again."

c  And  so  with  the  Turks,  among  whom,  Capt.  Frankland  attests,  a  good  deal  of  jockeyship  and  duplicity  will  be  found,  not
unworthy  of  Newmarket  or  Epsom,  displayed  upon  occasion  of  the  purchase  or  sale  of  horses.  They  frequently  procure  a
number  of  their  friends,  to  come,  as  by  accident,  and  puff  off  the  horse  in  question,  bidding  against  the  traveller,  and  showing  a
great  apparent  anxiety  to  purchase  themselves.  In  these  cases,  the  only  plan  is  to  get  backed  likewise  by  another  party,  who
decry  the  animal,  and  affect  to  find  unfavourable  marks  about  him.  The  Turks  and  Arabs  are  so  superstitious  in  these  matters,
that  they  will  not  trust  themselves  upon  a  horse  which  has  a  bad  mark  about  him  ;— this  being  sure  to  portend  some  evil  to  th»

3  c  2

ccclxxx  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

too  precious  to  be  sold — but,  trading  upon  tbe  reputation  of  tbeir  animals,  they  will  endeavour
to  put  off  a  most  inferior  horse  with  the  most  solemn  and  formal  assurances  of  its  being  of
the  best  breed  in  Arabia.  In  the  interior  of  Arabia,  as  noticed  by  Niebuhr,  the  natives,  who
on  other  occasions  care  little  about  taking  a  false  oath,  are  never  known  to  sign  a  false  decla-
ration as  to  the  genealogy  of  a  horse.  But  on  the  borders  of  Arabia,  as  in  Syria,  the  Arabs,
corrupted  by  intercourse  with  strangers,3  have  very  slight  scruples  on  the  subject,  and  the
teskar,  or  formal  attestation  of  the  genealogy,  is  often  attested  by  persons  who  know  nothing
of  the  matter  beyond  what  they  had  been  instructed  to  swear.

The  Arabs  greatly  prefer  to  ride  mares  rather  than  horses,  the  greater  proportion  of  which
they  sell  to  the  townspeople ;  and,  as  it  happens  that  the  Turks  prefer  horses,  this  differing
taste  acts  exceedingly  well.  The  price  of  an  Arab  horse  in  Syria  was,  in  Burckhardt's  time,
[1810-1816]  from  10/.  to  120/.  ;  the  latter  price  being  the  highest  known.  An  Arab  mare
can  scarcely  be  obtained  under  60/. ;  and  even  at  that  price  it  is  difficult  for  the  townspeople  to
purchase  one.  Prices  have  risen  considerably  since  the  English  have  been  in  the  habit  of  pur-
chasing Arabian  horses  at  Baghdad  and  Basra  to  send  to  India.  The  Arabs  themselves  often
pay  as  much  as  200/.  for  a  celebrated  mare — and  even  such  a  price  as  500/.  has  been  given —
a  prodigious  sum,  considering  the  scarcity  and  consequent  high  value  of  money  in  Western
Asia.  Burckhardt  mentions  a  sheikh  who  had  a  famous  mare,  for  the  halfh  of  which  he  gave
400/.

The  Arab  horses  are  mostly  small,  in  height  seldom  exceeding  fourteen  hands ;  but  few  are
ill  formed,  and  they  have  all  certain  characteristic  beauties  which  distinguish  their  breed  from
any  other.  The  Arabs  count  five  noble  breeds,  descended,  as  they  believe,  from  the  five
favourite  mares  of  Mohammed.  But  these  five  principal  races  diverge  into  infinite  ramifica-
tions •  for  any  mare  particularly  swift  and  handsome  may  give  origin  to  a  new  breed,  the
descendants  of  which  are  called  after  her.  On  the  birth  of  a  colt  of  noble  breed,  it  is  usual  to
assemble  some  witnesses,  and  to  write  an  account  of  the  colt's  distinctive  marks,  with  the  name
of  its  sire  and  dam.  These  genealogical  tables  never  ascend  to  the  grand-dam,  because  it  is
presumed  that  every  Arab  of  the  tribe  knows  by  tradition  the  purity  of  the  whole  breed.  Nor
is  it  always  necessary  to  have  such  certificates;  for  many  horses  and  mares  are  of  such  illus-
trious descent  that  thousands  might  attest  the  purity  of  their  blood.  The  pedigree  is  often  put
into  a  small  piece  of  leather  covered  with  a  waxed  cloth,  and  hung  by  a  leathern  thong  around
the  horse's  neck.

The  Arabs  keep  their  horses  in  the  open  air  all  the  year  round,  not  (like  the  Turkmans)
tying  them  up  in  the  tent,  even  in  the  rainy  season.  Although  thus  exposed  to  the  inclemency
of  the  weather  at  all  seasons,  and  with  very  little  attention  paid  to  its  health,  the  Arab  horse  is
seldom  ill.  From  the  time  that  a  colt  is  first  mounted  (which  is  after  its  second  year)  the
saddle  is  scarcely  ever  off  its  back :  in  winter  a  sackcloth  is  thrown  over  the  saddle,  but  in
summer  the  horse  stands  exposed  to  the  mid-day  sun.  Those  Arabs  who  have  no  saddles
ride  upon  a  stuffed  sheep-skin,  and  without  stirrups:  they  all  ride  without  bridles,  guiding

rider.  The  traveller  may  thus  get  a  horse  cheap The  kings  of  France  and  Bavaria  [this  was  in  182/]  sent  experienced  horse-
dealers  into  Syria,  to  purchase  Arab  stallions  for  the  European  haras.  The  captain  never  met  with  these  agents,  but  was  told  by
good  judges,  who  have  seen  much  of  them  and  their  cattle,  that  they  had  in  general  been  much  taken  in.  Indeed,  good  horses
upon  the  coast  are  very  difficult  to  be  had.  The  plains  of  the  Haourau  afford  the  best  market;  but  they  are  distant,  and  not  much
visited  by  European  merchants.

a  We  do  not  wish  this  to  be  drawn  into  an  expression  of  opinion  as  to  the  relative  deservings  of  the  Arabs  and  Syrians.  Two
foreign  nations  may  be  corrupted  by  intercourse  with  each  other,  although  one  of  them  may  not  originally  have  been  worse  than
the  other.  In  such  cases  one  party  knows  many  things  which  the  other  does  not,  and  there  is  a  mutual  temptation  in  each  party
to  take  advantage  of  the  other's  ignorance.  Hence  the  intense  improbity  which  is  usually  found  to  exist  on  the  borders  of  neigh,
bouring  nations.

b  This  phraseology  needs  explanation.  A  mare  of  high  breed  is  seldom  sold  without  the  seller  reserving  the  half  or  two-
thirds  of  her.  If  he  sells  half,  the  buyer  takes  the  mare,  and  is  obliged  to  let  the  seller  take  the  mare's  next  filly,  or  to  keep  the
filly  himself  and  return  the  mare.  If  the  Arab  has  sold  but  one-third  of  the  mare,  the  purchaser  takes  her  home,  but  must  give
the  seller  the  fillies  of  two  years,  or  else  one  of  them  and  the  roare.  The  fillies  of  the  third  year,  and  all  subsequent,  belong  to
the  buyer,  as  well  as  all  the  male  colts,  whether  produced  the  first  or  any  following  year.  It  thus  happens  that  most  of  the  Arab
mares  are  the  joint  property  of  two  or  three  persons,  or  even  ot  half-a  dozen,  if  the  price  of  the  mare  be  very  high.  A  mare  is
sometimes  sold  on  the  remarkable  condition  that  all  the  booty  obtained  by  the  man  who  rides  her  shall  be  shared  between  him
and  the  seller.

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccclxxxi

the  horse  with  a  halter.  In  fact,  the  extreme  good  temper  and  entire  freedom  from  vice  of  a
horse  which  is  treated,  and  which  feels  itself  rather  the  friend  than  the  slave  of  man,  renders  a
hridle  needless.  The  Arab  is  ignorant  of  the  frauds  of  the  European  jockey,  and  although  in
their  dealings  with  strangers  they  are  apt  to  play  false  as  to  the  pedigree,  they  may  generally
be  trusted  as  to  the  actual  qualities  of  the  horse  they  sell.  Few  of  them  know  how  to  tell  the
age  of  a  horse  by  examining  its  teeth.  Burckhardt  relates  that  when  he  once  looked  into  the
mouth  of  a  mare,  it  was  at  first  apprehended  by  the  Arabs  present  that  he  was  practising  some
secret  charm ;  and  when  the  owner  heard  that  by  such  inspection  the  age  of  the  animal  might
be  ascertained,  he  seemed  astonished,  and  wished  that  his  own  age  should  be  told  by  the
examination  of  his  teeth.

The  Arabs  believe  that  some  horses  are  predestined  to  evil  accidents ;  and,  like  the  Os-
manlis,  they  think  that  the  owners  of  other  horses  must  sooner  or  later  experience  certain  mis-
fortunes, which  are  indicated  by  particular  marks  on  the  horses'  bodies.  There  are  above
twenty  evil  marks  of  this  kind,  which  have  the  effect  of  depreciating  the  value  of  the  horse  by
two-thirds,  or  more.

In  Syria,  as  elsewhere  in  Western  Asia,  the  horses  universally  live  on  barley  and  chopped
straw.  They  are  regularly  fed  morning  and  evening,  and  for  the  most  part  eat  nothing  in  the
interim.  In  the  stable  the  provender  is  laid  before  them  in  troughs  ;  in  the  fields  it  is  put
into  hair  bags,  which  are  fastened  in  such  a  manner  to  the  horse's  head  that  he  can  feed  as  he
stands.  In  the  spring  season  the  horses  are  fed  for  forty  or  fifty  days  with  green  barley,  cut
as  soon  as  the  corn  begins  to  ear.  This  is  termed  "  tying  down  to  grass,"  during  which  time
the  animals  remain  constantly  exposed  in  the  open  air,  and  for  the  first  eight  or  ten  days  are
neither  curried,  mounted,  nor  even  led  about.  After  this  they  are  dressed  as  usual,  and  rode
out  gently,  but  are  never  much  worked  in  the  grass  season.  Some  feed  their  horses  with  the
cut-down  corn  in  their  stable  yards ;  but  it  is  considered  better  to  tie  them  down  in  the  barley
field,  where  they  are  confined  to  a  certain  circuit  by  a  long  tether.  This  grazing  is  con-
sidered of  great  service  to  the  health  of  the  horses,  and  gives  a  beautiful  gloss  to  their  skin.
They  are  at  all  times  littered  with  the  refuse  of  their  provender,  mixed  with  their  own  dung
dried  in  the  sun.

The  reader  will  perceive  that  there  is  some  difference  between  this  treatment  and  that
which  the  Arab  horses  receive.  Some  Arabian  tribes,  indeed,  give  no  corn  at  all  to  their
horses,  which  feed  upon  the  herbs  of  the  desert,  and  drink  plenty  of  camel's  milk,  and  are
besides  nourished  with  a  paste  made  of  dates  and  water.  Even  flesh,  raw  as  well  as  boiled,  is
given  to  the  horses  in  some  quarters,  together  with  the  fragments  of  their  owners'  meals.  An
inhabitant  of  Hamah  assured  Burckhardt  that  he  had  often  given  his  horses  roasted  meat
before  the  commencement  of  a  fatiguing  journey,  that  they  might  be  the  better  able  to  endure
it;  and  the  same  person,  fearing  lest  the  governor  should  take  from  him  his  favourite  horse,
fed  him  for  a  fortnight  exclusively  upon  roasted  pork,  which  so  excited  its  spirit  and  mettle,
that  it  became  absolutely  unmanageable,  and  no  longer  an  object  of  desire  to  the  governor.

Another  difference  is,  that  the  Arabs  never  clean  or  rub  their  horses,  whereas  in  Syria  the
better  sort  of  horses  are  dressed  every  morning.

These  details  respecting  Arab  horses  are  by  no  means  irrelevant ;  for  not  only  do  such
horses  abound  in  Syria  and  in  Palestine  particularly,  but  Burckhardt  affirms  that  it  has  come  to
his  knowledge,  on  the  very  best  authority,  that  the  finest  race  of  Arabian  blood-horses  is  to  be
found  in  Syria;  and  that  of  all  the  Syrian  districts,  the  most  excellent  in  this  respect  is  the
Haouran  (beyond  Jordan),  where  the  horses  may  be  purchased  at  first  cost,  and  chosen  among
the  camps  of  the  Arabs  themselves,  who  occupy  the  plain  in  spring-time.  The  same  excellent
traveller  informs  us  that  the  Bedouins  are  of  opinion  that  the  product  of  an  Egyptian  mare  by
a  blood  Arabian  produces  a  good  breed,  much  better  than  that  of  the  indigenous  Syrian  mares,
whose  breed  is  not  considered  of  any  value,  even  though  crossed  by  the  Koheyl.

Burckhardt  contradicts  the  general  opinion  that  Arabia  is  very  rich  in  horses.  He  is  con-
fident that  he  is  not  by  any  means  under  the  true  estimate  when  he  calculates  the  number  of
horses  in  Arabia,  as  bounded  by  Syria  and  the  Euphrates,  at  fifty  thousand — a  number  much

ccclxxxii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII

inferior  to   what  the  same  extent  of  ground  would  furnish  in  any  other  part  of  Asia  or  in
Europe.

It  has  heen  already  stated  that  the  Osmanlis,  contrarily  to  the  Arabs,  prefer  horses  to
mares  for  riding.  Entire  horses  are  usually  preferred ;  but  persons  advanced  in  years,
especially  among  the  Effendis,  like  geldings,  which  are  not  uncommon  in  the  towns.  The
Syrian  horses,  in  common  with  other  domestic  animals  of  that  climate,  partake  of  a  certain
gentleness  of  temper,  and  have  such  a  disposition  to  become  docile  and  familiar,  that  it  is  very
rare  indeed  to  find  one  completely  vicious. a  The  Arab  horses  are  remarkably  distinguished
for  this  quality,  owing,  without  doubt,  in  a  great  measure  to  the  kind  and  humane  manner  in
which  they  are  reared,  and  ever  after  treated  by  their  masters. b

The  Ass.  It  appears  from  various  evidence,  and  in  particular  from  the  negative  evidence
of  Scripture,  that  the  ass  was  reduced  under  obedience  to  man  long  before  the  horse.  In  the
preceding  notice  of  the  horse  it  has  been  shown  that  the  horse  was  not  known  in  Palestine  until
a  comparatively  late  date ;  and  although  it  was  in  use  earlier  in  Egypt,  it  does  not  appear  that
even  there  the  horse  was  domesticated  in  the  time  of  Abraham.  The  negative  proof  is,  that
the  patriarch  on  leaving  that  country  received  from  its  king  valuable  gifts,  including,  as  it
appears,  all  the  animals  then  domesticated,  "  sheep  and  oxen,  and  maid-servants,  and  he  asses,
and  she-asses,  and  camels."  Now  that  the  horse  is  not  included  seems  clearly  to  evince  that
it  was  not  domesticated,  for  it  is  incredible  that  if  possessed  by  the  Egyptians  it  should  not  have
been  included  among  the  riches  which  Pharaoh  showered  upon  Abraham.  The  absence  of  the
horse,  and  afterwards  its  use  exclusively  in  war,  while  the  ass  was  the  beast  of  civil  life,
occasioned  the  latter  to  be  treated  with  such  care,  as  to  breed  and  rearing,  that  it  had,  and
still  has  in  the  East,  a  very  different  appearance  and  character  to  that  which  it  bears  with  us.
Climate,  also,  may  have  something  to  do  with  the  difference,  as  it  appears  that  the  ass  is
constitutionally  the  animal  of  a  warm  climate.  In  the  genial  climates  of  Western  and  Central
Asia,  where  the  ass  is  carefully  trained,  and  deemed  no  unworthy  rival  of  the  horse,  the  asses  are
not  only  diligent  and  patient,  but  active,  beautiful  in  appearance,  and  in  no  wise  ignoble.  And
if  the  ass  is  even  now  held  in  high  estimation,  overshaded  as  he  is  by  his  magnificent  congener,
the  horse,  how  much  more  so  when  the  horse  was  not  in  use,  or  used  only  in  war  ?  Anciently,
princes  and  great  men  rode  on  asses,c  and  we  have  ourselves  seen  asses  on  which  princes  and
great  men  might  not  disdain  to  ride.  There  are  still,  as  formerly,  an  unusual  number  of  white
asses  ;d  and  we  presume  that  it  is  the  fact  that  such  asses,  as  well  as  horses  of  the  same  colour,
have  their  manes  and  tails  stained,  and  figures  marked  on  their  bodies  with  an  ochreous-red
colour,  which  has  led  some  writers  to  speak  of  parti-coloured  asses.  The  asses  used  in  riding
among  the  Hebrews  were,  as  now,  guided  by  a  rein  placed  in  the  mouth;  in  Hebrew  t£Qn
TlDf!,  translated  to  "  saddle  the  ass."e  The  saddle  was  merely  a  piece  of  cloth,  thrown  over  the
back  of  the  animal.  Among  the  wealthy,  especially  when  women  rode,  a  slave  followed  with
a  staff,  which  he  used  occasionally,  in  order  to  quicken  the  animal's  speed.f

The  best  asses,  as  of  horses,  are  those  of  Arabian  blood.  Chardin  describes  them  as  "  perhaps
the  finest  asses  in  the  world  :  their  coat  is  smooth  and  clean ;  they  carry  the  head  elevated,
and  have  fine  and  well-formed  legs,  which  they  throw  out  gracefully  in  walking  or  galloping.
They  are  used  only  for  the  saddle,  and  are  imported  in  vast  numbers  into  Persia  [and  Syria],
where  they  are  frequently  sold  for  four  hundred  livres ;  and  being  taught  a  kind  of  easy
ambling  pace,  are  richly  caparisoned,  and  used  only  by  the  rich  and  luxurious  nobles."?
As  the  best  of  the  Arabian  horses,  so  may  the  best  of  these  Arabian  asses  be  found  in  Syria
and  Palestine.

a  A  vicious  horse,  prone  to  bite,  is  generally  cured  by  a  hot  leg  of  mutton  being  presented  to  him,  the  painful  effects  which
follow  his  vicious  bite  at  which  make  a  deep  impression  on  his  memory.

t>  The  above  notice  of  horses  is  chiefly  drawn  up  from  the  accounts  of  D'Arvieux,  Russell,  and  Burckhardt,  with  incidental
details  from  various  other  sources.

c  Gen.  xxii.  3,  5;  Num.  xxii.  21,  30  ;  Josh. xv. 18;  Judg.  i.  14;  v.  10  ;  x.  4  ;  xii.  14;  1  Sam.  xxv.  20,  23  ;  2  Sam.  xvii.  23;
xix.  26;  IKingsii.  40;  xiii.  13;  2  Kings  iv.  22,  24 ;  Zech.  ix.  9  ;  Matt.  xxi.  1—7;  Luke  xix.  29— 36  ;  John  xii.  12— 16.

d  Judg.  v.  10.  e  Gen.  xxii.  3;  Num.  xxii.  21 ;  Judg.  xix.  10  ;  2  Sam.  xvi.  1  ;  xvii.  23.

f  Judg.  xix.  3  ;  -2  Kings  iv.  24  ;  Prov.  xxvi.  3.  S  '  Voyages  de  Chardin,'  ed.  Langles,  iii.  368.

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccclxxxii

Dr.  Russell  discriminates  three  sorts  of  asses  as  in  use  in  Syria,  the  most  valuahle  being  the
largest  sized.  The  most  common,  labouring  ass  is  stout  and  hardy,  and  is  larger  than  usually
seen  in  this  country.  Large  caravans  of  them  are  daily  employed  in  taking  provisions  from
the  villages  to  the  towns  :  they  serve  also  for  the  plough ;  and  within  the  cities,  as  they  assist
in  various  kinds  of  labour,  they  are  seen  in  every  street.  Another  and  larger  breed  is  re-
served for  the  saddle;  for  people  in  ordinary  circumstances,  and  many  in  middling  circum-
stances, commonly  ride  asses.  The  Osmanlis  indeed  are  seldom  seen  but  on  horseback,  but
asses  are  often  preferred  by  the  Sheiks,  or  religious  men ;  and  although  most  of  the  opulent
merchants  keep  horses,  they  are  not  ashamed,  especially  when  aged,  to  appear  mounted  on
asses.  Saddle-asses,  of  the  best  sort,  bear  a  high  price ;  they  are  such  as  described  in  the
quotation  from  Chardin — tall,  delicately  limbed,  go  swiftly  in  an  easy  pace,  or  gallop,  and  are
very  docile.  They  are  fed  and  dressed  with  the  same  care  as  horses  ;  the  bridle  is  ornamented
with  fringe  and  cowries,  and  the  saddle,  which  is  broad  and  easy,  is  covered  with  a  fine
carpet.  The  stirrups  are  made  in  the  European  manner,  not  in  the  broad  box-like  fashion
of  those  used  for  horses.

There  is  a  third  variety  of  the  ass,  which  is  known  in  Syria  by  the  name  of  the  Damascus
Ass,  because  it  is  numerous  in  that  city.  It  has  an  enormous  long  body,  and  ears  of  a  remark-
able length.  It  is  taller  than  the  common  sort,  its  skin  smoother,  and  of  a  much  darker
colour.  It  is  often  employed  by  the  bakers  in  transporting  flour  and  brushwood.  A  rider
on  this  animal,  sitting  almost  close  to  the  tail,  when  viewed  from  behind,  has  the  figure  of  a
centaur.

We  have  seen  that  a  larger  size  is  the  characteristic  of  the  ass  preferred  for  the  saddle;
but  yet  a  recent  traveller  describes  the  Syrian  ladies  as  "  riding  upon  donkeys,  which  are
not  much  larger  than  the  largest  kind  of  sheep ;  they  have  great  strength,  and  a  pleasant
gait."a

From  the  number  and  distinction  of  races  indicated  in  the  preceding  account,  it  becomes
more  than  probable  that  some  of  the  varied  names  which  the  Scriptures  apply  to  the  ass  refer
rather  to  those  varieties  in  the  animal  than,  as  translators  have  supposed,  to  the  condition  of
sex  or  age  in  the  same  variety.  Thus  in  the  list  of  domestic  animals  presented  by  the  king  of
Egypt  to  Abraham,  we  read  of  the  "n£)7  chamor,  and  pJ"|N  atun,  rendered  respectively,  "  he-
ass''  and  "she-ass."  But  as,  on  tracing  the  words  through  the  Scripture,  we  find  that
chamor  occurs  in  a  middle  sense,  as  applied  to  the  ass  in  its  average  character,  while  the
atun  is  connected  with  circumstances  of  dignity  and  value,  it  becomes  probable  that  the  former
was  the  common  labouring  ass,  while  the  latter  was  of  a  breed  of  peculiar  value  and  beauty,
used  exclusively  for  the  saddle.  It  is  a  colt  of  the  atun,  which,  in  the  poetical  benediction  of
Israel,  Judah  is  described  as  possessing,  and  binding  to  the  choice  vine  of  Sorek.b
Twenty  asses  distinguished  by  this  name,  were  given  by  Jacob  to  Esau.c  The  ass  on  which
Balaam  rode — the  ass  that  spake — was  an  atun  ;d  of  the  same  were  the  asses  which  were  lost
by  Kish,  and  which  his  son  Saul  sought  with  unavailing  diligence,  but  found — a  kingdom. e
Of  these  also  were  the  asses  belonging  to  king  David,  which  were  entrusted  to  the  care  of  an
officer  of  dignity .f

The  Wild  Ass,  being  mentioned  as  well  known  in  Palestine  and  Edom  as  early  as  the  times
of  Jacobs  and  of  Job,h  it  appears  to  have  been  of  aboriginal  antiquity  in  those  countries.
From  the  subsequent  allusion  to  it,1  its  qualities  appear  to  have  been  familiarly  known
through  the  whole  period  which  the  Scriptural  history  embraces.

The  name  is  fcOS,  para,  which  the  dialects  of  Western  Asia  still  preserve  with  little  variation.
It  may  be  doubtful  whether  the  word  "Tpy,  orud,  indicates  a  different  species,  or  rather  variety
of  wild  ass,  or  is  another  name  for  the  same  variety.  Our  translators  render  this,  as  well  as  the
other,  by  "  wild  ass,"  which  we  much  prefer  to  Good's  attempt  to  mark  a  difference  by  giving  the

a  Paxton,  15.  b  Gen.xlix.il.  c  Gen.  xxxii.  15.  d  Num.  xxii.  23.

e  1  Sam.  ix.  3.  '1  Chron.  xxvii.  30.  S  Gen.  xvi.  13.

ll  Job  vi.  5  ;  xi.  12 ;  xxiv.  5  ;  xxxix.  5—8.  ■  Isa.  xxxii.  14 ;  Jerem.  ii.  24  ;  xiv.  6 ;  Hos.  xiii.  15  ;  Eccles.  xiii.  9.

ccclxxxiv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

latter  as  "  wild  mule  /"     It  might  be  better  to  preserve  both  names  untranslated,  at  least  in
the  description  which  we  find  in  Job  : —

"  Who  hath  sent  forth  the  paha  free?

Or  the  bands  of  the  orud  who  hath  loosed?

Whose  house  I  have  made  the  wilderness,

And  the  barren  land  his  dwelling.

He  seorneth  the  multitude  of  the  city;

To  the  cry  of  the  driver  he  attendeth  not.

The  range  of  the  mountain  is  his  pasture,

And  he  seeketh  alter  every  green  thing."— Job  xxxix.  5—8.

The  Scriptural  intimations  should  be  used  as  materials  for  the  natural  history  of  this  animal.
From  the  passage  now  cited,  it  appears  that  the  wild  ass  was  an  animal  of  the  desert  and  the
mountain — perhaps  changing  from  the  one  to  the  other  with  the  season,  and  bounding,  as  if  in
exultation,  at  his  freedom  from  the  yoke  man  had  imposed  upon  his  kind.  It  seems  also
that  it  was  less  an  inmate  of  Palestine  than  of  the  bordering  plains  and  mountains.  The
intense  and  untameable  wildness  of  the  animal  is  implied  in  nearly  all  the  allusions  to  it ;  hence
its  adoption  as  the  symbol  of  a  perverse  and  incorrigible  character  in  man,  in  which  sense  it
occurs  several  times — as  in  Job  xi.  12  :  "  Vain  man  would  be  wise,  though  he  be  born  a  wild
ass's  colt."  The  Arabs  still  describe  an  "  ass  of  the  desert"  an  indocile  and  contumacious
person.  The  animal  brayed  not  over  his  grass— that  is,  when  his  food  abounded  ;a  and  in
times  of  excessive  drought,  and  therefore  of  corresponding  scarcity  of  food  to  man  and  beast, —

"  The  wild  asses  stood  upon  the  plains,
And  snuffed  up  the  wind  like  dragons:
Their  eyes  were  wasted,  for  there  was  no  grass." — Jer.  xiv.  6.

We  are  also  assured  by  an  Apocryphal  writer  that  the  wild  ass  {onager)  was  the  prey  of  the

lion  in  the  wilderness. b

■

fl/.'i/i

mMmMm  ..

6»M

!//

V

("The  Wild  Ass.     From  a  Drawing  by  Col.  C.  II.  Smith.]
a  Job  vi.  5.

The  Wild  Ass  stands  much  higher
on  its  limbs  than  the  common  ass.
Its  legs  are  longer  and  more  slender,
and  it  is  altogether  a  more  graceful
and  symmetrical  animal,  with  a  greater
predominance  of  equinine  forms  and
qualities  than  the  domestic  ass  exhi-
bits, and  having  therefore  less  resem-
blance to  it  than  to  a  very  fine  mule.
The  mane  is  composed  of  short  erect
hair  of  a  dusky  hue,  and  rather  woolly
texture.  The  colour  of  the  body  is
uniform  silvery  grey,  with  a  broad
coffee-coloured  stripe  extending  down
the  back,  from  the  mane  to  the  tail,
and  crossed  on  the  shoulder  by  the
same  transverse  band  which  the  do-
mestic variety  exhibits.  The  head
of  the  species  west  of  the  Euphrates
is  much  finer  than  that  of  Persia  and
Central  Asia,  and  is  altogether  a  con-
siderably handsomer  animal.  Indeed,
we  are  informed  by  Colonel  Smith  (to
whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  figure
we  give),  that  not  only  is  the  Syrian
wild  ass  larger  and  more  handsome
than  the  Ghurkhud  of  Persia,  but
that  the  species  improves  west  of  the

b  Ec?les.  xiii.  9.

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccclxxxv

Euphrates,  and  is  very  fine  in  the  Bahar  el  Abaid  in  Africa.  We  know  not  on  what  authority
it  is  usually  affirmed  that  the  wild  ass  has  withdrawn  beyond  the  Euphrates,  and  no  longer
exists  in  Asia  west  or  south  of  that  river.  The  facts  we  have  just  stated  evince  the  contrary.
Rauwolff,  travelling  from  Tripoli  to  Aleppo,  says,  "  In  these  countries  are  a  great  many  wild
asses,  called  Onagri"  and  proceeds  to  describe  the  use  made  of  its  skin  in  forming  the  scab-
bards of  swords  and  daggers  ;a  and  Nau  declares  that  he  saw  gazelles  and  wild  asses  among
the  wild  animals  in  the  plains  of  Sharon.b  Burckhardt  declares  that  the  wild  asses  are
"  found  hi  great  numbers"  in  Arabia  Petraea,  near  the  gulf  of  Akaba.  "  The  Sherarat  Arabs
hunt  them,  and  eat  their  flesh,  but  not  before  strangers.  They  sell  their  skins  and  hoofs  to  the
pedlars  of  Damascus,  and  to  the  people  of  the  Haouran.  The  hoofs  furnish  materials  for
rings,  which  are  worn  by  the  peasants  on  their  thumbs,  or  fastened  under  the  arm-pits,  as
amulets  against  rheumatism."0  In  Persia  the  wild  ass  is  a  favourite  object  of  chase,  and  its
flesh  is  esteemed  much  as  we  esteem  venison ;  and  as  such  is  served  up  on  high  occasions  at
royal  tables.

Of  Mules  there  are  various  breeds  in  Syria.  Some  very  beautiful  animals  are  produced
between  high-blood  Arab  mares  and  well  selected  male  asses.  Indeed,  it  is  the  general  opinion
in  the  East  that  the  breed  is  much  finer  in  all  cases  where  the  mother  is  a  mare,  than  when  the
mother  is  an  ass.  Mules  are  noticed  in  the  reign  of  David,  who  himself  had  a  mule  of  state
for  his  own  riding. d  Probably  they  were  known
much  earlier — even  in  the  time  of  Moses;  but
the  reader  may  be  warned  that  the  word  rendered
"mules"  in  Gen.  xxxvi.  24,  has  not  really  that
meaning,  but  probably  signifies  "warm  baths."
Mules  appear  to  have  been  brought  to  the  He-
brews from  other  nations;  and  in  the  more  re-
cent periods  of  their  history  we  find  that  the
more  valuable  ones  came  from  Togarmah,  or
Armenia.e  The  great  mules  of  Persia,  celebrated
for  their  swiftness  (the  mothers  of  which  were
mares)  are  mentioned  in  Est.  viii.  10.

The  better  sort  of  mules,  which  are  capable
of  carrying  heavy  loads,  are  employed  in  the
caravans ;  and  the  common  sort  are  of  great  ser-  [Saddled  Mule.]

vice  for  the  mill  and  water-wheels.      Both  are

maintained  at  less  expense  than  horses,  and  being  surer  footed,  are  better  suited  for  traversing
the  rugged  roads  in  mountainous  countries.  The  domestic  trade  with  the  maritime  towns  and
the  mountains  is  not  only  carried  on  chiefly  by  mule  caravans,  but  they  are  sent  even  to
Erzeroum,  Constantinople,  and  other  remote  towns.  In  these  caravans  the  male  travellers  are
mounted  on  mules  lightly  laden  (usually  with  the  mere  personal  baggage  of  the  rider) ;  and
the  women  either  ride  in  the  same  manner  (sitting  astride,  as  they  always  do,  like  men),  or
ride  in  a  kind  of  wooden  cradle  (called  Muhafly)  hung  on  one  side  of  the  mule  with  another
to  balance  it,  occupied  or  not,  but  made  equiponderant  on  the  other.  But  persons  of  a  certain
rank  travel  in  a  kind  of  litter  carried  by  two  mules.  Within  the  towns,  and  in  short  excur-
sions to  the  circumjacent  gardens,  asses  generally  have  the  preference,  and  the  mules  are
charged  with  the  luggage.  Burckhardt f  states  that  the  breed  of  Baalbec  mules  is  much
esteemed,  and  that  he  had  seen  some  which  were  worth,  on  the  spot,  30/.  or  35/. — a  large  sum
in  that  quarter.

Camels  are  very  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures,  so  as  to  show  that  they  were  from
the  earliest  times  in  common  use  among  the  nomades,  and  that  they  were  also  of  important
service,  at  all  times,  to  the  settled  inhabitants  of  Palestine  and  the  neighbouring  countries.

a  Rauwolff,  58.  b  Nau,  15.  c  '  Notes  on  Bedouins,'  125.

d  2  Sam.  xiii.  29 ;  xviii.  9,  10 ;  1  Kings  i.  33 ;  1  Chron.  xii.  40 ;  Psalms  xxxii.  9.  *  Ezek.  xxvii.  14.

f  Syria,  16.

vol.  i.  3d

ccclxxxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap  VIII.

It  is  surprising  how  little  is  known  to  the  public  of  this  most  useful  animal.  Travellers
supply  but  little  information  concerning  it,  and  the  notices  in  books  of  zoology  are  unsatis-
factory and  incorrect.  Lieut.  Wellsted  accounts  for  this  by  the  supposition  that  every  indivi-
dual traveller  conceived  the  subject  to  be  too  important  to  have  escaped  his  predecessors  and
naturalists  in  general,  as,  in  truth,  it  appears  to  have  done.

The  traveller  just  named,  applies  himself  to  supply  this  deficiency,  and  furnishes  a  very
complete  and  satisfactory  account  of  the  animal.  Burckhardt  had  previously  supplied  a  very
valuable  mass  of  information  on  the  subject.  These  two  form  the  only  tolerable  accounts  of
the  camel  which  we  possess ;  and  it  is  from  them  chiefly  that  the  following  statement  is
derived.  As  the  information  thus  furnished  has  not  yet  found  its  way  into  zoological  books,
we  have  the  more  pleasure  in  introducing  the  substance  of  it  to  the  notice  of  our  readers.

As  a  general  rule,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  camels  of  northern  countries  are  larger,  and
have  more  and  darker  hair  than  those  of  the  south.  Thus  the  camels  of  the  Syrian  deserts  are
larger,  more  hairy,  and  darker  than  those  of  Arabia  and  Egypt ;  but  smaller,  less  hairy,  and
lighter  than  those  of  Anatolia,  and  Northern  Persia,  and  of  the  Turkmans  and  Kourds.  It
bears  heat  and  thirst  better  than  these  latter,  but  is  much  affected  by  cold,  which  kills
many  of  them  even  in  the  desert.  Much  curious  information  respecting  the  different
breeds  may  be  found  in  Burckhardt.  The  countries  most  rich  and  abundant  in  camels  is
undoubtedly  the  province  of  Nejed  in  Arabia,  entitled  on  that  account  Om  el  Bel,  or  Mother
of  Camels.  It  furnishes  Syria,  Hedjaz,  and  Yemen  with  camels,  which  in  those  countries
become  worth  double  the  price  originally  paid  for  them  in  Nejed.  The  Turkmans  and
Kourds  of  Anatolia  purchase  yearly  from  8000  to  10,000  camels  in  the  Syrian  deserts,  of
which  the  greater  number  are  brought  there  from  Nejed.  But  it  is  the  camel  of  Oman  which
is  celebrated  in  the  songs  of  Arabia,  as  the  fleetest  and  most  beautiful ;  and,  in  fact,  the
legs  of  the  Oman  camels  are  more  slender  and  straight,  their  eyes  more  prominent  and
sparkling,  and  their  whole  appearance  denotes  them  of  higher  lineage  than  the  ordinary  breeds
of  this  animal.  In  mountainous  countries  camels  are  scarce  certainly  :  but  it  is  a  mistaken
impression  that  camels  are  not  capable  of  ascending  hills;  for,  provided  they  are  rough,  they
can  ascend  the  steepest  and  most  rugged  paths  with  as  much  facility  as  mules.  The  feet  are
large  and  spreading,  and  covered  at  the  lower  part  with  a  rough  flexible  skin.  It  is  an  erro-
neous opinion  that  the  camel  delights  in  sandy  ground.  It  is  true  that  he  crosses  it  with  less
difficulty  than  any  other  animal :  but  wherever  the  sands  are  deep,  the  weight  of  himself  and
his  load  makes  his  feet  sink  into  the  sand  at  every  step,  and  he  groans  and  often  sinks  under
his  burden.  Hence  the  skeletons  of  camels  are  found  in  the  greatest  numbers  where  the  sands
are  the  deepest.  The  soil  best  adapted  to  their  feet,  and  which  they  traverse  with  the  most
facility,  is  that  of  which  the  desert  is  usually  composed,  a  dry  and  hard  but  fine  gravelly
plain.

In  years  of  scarcity  the  camel  is  always  barren.  If  the  birth  of  a  camel,  as  is  often  the
case,  happens  on  a  journey,  the  Bedouin  receives  it  in  his  arms,  and  places  it  for  a  few  hours
on  the  back  of  its  mother.  But  at  the  first  halting-place  the  little  stranger  is  put  down  to
receive  the  parent's  caresses,  and  always  after  it  continues  to  follow  her  footsteps  unassisted.
At  the  beginning  of  the  second  year  the  young  camels  are  weaned ;  in  the  fourth  year  they
begin  to  breed.

Accustomed  even  from  its  birth  to  long  and  toilsome  journeys,  little  training  is  necessary,
beyond  proportioning  the  weight  to  its  tender  age,  to  inure  them  to  the  carrying  of  burdens ;
and  they  voluntarily  kneel  when  about  to  be  loaded  for  a  journey,  a  position  which  their  great
height  renders  necessary.  Kneeling  is  their  natural  state  of  rest,  but  when  heavily  laden  on
flinty  or  stony  ground,  it  cannot  be  accomplished  without  pain.  They  then  drop  at  once  on
both  front  knees,  and  in  order  to  establish  room  for  their  hinder  legs,  are  compelled  in  that
condition,  and  whilst  encumbered  with  the  whole  weight  of  the  burthen,  to  plough  them
forward.  The  callosities  on  their  joints,  although  nearly  of  a  horny  nature  in  the  aged
camels,  seem  insufficient  to  defend  them,  and  it  is  impossible  for  the  European  to  view  the  act
without  commiseration.     In  consequence  of  this  the    Bedouins  never  make  them  kneel  to

Chap.  VIII.J  ZOOLOGY.  ccclxxxvii

mount  themselves,  but  either  cause  the  animal  to  drop  his  neck  to  receive  their  foot,  and  on
their  raising  it  the  rider  is  enabled  to  gain  his  seat,  or  they  climb  up  behind ;  it  pleases  them
much  when  a  stranger  can  accomplish  either  of  these  feats.

The  distinction  between  the  Camel  and  the  Dromedary  is  not  that  the  former  has  two  humps

and  the  latter  but  one,  as  very  frequently  has  been  stated  and  very  generally  believed.     Both

have  but  one  hump,  and  the  dromedary  is  distinguished  from  the  camel  only  by  its  hio-her

breed  and  finer  qualities — as  the  high  blood  race-horse  is  distinguished  from  the  cart-horse.

Whenever  an  Arab  perceives  in  one  of  his  camels  any  indication  of  its  being  small  and

active,  he  trains  it  for  the  purpose  of  riding  ;  and  if  it  be  a  female,  he  takes  care  to  match  her

with  a  fine  high-bred  male,  whereby  the  fine  dromedary  races  are  improved  and  perpetuated.

These  animals,  destined  exclusively  for  riding,  are  called  hedjein  in  Egypt,  and  deloul  in

Arabia.      The  two-humped  camel  is  the  northern  or  Bactrian  camel — the  camel  of  Central

Asia,  and  found,  by  migration  with  man,  in  the  Crimea,   and  in  the  other  countries  which

border   the   Caucasian  mountains.      In  South-western  Asia   this  camel  is  scarcely  known.

Stephens3  assures  us,  that  on  the  starting  of  the  Mecca  caravan  he  had  seen  together  as  many

as  perhaps  20,000  camels  and  dromedaries,  and  had  not  seen  among  them  more  than  half  a

dozen  with  two  humps.     Burckhardt  also  says  the  Arabs  have  no  dromedaries  with  two  humps,

nor  did  he  ever  see  or  hear  of  any  in  Syria.     It  is  true  that  in  Anatolia  there  is  a  two-humped

breed,  produced  between  the  two-humped  male  dromedary  brought  from  the  Crimea  and  a

Turkman  she  camel.     But  one  of  the  two  small  humps  which  the  progeny  exhibits  is  cut  off

immediately  after  birth,  to  render  it  more  fit  for  bearing  a  load.b     The  single  hump  of  the

Arabian  and  Syrian  camels  continues  round  and  fleshy  while  the  animal  is  in  good  condition ;

but,  by  a  remarkable  provision  of  nature,  this  excrescence  by  its  gradual  absorption  supplies  the

place  of  other  nourishment  under  circumstances  of  privation.     Few  creatures  exhibit  so  rapid  a

conversion  of  food  into  fat  as  camels.     A  few  days  of  rest  and  ample  nourishment  produce  a

visible  augmentation  of  flesh ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  a  few  days  employed  in  travelling  without

food,  reduce  the  creature  almost  immediately  to  little  more  than  a  skeleton,   excepting  the

hump,  which  much  longer  resists  the  effects  of  fatigue.0

The  first  thing,  therefore,  about  which  an  Arab  is  solicitous,  on  commencing  a  long  journey,
is  the  state  of  his  camel's  hump.  If  this  is  in  good  condition,  he  knows  that  the  animal  is  in
a  state  to  endure  much  fatigue  on  a  very  moderate  allowance  of  food,  believing  that,  according
to  the  Arabic  saying,  "  the  camel  feeds  on  its  own  hump."  The  fact  is,  that  as  soon  as  the
hump  subsides,  the  animal  begins  to  desist  from  exertion,  and  gradually  yield  to  fatigue.  After
the  creature  has  in  this  manner  lost  its  hump,  it  requires  three  or  four  months  of  repose  and
copious  nourishment  to  restore  it,  which,  however,  does  not  take  place  until  long  after  the
other  parts  of  the  body  have  been  fully  replenished  with  flesh.  It  is  in  these  facts,  which
exhibit  the  hump  as  a  provision  of  food  (so  to  speak)  for  the  exigencies  of  protracted  travel
across  the  deserts,  that  we  discover  the  adaptative  use  of  this  curious,  and,  as  might  seem  to
the  cursory  observer,  needless  excrescence.

While  young,  camels  are  pretty-looking  animals ;  but  when  aged  and  over-worked,  they
generally  lose  their  hair,  and  become  very  unsightly  objects.  In  general  they  have  a  clean
sleek  coat,  usually  of  a  light-brown  colour,  with  a  fringe  of  dark  hair  along  their  neck ;  but

a  'Incidents  of  Travel,'  248.

b  We  should  not  wonder  if  this  prove  the  foundation  of  the  amusing  story  which  Stephens  says  he  was  repeatedly  told  by  the
Aiabs,  that  all  camels  are  born  with  one  hump,  but  that  the  mass  is  sometimes  cut  down  in  the  middle,  or  indented,  so  as  to
make  two,  to  adapt  the  back  the  better  to  the  saddle.  The  Arabs  obviously  could  not  have  told  him  any  such  thing,  for  it
involves  the  contradiction  of  stating  an  important  use  and  benefit  in  a  practice,  while  practically  no  use  was  made  of  it.  They
doubtless  told  him  just  the  contrary,  being  the  statement  in  our  text ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  how,  through  the  traveller's  interpreter
badly  understanding  the  Arabs,  and  the  traveller  badly  understanding  his  interpreter,  the  fact  which  we  have  stated  might  be
turned  into  the  comical  story  which  he  reports.  It  is  evident  that  his  Arabs  were  not,  as  he  suspects,  "  quizzing  "  him  ;  but  that
they  were  imperfectly  understood  by  him.

c  This  is  Burckhardt' s  statement.  Lieut.  Wellsted  says  just  the  reverse,  namely,  that  the  hump  suffers  before  the  general
frame  of  the  animal.  But  he  is  certainly  wrong,  and  Burckhardt  right;  and  in  all  cases  where  these  authorities  differ,  Burck-
hardt is  to  be  preferred  without  hesitation.  He  knew  far  more  of  camels  than  Wellsted  ;  and  the  statement  of  the  latter,  although
good  and  graphic,  does  not,  when  closely  examined,  contain  any  great  quantity  of  information  which  Burckhardt  had  not  pre-
viously supplied.

3d  2

ccclxxxviii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

this  covering  in  the  Arabian  or  desert  camel  is  less  profuse  than  in  that  of  Upper  Asia,  which
is  better  adapted  to  the  climate  of  those  regions.  In  a  camel,  the  brown  colour  is  not
esteemed ;  reddish,  or  light  gray,  or  reddish  gray  is  preferred.  There  are  black  camels.  The
eye  of  the  camel  much  resembles  that  of  the  gazelle ;  it  is  large,  dark,  soft,  and  prominent,
and  retains  its  peculiar  brilliancy  under  the  fiercest  glare  of  the  sun  and  sand.

The  price  of  a  camel  is  found  to  vary  in  almost  every  place.     In  Egypt  the  price  of  the
same  animal  may  fluctuate  from  twelve  to  forty  dollars,  according  to  the  abundance  and

cheapness  of  provisions.  A  good
Nubian  dromedary*  will  sometimes
cost  eighty  dollars  at  Cairo.  Dro-
medaries of  fine  quality  are  in
much  demand;  fifty  or  sixty  dol-
lars are  given  for  those  of  a  very
common  kind  in  Hedjaz.  The
Oman  camels  are  high-priced.
Burckhardt  mentions  a  case  in
which  three  hundred  dollars,  and
Wellsted  another  in  which  one
hundred  and  fifty  dollars  had  been
given  for  one.  But  from  thirty  to
fifty  dollars  is  their  average  price.
Depth  of  chest  and  largeness  of
barrel  are  their  chief  excellencies.

The  great  length  of  the  camel's
neck  enables  the  animal,  without
stopping,  to  nip  the  thorny  shrubs
which  everywhere  abound  on  the
desert,  and,  although  the  spines  on
some  are  sufficiently  formidable  to
pierce  a  thick  shoe,  the  cartilagi-
nous formation  of  their  mouth  en-
ables them  to  feed  without  diffi-
culty. The  Bedouin  also,  when
walking  devotes  a  considerable
portion  of  his  time  in  collecting  and  feeding  his  camel  with  the  succulent  plants  and
herbs  which  cross  his  path.  These,  on  a  journey,  with  a  few  handsful  of  dates  or  beans,
form  its  ordinary  food ;  but  while  encamped,  he  is  fed  on  the  green  stalk  of  the  jowaree,  and
the  leaves  and  tender  branches  of  the  tamarisk,  heaped  on  circular  mats  and  placed  before
the  camel,  who  kneels  while  he  is  partaking  of  them.  In  Southern  Arabia  they  are  fed  on  salt,
and  even  fresh  fish.

During  a  journey  it  is  customary  to  halt  about  four  o'clock,  remove  the  loads,  and  permit
the  camels  to  graze  around :  if  the  Arabs  are  desirous  of  preventing  them  from  straying  too
far,  they  tie  their  fore-legs  together,  or  bind  the  fetlock  to  the  upper  joint  by  a  cord.  The
head  is  never  secured,  excepting  whilst  travelling,  when  the  Arabs  unite  them  in  single  file  by
fastening  the  head  of  one  to  the  tail  of  his  predecessor.  Towards  evening  they  are  called  in
for  their  evening  meal,  and  placed  in  a  kneeling  posture  round  the  baggage.  They  do  not
browse  after  dark,  and  seldom  attempt  to  rise,  but  continue  to  chew  the  cud  throughout  the
greater  part  of  the  night.  If  left  to  themselves  they  usually  plant  their  hind-quarters  to  the
wind.     The  male  as  well  as  the  female  voids  its  urine  backwards,  and,  as  the  ground  then

a  Distinguished  for  fine  make,  light  colour,  and  scanty  hair.  The  cut  represents  this  fine  variety.  Speaking  of  this  species,
Burckhardt  says : — *'  The  good  Nubian  hedjeins  are  so  very  docile,  and  have  so  swift  and  pleasant  an  amble,  that  they  supply  the
want  of  horses  better  than  any  other  camels.  Most  of  them  are  whitish.  In  swiftness  they  surpass  any  of  the  various  camels  I
hav«  seen  in  those  parts  of  the  East.' '

[Dromedary.]

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccclxxxix

becomes  wet  and  uncomfortable,  tbey  continue  slowly,  without  changing  their  recumbent
posture,  to  move  themselves  forward.

Authorities  differ  with  respect  to  the  camel's  capability  of  enduring  thirst.  From  the  data
collected  by  Burckhardt,  it  appears  that  the  power  varies  much  in  the  different  races  of  the
camel,  or  rather  according  to  the  habits  respecting  the  exercise  of  this  faculty  which  have  been
formed  or  exacted  by  the  heat  or  cold,  the  abundance  or  paucity  of  water,  and  the  state  of
vegetation  in  the  country  in  which  they  have  been  brought  up.  Thus  the  camels  of  Anatolia,
during  a  summer  journey,  require  water  every  second  day,  while  the  camels  of  Arabia  can
dispense  with  it,  until  the  fourth,  or  even  fifth.  But  then  again  much  depends  on  the  season.
In  spring,  when  the  herbage  is  green  and  succulent  it  supplies  as  much  moisture  as  the
animal's  stomach  requires ;  at  that  season,  therefore,  the  journey  across  the  great  Syrian  desert
from  Damascus  to  Baghdad  (twenty-five  days)  may  be  performed  without  any  water  being
required  by,  or  given  to  the  camels ;  at  that  time  of  the  year  only,  therefore,  a  route  destitute
of  water  can  be  taken.  In  summer  the  route  by  Palmyra  is  followed,  in  which  wells  of
water  can  be  found  at  certain  distances.3  Burckhardt  reckons  that  all  over  Arabia,  four  entire
days  constitute  the  utmost  extent  to  which  the  camel  is  capable  of  enduring  thirst  in  summer.
In  case  of  absolute  necessity,  an  Arabian  camel  may  go  five  days  without  drinking,  but  the
traveller  must  never  reckon  on  such  an  extraordinary  circumstance.  The  animal  shows
manifest  signs  of  distress  after  three  days  of  abstinence.  The  traveller  last  named  throws
much  discredit  on  the  popular  story  of  the  reserved  supply  of  water  in  the  camel's  stomach,
for  the  sake  of  which  the  animal  is  said  to  be  often  slain  by  his  thirsty  master.  He  declares
that  he  never  heard  of  this  in  Arabia,  and  the  Darfur  caravans  suffer  much  from  thirst
without  any  such  resource  being  known.  Besides,  he  had  seen  weary  camels  slaughtered
without  noticing  any  water  in  their  stomachs,  unless  they  had  been  watered  the  same  day  ;  and
although  he,  with  philosophical  caution,  does  not  undertake  absolutely  to  deny  the  possibility  of
the  circumstance,  he  does  not  hesitate  to  affirm  that  it  can  have  occurred  but  seldom;  "  Indeed,
the  last  stage  of  thirst  renders  a  traveller  so  unwilling  and  unable  to  support  the  exertion  of
walking,  that  he  continues  his  journey  on  the  back  of  his  camel,  in  the  hope  of  finding  water,
rather  than  expose  himself  to  certain  destruction  by  killing  that  serviceable  creature."

Notwithstanding  its  patience  and  other  admirable  qualities,  the  camel  is  gifted  with  but
little  sagacity ;  nor  does  it  appear  to  be  capable  of  forming  any  strong  attachment  to  its  master,
although  it  frequently  does  so  to  one  of  its  own  kind,  with  which  it  has  long  been
accustomed  to  travel.  In  protracted  desert  journeys  the  camel  appears  fully  sensible  that
his  safety  consists  in  keeping  close  to  the  caravan,  for  if  detained  behind,  he  never  ceases
making  strenuous  efforts  to  regain  it.

It  is  a  pity  to  contradict  the  pleasing  picture  which  Ali  Bey  draws  of  the  peaceful  disposi-
tions of  camels ;  but  the  truth  must  be  told,  which  is,  that  they  are  among  the  most  quarrelsome
beasts  in  existence.  After  the  hardest  day's  journey,  no  sooner  is  the  baggage  removed  than
the  attention  of  the  driver  is  required  to  keep  them  from  fighting,  as  they  are  prone  to  give
the  most  ferocious  bites  and  to  lacerate  each  other's  ears.

The  desert  camels,  less  accustomed  to  walls  and  houses  than  those  of  Anatolia  and  Syria,  are
with  difficulty  led  through  the  streets  of  towns  when  they  arrive  in  caravans ;  and  it  being
impossible  to  prevail  upon  some  of  the  more  unruly  to  enter  the  gates,  it  is  often  found  ne-
cessary to  unload  them  outside  and  to  transport  the  bales  into  the  town  on  asses.b

There  have  been  various  estimates  of  the  speed  of  the  camel.  A  sufficient  number  of  autho-
rities are  agreed  in  estimating  its  ordinary  pace  at  two  and  a  half  miles  an  hour.  Calculations
made  in  Syria,  Egypt,  Arabia  and  Turkistan  agree  in  this.  This  is  to  be  understood  as  the
ordinary  pace  in  long  caravan  journeys,  when  the  animal  only  walks.  The  saddle-dromedaries
are  capable  of  other  things,  although  it  may  be  noted  that  the  long  journeys  which  it  can
perform  in  a  comparatively  short  time,  are  in  general  effected  less  by  positive  speed  than  by
its  very  extraordinary  powers  of  sustained  exertion,  day  after  day,  through  a  time  and  space

*  For  this  see  Wellsted,  ii.,  298 ;  ;*ud  more  particularly.  Skinner,  ii.  87.  b  Russell,  »*•  371*

cccxc  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

which  would  ruin  any  other  quadruped.  For  short  distances,  the  swiftness  of  a  camel  makes
no  approach  to  that  of  even  a  common  horse.  A  forced  exertion  in  galloping,  the  animal
cannot  sustain  above  half  an  hour,  and  it  never  produces  a  degree  of  speed  equal  to  that  of  the
common  horse.  Burckhardt  believes  that  twelve  miles  in  one  hour  is  the  utmost  degree  of
celerity  which  the  very  best  dromedary  can  attain  a  it  may  perhaps  gallop  at  fullest  speed  eight
or  nine  miles  in  half  an  hour,  but  it  cannot  sustain  such  a  rate  of  exertion  for  any  longer
time.  A  forced  trot  is  not  so  adverse  to  the  habits  of  this  animal  as  the  gallop,  and  it  can
sustain  it  for  several  hours  without  enduring  fatigue,  although  in  this  pace  also  the  camel  is
inferior  in  speed  to  the  horse.  Wellsted  reports  that  the  Bedouins  of  Oman  perform  their
desert  journeys  at  a  quick  hard  trot,  from  six  to  eight  miles  an  hour,  and  that  the  camel  can
sustain  this  pace  from  twenty  to  twenty-four  consecutive  hours.  A  gentle  and  easy  amble  of
five  or  five  and  a  half  miles  an  hour  is  however  the  favourite  quick  pace  of  the  dromedary ;
and  if  allowed  to  persevere  in  it,  they  will  carry  their  rider  an  uninterrupted  journey  of  several
days  and  nights.  A  common  caravan  journey  of  twenty-one  days  is  sometimes  performed  in
five  days  at  this  rate.  The  ordinary  burden  of  a  camel  in  a  caravan  journey  is  from  two
hundred  and  fifty  to  five  hundred  pounds ;  but,  for  short  distances,  camels  supplied  abundantly
with  food  can  carry  as  much  as  one  thousand  pounds.

Among  the  Bedouins,  the  female  camels  are  always  more  esteemed,  and  are  dearer  than  the
males,  on  account  of  their  bearing  young,  and  of  the  constant  benefit  of  their  milk ;  but  the
males,  on  account  of  their  greater  spirit,  are  preferred  for  riding,  although  the  females  are
considered  more  expeditious.  In  Syria  and  Egypt,  where  camels  are  chiefly  wanted  for  their
strength  in  bearing  heavy  loads,  the  males  are  the  most  valuable.

Although  the  camel  breeds  in  the  fourth  year  of  its  life,  it  does  not  attain  its  perfect  growth
until  the  twelfth  year.  It  lives  as  long  as  forty  years ;  but  after  twenty-five  or  thirty  his
activity  begins  to  fail,  and  he  is  no  longer  capable  of  enduring  much  fatigue.  If  a  camel  that
has  passed  its  sixteenth  year  becomes  lean,  the  Arabs  say  that  he  can  never  again  be  rendered
fat ;  and  in  that  case  they  generally  sell  them  at  a  low  price  to  the  peasants,  who  feed  their
cattle  better  than  the  inhabitants  of  the  Desert.

Camels'  flesh  is  eaten  with  relish,  and  forms  part  of  all  the  great  feasts  of  the  Bedouins.
For  slaughter,  a  female  that  does  not  breed  is  usually  chosen.  Major  Skinner  describes  the
slaughter  of  a  camel  in  the  journey  across  the  Syrian  desert.  In  the  first  instance  he  was
hamstrung  by  a  cut  from  a  sword  ; — he  sunk  to  his  knees  upon  this,  when  another  man  seized
his  head,  and  bent  it  backwards  on  his  left  side,  exposing  his  breast,  into  which  a  third  plunged
a  sword  up  to  the  hilt.  The  blood  gushing  out,  covered  him  completely.  The  camel  died
instantly,  and  in  less  than  an  hour  was  wholly  eaten.  "  I  gave  my  assistance  to  the  latter
part  of  the  operation,"  says  the  Major,  "  and  found  the  flesh  very  well  flavoured.  Before  it
was  cooked,  it  had  an  exceedingly  coarse  and  red  appearance."  It  appears  from  Burckhardt
that  a  camel  is  rarely  killed.  When  this  does  happen,  it  is  cut  into  large  pieces  ;  some  part
is  boiled,  and  its  grease  mixed'with  borgoul  ;b  part  is  roasted,  and,  like  the  boiled,  put  upon  the
dish  of  borgoul.  The  whole  tribe  then  partakes  of  the  delicious  feast.  Camels'  flesh  is  more
esteemed  in  winter  than  in  summer  ;  and  the  she-camel  more  than  the  male.  The  grease  of
the  camel  is  kept  in  goat-skins  and  used  like  butter.  The  milk  of  the  camel  is  of  great
service  to  the  Bedouins.  It  is  the  milk  for  drink  ;  that  of  the  goats  and  sheep  being  gene-
rally made  into  butter.  Even  the  young  horse  colts,  after  being  weaned  from  their  dams,  are
fed  exclusively  on  camels'  milk  for  a  considerable  time,  and  in  some  tribes  the  adult  horses
partake  of  it  largely.  Flour  made  into  a  paste  with  sour  camels'  milk,  is  a  standing  dish  (called
ayesh)  among  the  Bedouins.  Rice  or  flour,  boiled  with  sweet  camels'  milk  is  another  (called
behatta).  The  useful  hair  or  wool  of  the  camel  is  easily  taken  off  the  skin  by  a  person's  hand,
towards  the  end  of  spring ;  a  camel  has  seldom  more  than  two  pounds  of  hair.  It  is  applied  to  a
variety  of  useful  purposes  by  the  Bedouins ;  but  in  general  use  the  hair  of  the  goat  is,  for  its

a  Lieut.  Wellsted  says  thirteen  to  fifteen  miles.

b  Wheat,  boiled  with  some  leaven,  and  then  dried  in  the  sun.     The  dried  wheat  is  preserved  for  a  year,  and,  boiled  with  butter
and  oil,  is  the  common  dish  with  ;ill  classes  in  Syria.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

CCCXCl

quality,  mucli  preferred  to  that  of  the  camel.  One  consequence  of  the  short  hair  (like  that  of
the  deer)  in  the  Nubian  camel,  and  also  in  the  sheep,  is,  that  the  Bedouins  of  that  country
live  in  huts  made  of  mats  and  reeds,  for  want  of  the  materials  (goats'  and  camels'  hair)  of
which  tent-coverings  are  fabricated  in  Arabia.

The  Arabs  adorn  the  necks  of  their  camels  with  a  band  of  cloth  or  leather,  upon  which  are
strung  or  sewn  small  shells,  called  cowries,  in  the  form  of  half-moons :  to  these  the  sheikhs  add
ornaments  of  silver,  so  that  even  at  the  present  day  they  will  form  a  valuable  prize  to  the
spoiler.  We  possibly  have  here  an  illustration  of  some  passages  in  holy  writ  (as  Jud.  iii.  20,
26),  where  camel  ornaments  are  mentioned  in  connection  with  jewels  and  other  articles  of
value.     The  shells  are  strung  in  a  semicircular  form  :  hence  the  phrase,  "  ornaments  like  the

moon.

If  a  camel  happens  to  break  a  leg,  it  is  immediately  killed,  as  such  a  fracture  is  deemed
incurable.  The  camel  is  laden  as  it  kneels,  and  although  the  load  is  often  laid  on  recent  wounds
and  sores,  no  degree  of  pain  or  want  ever  induces  the  generous  animal  to  refuse  the  load,  or
attempt  to  cast  it  off.  But  it  cannot  be  forced  to  rise,  if  from  hunger  or  excessive  fatigue  its
strength  has  failed;  it  will  not  then  do  this,  even  without  the  load.  Under  such  circum-
stances camels  are  abandoned  to  their  fate.a  It  is  seldom  they  get  on  their  legs  again,  although
instances  have  been  known  where  they  have  done  so,  and  completed  a  journey  of  several  days.
Wellsted  tells  us  he  had  often  passed  them  when  thus  abandoned,  and  remarked  the  mournful
looks  with  which  they  gazed  on  the  receding  caravan.  When  the  Arab  is  upbraided  with
inhumanity,  because  he  does  not  at  once  put  a  period  to  the  animal's  sufferings,  he  answers
that  the  law  forbids  the  taking  away  of  life  save  for  food ;  and  even  then,  pardon  is  to  be
implored  for  the  necessity  which  compels  the  act.  When  death  approaches  the  poor  solitary,
vultures  and  other  rapacious  birds  which  espy  or  scent  their  prey  at  an  incredible  distance,
assemble  in  flocks,  and,  darting  upon  the  body,  commence  their  repast  even  before  life  is
extinct.  The  traveller  continually  sees
remains  of  this  faithful  servant  of
man,  exhibiting  sometimes  the  perfect
skeleton,  covered  with  a  shrunk  shri-
velled hide,  sometimes  the  bones
only,  altogether  deprived  of  flesh,  and
bleached  to  dazzling  whiteness  by  the
scorching  rays  of  a  desert  sun.

Gazelles  are  common  in  Palestine,
and  abound  in  the  Syrian  desert.  It
is  difficult  to  conceive  creatures  more
beautiful,  or  any  whose  frame  and
organization  is  adapted  to  its  pro-
verbially rapid  motions.  The  beauty
of  their  large  and  lustrous,  yet  mild,
black  eyes,  supplies  a  thousand  allu-
sions to  the  poets  and  orators  of  the
East,  who  think  they  bestow  on  a
woman  the  most  rapturous  commen-
dation when  they  say  "  She  has  the
eyes  of  a  gazelle."  Its  speed  supplies
similar  allusions,  and  "  Swift  of  foot
as  a  gazelle"  expresses  the  most  ex-
travagant admiration  of  fleetness  in  a
horse  or  in  man.  So  it  was  among
the  ancient  Hebrews;  as  where  re-
ference    is    made    to    the    speed    of

"    %'-£

^mM§lt

1 •■

*l

M

J

[Gazelles.]
See  a  striking  instance  of  this  in  Stephens,  ii.  11G.

cccxcn

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

[Gazelle  caught  with  lasso.]

Asahel,a  and  where  David,  in  his  elegiac  lamentation  for  Jonathan,  apostrophises  that
tender  friend, — "  O,  antelope  of  Israel!  pierced  in  thy  high  place !"b  The  Hebrews
were  allowed  to  eat  its  flesh,c  and  the  manner  in  which  the  necessary  difference  between
the  mode  of  slaughtering  a  wild  and  a  domestic  animal  is  alluded  to,d  evinces  that  it  was
an  object  of  chase  to  that  people,  as  indeed  the  permission  to  eat  it  implies.  We  have
eaten  of  its  flesh,  and  found  it  very  good,  equal  to,  and  little  different  from  our  venison.  The
gazelle  was  a  conspicuous  object  of  chase  among  the  ancient  Egyptians ;  the  reader  will  notice
the  large  numbers  (comparatively)  in  which  it  appears  in  the  hunting  piece  at  p.  ccclx.  From
that  it  appears  to  have  been  hunted  with  hounds,  although  no  present  hound  or  greyhound  of

that  country  or  of  Western  Asia  is
now  able  to  overtake  it.  It  was  also
caught  by  the  lasso,  and  as  the  chas-
seur by  whom  it  is  used  is  always
represented  on  foot  when  throwing
it,  we  must  suppose  that  he  lay  in
ambush  for  the  purpose,  and  that  it
was  principally  adopted  when  it  was
wished  to  take  the  animal  alive.  In
the  cut  at  p.  ccclxi  we  see  a  gazelle
taken  alive,  and  carried  home  to
stock  the  preserves;  for  it  appears
that  large  herds  of  gazelles  were
kept  by  the  landed  proprietors  of
Egypt  in  fenced  enclosures.  The  noose  employed  in  Egypt  was  very  similar  to  the  South
American  lasso,  but  with  the  difference  in  the  mode  of  use  which  has  just  been  pointed  out.

The  gazelles  are  gregarious  animals,  and  in  Syria  often  appear  in  large  herds  within  a  few
miles  of  the  towns.  They  permit  huntsmen,  if  they  advance  gently,  to  approach  very  near  them,
and  do  not  seem  to  care  much  for  a  caravan  passing  at  a  little  distance ;  but  the  moment  they
take  alarm  they  bound  away,  casting  from  time  to  time  a  look  behind,'  and  if  they  find  them-
selves pursued,  they  lay  their  horns  backward  almost  close  on  their  shoulders,  and  flee  with
incredible  swiftness.  The  greyhounds,  although  reckoned  fleet,  cannot  overtake  them  without
the  aid  of  the  falcon ;  and  as  they  take  alarm  the  instant  they  discover  the  presence  of  dogs,
the  huntsmen  endeavour  to  steal  upon  the  gazelle  unawares,  and  to  get  as  near  as  possible
before  the  dogs  are  slipped,  and  then  pushing  on  at  full  speed,  they  throw  off  the  falcon,  which
being  taught  to  strike  at  or  fix  on  the  cheek  of  the  game,  confuses  it  and  retards  its  course
until  the  greyhounds  are  able  to  come  up.  Although  the  noble  beast  be  thus  interrupted,  the
huntsman  must  ride  hard  who  would  be  in  at  the  death.6

Burckhardt  informs  us  that  on  the  eastern  frontiers  of  Syria  are  several  places  allotted  to  the
hunting  of  gazelles.  An  open  space  in  the  plain,  of  about  one  mile  and  a  half  square,  is
enclosed  on  three  sides  by  a  wall  of  loose  stones,  too  high  for  the  gazelles  to  leap  over.  Gaps
are  left  in  different  parts  of  this  wall,  and  near  each  gap  a  deep  ditch  is  made  on  the  outside.
This  enclosure  is  situated  near  some  rivulet  or  spring  to  which  the  gazelles  resort  in  summer.
When  the  hunting  is  to  begin  many  peasants  assemble  and  watch  till  they  see  a  herd  of
gazelles  advancing  from  a  distance  towards  the  enclosure,  into  which  they  drive  them.  The
gazelles  frightened  by  the  shouts  of  these  people,  and  the  discharge  of  fire-arms,  endeavour
to  leap  over  the  wall,  but  can  only  effect  this  at  the  gaps,  where  they  fall  into  the  ditch

a  2  Sam.  ii.  18.  b  2  Sam.  i.  19.  c  Deut.  xiv.  8.  <»  Deut.  xii.  15. 22 ;  xv.  22,

e  Here  is  an  account  of  an  extemporaneous  gazelle  chase. — "  We  suddenly  came  in  sight  of  a  large  herd  of  antelopes,  which
appeared  to  be  of  the  species  called  by  us  gazelle.  The  Arabs  seized  their  lances,  we  drew  our  pistols,  and  distributing  ourselves
in  an  immense  circle,  we  walked  our  horses  towards  them  slowly.  They  heeded  us  not  till  we  approached  near,  when  they  began
to  hold  up  their  beautiful  heads,  adorned  with  .slightly  curved  tapering  horns,  and  trotted  up  together :  then  seeing  ns  spurring
our  horses  from  behind  the  little  hillocks  all  around  them,  they  dashed  through  us  with  the  rapidity  of  mind ;  lances  were  thrown
pistols  discharged,  but  all  in  vaiu ;  they  quickly  distanced  the  fleetest  horse,  which  was  a  grey  Arab  mare,  and  then  stopped,  and
turned  round,  and  looked  at  us,  and  then  took  to  their  heels  again,  bounding  over  the  ground  in  such  a  way  that  they  appeared  to
fly  rather  than  to  run."— Addison's  '  Damascus  and  Palmyra,'  ii.  340,

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

CCCXClll

outside,  and  are  easily  taken,  sometimes  by  hundreds.  The  chief  of  the  herd  always  leaps
first,  and  the  others  follow  him,  one  by  one.  The  gazelles  thus  taken  are  immediately  killed,
and  their  flesh  sold  to  the  Arabs  and  neighbouring  Fellahs.  Of  the  skin  a  kind  of  parch-
ment is  made,  used  to  cover  the  small  drum  with  which  the  Syrians  accompany  some  musical
instruments  or  the  voice.  When  taken  young,  gazelles  are  easily  domesticated ;  we  have  seen
them  quite  at  ease  and  familiar  in  the  court-yards  of  inhabited  houses  in  the  East.

The  animal  which  we  have  figured  (after  Laborde)  is  not  the  Antilope  dorcas,  to  which  natu-
ralists usually  give  the  name  of  gazelle.  We  know  that  the  animal  figured  is  the  true  gazelle,
and  suppose  it  to  be  the  same  which  Hemprich  and  Ehrenberg  mention  as  the  Ariel  Antelope
(A.  Arabica),  so  called  from  its  light,  elegant  and  graceful  form.  It  is  indeed  not  unlike  the
other  antelope  (A.  dorcas),  but  that  animal  is  of  a  heavier  and  less  elegant  make,  its  colour  is
lighter,  and,  although  very  fleet,  is  considerably  less  active  than  the  true  gazelle.

This  animal  also  doubtless  exists  in  Syria.  We  do  not  indeed  find  it  distinctly  named  by
any  competent  traveller ;  but  Russell  describes  its  prominent  characteristics  and  relation  to
the  true  gazelle  in  terms  which  it  seems  necessary  to  refer  either  to  this  species  or  to  the  Ahu.a
However,  we  are  content  to  have  noticed  the  true  gazelle,  without  involving  our  readers  in  the
obscurities  which  involve  every  attempt  to  determine  critically  the  distinctions  of  the  species
of  the  antelope  genus  found  in  Western  Asia.

Of  the  Cervidce  no  example  appears  to  exist  in  Syria  and  Palestine ;  but  we  are  by  no
means  clear  that  the  Common  Stag  may  not  claim  one  of  the  names  in  Scripture  which  are  of
difficult  appropriation,  but  which  appear  to  refer  to  animals  of  the  antelope,  deer,  and  goat
kinds.  We  have  the  satisfaction  of  finding  the  stag  among  the  animals  represented  in  the
Egyptian  sculptures ;  and  although  it  does  not  now  exist  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  or  in  the
deserts  east  thereof,  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  was  assured  that  it  was  still  seen  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  Natron  Lakes.

We  here  introduce  some  figures  of  horned  animals,  objects  of  chase,  from  the  Egyptian

[Ibex.

Oryx.

Gazelle.

Stag.]

sculptures.  The  two  middle  figures  are  the  only  two  species  of  the  antelope  genus  which  the
sculptures  represent,  unless  the  newly  identified  animal,  the  Addax,  be  intended  to  be  repre-
sented in  another  figure  of  obscure  character,  as  shown  in  the  first  figure  of  the  following
engraving.

The  Oryxb  and  Addax  are  not  natives  of  Syria,  or  even  of  Egypt,  at  present ;  although  the

[Addax?  Goat.  Kebseh.]

former,  at  least,  certainly  was  found  there  in  ancient  times.     It  was  a  conspicuous  object  of

a  Antelope  subgulturosa.

b  Abu  Haib.— Antelope  leucoryx.

VOL.  I.

3e

cccxciv  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

the  chase.  The  Cut  at  p.  ccclxi  represents  a  man  carrying  home  a  dead  oryx.  It  was  one  of
the  animals  tamed  by  the  Egyptians,  and  kept  in  great  numbers  in  the  preserves  of  their  villas.
We  are  induced  to  notice  it  in  this  place  from  the  fact  that  this  is  the  most  celebrated  of  all
the  genus,  being  that  which  appears  to  have  given  rise  to  the  famous  Unicorn  of  the  ancients,
and  to  which  there  are  so  many  references  in  Scripture.  The  animal  is  about  the  size,  and
has  much  general  resemblance  to  a  large  ass,  and  its  very  long,  thin,  annular,  and  slightly
curved  horns,  have  a  perfect  resemblance  to  that  which  is  ascribed  to  the  unicorn  of  the
heralds.  The  horns  lying  comparatively  close  to  each  other,  the  animal  seems  at  a  distance,
and  in  various  points  of  view,  to  have  but  one  horn;  and  in  the  Egyptian  representations,
which  are  almost  always  in  profile,  only  one  horn  is  usually  seen.

Goats  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  as  forming  a  very  important  portion  of  the
flocks.  Indeed,  the  many  useful  qualities  of  the  goat  seem  to  have  recommended  it  almost  as
early  as  the  sheep  to  the  care  of  the  early  pastoral  tribes.  When  proper  attention  is  paid  to
this  animal,  it  is  scarcely  exceeded  by  the  sheep  in  usefulness  to  man.  Its  flesh  is  much
esteemed  in  the  East,  and  that  of  the  kids  is  most  excellent.  The  hair  is  more  valued  than
that  of  the  camel,  and,  as  at  the  time  when  the  Israelites  sojourned  in  the  wilderness,51  goats'
hair  among  all  the  Bedouins  constitutes  the  material  of  which  the  coverings  of  tents  are  made,
as  well  as  camel  and  provision  bags.  The  milk  also  is  now,  as  among  the  ancient  Hebrews,
highly  esteemed.b  From  the  beginning  of  April  to  September  the  towns  are  supplied  with
milk  by  large  herds  of  goats,  which  pass  through  the  streets  every  morning,  and  are  milked
before  the  houses  of  the  customers.  The  products  from  the  milk  are  furnished  in  abundance
at  the  same  season.  Butter  and  cheese  are,  among  the  nomades  who  principally  supply  the
towns,  made  of  goat's  and  sheep's  milk,  although  cow's  milk  is  also  used  in  the  towns.  It  may
be  had  fresh  through  this  season.  Som&y  kaimak,  which  has  some  resemblance  to  Devonshire
cream.  And,  above  all,  there  is  leben— &  scriptural  name  for  the  same  thing — sour  butter-
milk, which  forms  the  principal  beverage  of  the  Arabs,  and  is  much  used  in  their  dishes.
Large  quantities  are  also  consumed  in  the  towns.  While  the  season  lasts  it  makes  up  a  great
part  of  the  food  of  the  poorer  classes ;  it  is  also  served  up  at  all  tables,  either  in  small  bowls
by  itself,  or  mixed  up  with  salad-herbs,  and  is  sometimes  poured  over  the  roast  meat  and
ragouts.  Leben  from  the  milk  of  the  buffalo  is  also  much  esteemed.  These  things  are  brought
to  the  towns  from  the  villages  and  the  camps  of  the  wandering  tribes.  The  Scriptural  name
of  haleib  is  still  applied  to  fresh  milk,  as  that  of  leben  is  to  sour.

Of  the  skins  of  the  goat  leather  bottles  are  made.  These  are  often  mentioned  in  the  Bible.
When  intended  for  water,  the  hairy  side  of  the  skin  is  external ;  but  in  wine-bottles  the  hairy
side  is  internal.  Of  the  skins  of  kids,  small  bottles,  which  answer  the  purpose  of  flasks,  are
made.

The  treatment  of  goats  in  the  flock  is  little  distinguished  from  that  of  the  sheep ;  we  shall
therefore  only  notice  one  fact  which  has  come  under  our  own  cognizance; — that  in  mixed  flocks
of  sheep  and  goats,  the  old  he-goats  assume  the  head  and  pre-eminence,  not  only  over  their  own
species,  but  over  the  whole  flock.  And  to  this,  they,  by  their  superior  physical  energies,  seem
fairly  entitled.

There  are  two  domestic  varieties  of  the  goat  in  Syria.  One  of  them  differs  in  no  considerable
degree  from  the  British  goat ;  but  the  other  is  of  larger  size,  and  is  distinguished  by  its  pendu-
lous ears,  often  a  foot  in  length,  and  for  the  ram-like  form  and  character  of  the  head.  The  goats
of  the  Arabs  also  are  mostly  of  this  long-eared  species,  and  their  colour  is  generally  black. —
Hence  the  black  colour  of  the  Arab  tents,  which  are  commonly  made  with  its  hair,  which  is  very
ample.  It  yields  very  sweet  and  excellent  milk  in  a  profuse  q\iantity ;  it  is  therefore  preferred  as
a  milch-goat,  and  many  large  towns  derive  nearly  their  whole  supply  from  it.  Rauwolff  says  that
among  the  goats  at  Aleppo  "  there  are  some,  not  very  large,  whose  ears  are  two  feet  long,  and
so  hang  down  to  the  ground  as  to  embarrass  the  animal  when  it  feeds."  He  adds  that  one
of  these  ears  is  usually  cut  off,  and  that  then  the  animal  turns  on  that  side  in  feeding,  that

a  Exod.  xxv.  6,  26.  b  Prov.  xxvii.  27-

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

cccxcv

he  may  not  be  inconvenienced  by
the  remaining  ear.  At  Jerusalem  he
gives  the  same  length  to  the  ears  of
some  of  the  goats.  The  long  ear  of
this  species  seems  to  be  alluded  to  by
the  prophet  Amos  (iii.  32)  when  he
describes  a  shepherd  as  saving  from
the  mouth  of  the  lion  only  "  two  legs,
or  a  piece  of  ear."

Burckhardt  notices  a  valuable  "  spe-

:i!>

%

t  1.1'      \

iff

cies "  of  domestic  goat  in  the  valley
of  Baalbec,  which  appears  from  the
description  to  be  a  variety,  or  a  very
fine  breed,  of  that  which  has  now  been
noticed.  "  The  goats  are  of  a  species
not  common  in  other  parts  of  Syria  ;
they  have  very  long  ears,  large  horns,
and  long  hair,  but  not  silky  like  that
of  the  goats  of  Anatolia."  It  is  not
impossible,  however,  that  the  cele-
brated Angora  species  of  goat,  with
its  hair  resembling  silk,  and  called
"  camel's  hair,"  was  known  to  the
ancient  Hebrews.  The  allusion  in
Solomon's  Song  iv.  1,2;  vi.  5,  may
apply  exceedingly  well  to  this  species  ;
and  Shulzea  assures  us  that  he  saw
flocks  of  these  goats  descending  from
the  mountains  in  the  vicinity  of  Acre
and  Caesarea.

Of  Wild  Goats  there  is  frequent  mention  in  the  Scriptures.  We  presume  that  the  names
there  employed  refer  to  the  two  species  whose  existence  in  Palestine,  Edom,  and  Sinai  has
been  ascertained.  These  are  the  Ibex  and  the  Kebsch.  It  happens  that  these  two  are  also
the  only  wild  goats  figured  on  the  Egyptian  monuments.b

The  Ibex  is  very  similar  to  the  Bouquetin  of  the  Alps.  It  is  called  in  Arabic  Beden  and
Tdylal.  The  former  appellation  is  exclusively  applied  to  the  male,  which  is  readily  distin-
guished by  a  beard  and  large  knotted  horns,  curving  backward  over  the  body.  The  female
has  short  erect  horns,  scarcely  larger  than  those  of  the  gazelle ;  and  being  of  much  smaller
and  lighter  structure,  we  suspect  that  it  has  sometimes  been  mistaken  for  a  different  species.
Burckhardt  informs  us  that  in  all  the  wadys  south  of  the  Modjeb  (Arnon),  and  especially  in
the  wadys  Modjeb  and  El  Ahsa,  large  herds  of  these  "  mountain  goats  "  are  found,  forty  or
fifty  together.  They  are  killed  by  the  people  of  Kerek  and  Tayfle,  who  hold  their  flesh  in
high  estimation.  They  sell  the  large  knotted  horns  to  the  Hebron  merchants,  who  carry  them
to  Jerusalem,  where  they  are  worked  into  handles  for  knives  and  daggers.  The  traveller
himself  saw  a  pair  of  the  horns  at  Kerek  three  feet  long.  The  Arabs  told  him  that  it  was
difficult  to  get  a  shot  at  them,  and  that  the  hunters  hide  themselves  among  the  reeds  on  the
banks  of  streams  where  the  animals  resort  in  the  evening  to  drink.  They  also  asserted  that,
when  perceived,  the  animals  will  throw  themselves  from  a  height  of  fifty  feet  and  more  upon
their  heads  without  receiving  any  injury.  The  same  thing  is  asserted  by  the  hunters  in  the
Alps.

a  In  Paulus's  Collection  of  Travels,  vii.  108.

b  The  common  domestic  milch-goat  is  seen  in  the  central  figure  in  the  second  cut  at  p.  cccxciii.  The  ibex  occurs  in  the  hunting
scene  at  p.  ccclx,  and  in  the  first  figure  of  the  first  cut  at  p.  cccxciii.  The  kebsch  is  seeu  as  the  third  fig.  in  the  second  cut  in  the
same  page.

3  e  2

CCCXCV1

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

The  same  traveller  had  occasion  to  notice  the  Ibex  again  among  the  Sinai  mountains,  where
it  is  common.  There  the  chase  of  the  Beden  resembles  that  of  the  Chamois  of  the  Alps,  and
requires  as  much  enterprise  and  prudence.  The  Arabs  make  long  circuits  to  surprise  them,
and  endeavour  to  come  upon  them  early  in  the  morning  when  they  feed.  The  goats  have  a
leader,  who  keeps  watch,  and  on  any  suspicious  sound,  smell,  or  object,  makes  a  noise,  which
is  a  signal  for  the  flock  to  make  their  escape.  They  have  much  decreased  of  late  years  in  the
Sinai  peninsula,  if  we  may  credit  the  Arabs,  who  say  that  fifty  years  ago,  if  a  stranger  came  to
a  tent,  and  the  owner  of  it  had  no  sheep  to  kill,  he  took  his  gun  and  went  in  search  of  a
Beden.  They  are,  however,  more  common  there  than  in  the  Alps,  or  in  the  mountains  to  the
east  of  the  Red  Sea.  The  flesh  is  excellent,  and  has  nearly  the  same,  flavour  as  that  of  the
deer.  The  Bedouins  make  water-bags  of  their  skins,  and  rings  of  their  horns,  which  they
wear  on  their  thumbs.  When  the  animals  are  met  with  in  the  plains,  the  dogs  of  the  hunters
easily  catch  them,  but  they  cannot  come  up  with  them  among  the  rocks,  on  account  of  the
tremendous  leaps  which  they  make  from  the  heights.

The  Kebsch  of  the  modern  Arabians  is  also  called  the  Wild  Sheep,  although  it  seems  to
have  more  of  the  goat  than  the
sheep.  At  all  events,  its  equivocal
position  indicates  the  present  as
the  proper  place  for  it.  It  is
found  in  Sinai  and  in  the  moun-
tains which  border  the  valley  of
the  Nile,  even  to  Ethiopia  and
Abyssinia;  and  there  is  little
doubt  that  it  formerly  existed  in
the  southern  districts  of  Judea  be-
yond Jordan.  It  is  supposed  by
some  to  be  the  TpN,  akko,  of
Deut.  xiv.  5,  rendered  "  wild-
goat;"  but  there  are  others  who,
we  think  with  less  probability,
refer  this  name  to  the  Saiga,  still
called  Akkak  by  the  Tartars,  and
Akkim  by  the  Turks,  while  some
assign  it  to  the  Ibex.  The  female
kebsch  is  between  two  and  three
feet  high  at  the  shoulder,  and  its
total  length  from  the  nose  to  the
end  of  the  tail  is  little  more  than
four  feet ;  but  the  male  is  longer,

and  is  provided  with  stronger  horns,  which  are  about  five  inches  in  diameter  at  the  roots,
and  are  curved  downward  towards  the  neck.  The  whole  body  is  covered  with  hair,  like
many  of  the  Ethiopian  sheep,  and  the  throat  and  thighs  of  the  fore  legs  are  furnished  with  a
long  pendant  mane.  This  peculiarity  is  clearly  exhibited  in  the  Egyptian  sculptures,  and
this  suffices  to  evince  the  identity  of  the  kebsch  wherever  its  figure  is  represented.*

Sheep.  The  Israelites  and  their  patriarchal  fathers  had  large  possessions  of  sheep;  and  the
allusions  to  sheep,  to  flocks,  to  shepherds,  and  to  sheep-keeping,  are  frequent  throughout  the
sacred  books.

There  are  two  varieties  of  sheep  in  Syria.  The  first,  called  the  Bedouin  Sheep,  differs  not
much  from  the  large  breed  in  Britain,  except  that  the  tail  is  somewhat  longer  and  thicker,  and

[Kebsch — Ovis  Nagilophus.]

a  The  principal  authorities  for  the  preceding  notice  of  goats  are— Russell,  i.  118;  ii.  150;  Burckhardt,  ("Notes,")  114,
("  Syria,")  15.  405,  526,  534,  590 ;  Wilkinson,  iii.  25 ;  Rauwolff,  96,  275  ;  Morison,  149,  468 ;  Nau.  535,  648  ;  D'Arvieux,  ii.  276 ;
Buckingham,  (A.  Tribes,)  468 ;  Paxton,  35.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

cccxcvn

the  ears  rather  larger.     They  derive  their  name  from  the  circumstance  that  the  flocks  of  the

Bedouins  are  composed  of  this  species.

The  other  species   is  very  common  in  Syria,   and  on  account   of  its  extraordinary   tail

has  been  much  noticed  by  nearly

all   travellers  in   the    East.      The

carcase  of  one  of  these  sheep,  with-
out including  the  head,  feet,  en-
trails,   and  skin,    generally  weighs

from  fifty  to  sixty  pounds,  of  which

the  tail  makes  up  fifteen  pounds;

but  some  of  the  largest  breed,  that

have  been   fattened  with  care,  will

sometimes  weigh  150  pounds,  the

tail  alone  composing  a  third  of  the

whole  weight. a     This  tail,  a  broad

and  flattish  appendage,  has  the  ap-
pearance of  a  large  and  loose  mass

of  flesh  or  fat,  upon  the  rump  and

about  the  root  of   the  tail ;    and,

from  the  odd  motion  which  it  re-
ceives when  the  animal  walks,  one
would  suppose  it  connected  to  the
animal's  body  only  by  the  skin
with  which  it  is  covered.  This
skin  is  usually  invested  with  thick
wool  on  the  upper  surface  of  the
tail.  In  the  Egyptian  variety b  this
tail  is  quite  pendulous  and  broad
throughout;    but    in    the     Syrian

variety  the  tail  narrows  almost  to  a  point  towards  the  end,  and  the  extremity  is  turned  up.
This  is  a  great  convenience  to  the  animal.  The  sheep  of  the  extraordinary  size  mentioned
before,  are  very  rare,  and  usually  kept  in  yards,  so  that  they  are  in  little  danger  of  injuring
the  tail  as  they  walk.  But  in  the  fields,  in  order  to  prevent  injury  from  the  bushes,  the
shepherds,  in  several  places  of  Syria,  fix  a  thin  piece  of  board  on  the  under  part  (which
is  not  like  the  rest  covered  with  wool),  and  to  this  board  small  wheels  are  sometimes
added.  From  this,  by  the  help  of  a  little  exaggeration,  we  have  the  story  of  the  Oriental
sheep  being  under  the  necessity  of  having  carts  to  carry  their  tails.  This  could  never
be  necessary  in  Syria,  where,  from  the  manner  in  which  the  extremity  of  the  tail  is  tucked  up,
no  enlargement  of  size  could  make  it  trail  on  the  ground.  The  African  sheep  do  not  enjoy
this  advantage,  and  with  respect  to  them  it  may  not  be  equally  necessary  to  dispute  the  story
told  by  Herodotus,  Ludolph,  and  others.  The  tail  is  entirely  composed  of  a  substance  between
marrow  and  fat,  serving  very  often  in  the  kitchen  in  the  place  of  butter,  and,  cut  into  small
pieces,  makes  an  ingredient  in  various  dishes.  When  the  animal  is  young  it  is  little  inferior
to  the  best  marrow.  The  only  allusion  to  this  appendage  which  we  can  discover  in  the  Scrip-
tures is  in  that  which  names  "  the  fat  of  the  tail,"  or  "  the  fat-tail,"  as  one  of  the  parts  of
sacrificial  victims  which  was  to  be  consumed  upon  the  altar.

In  the  more  populated  part  of  the  country,  it  is  not  usual  to  see  flocks  of  sheep,  although

[Fat-tailed  Sheep.]

a  Tails  much  exceeding  this  are  mentioned  by  travellers.  Ludolph  saw  a  sheep's  tail  weigh  eighty  pounds  in  Egypt ;  and
Symon  Simion  speaks  of  the  sheep-tails  in  that  country  as  weighing  seventy  pounds.  But  Russell  affirms  that  tails  of  such  size
must  have  been  produced  by  pampering  the  animals  with  bran  and  barley.  The  average  weight  of  the  tail  in  this  sheep,  in  dif-
ferent countries,  may  be  taken  at  from  twenty  to  thirty  pounds.  Villamont  says  he  saw  them  in  Syria  to  weigh  thirty-three  pounds
and  upwards  (Voyage,  liv.  v.  p.  628).

•>  This  is  the  variety  represented  in  our  cut,  having  been  unable  to  procure  a  good  figure  of  the  Syrian  variety.  There  is  no
perceptible  difference,  except  in  the  circumstance  indicated  in  the  text.

cccxcviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

flocks  of  goats  are  often  observed,  with  their  keeper.  But  numerous  sheep  (fat-tailed)  are
seen  individually,  or  in  twos  and  threes,  being  the  small  separate  property  of  the  several  in-
habitants. They  have  usually  a  string  about  their  necks,  by  which  they  are  fastened  when  at
home,  and  led  about  and  managed  when  out  at  pasture.  "  We  may  see  them,"  says  Paxton,
"  led  about  in  the  gardens  and  vineyards,  and  out  on  the  mountain  side ;  a  boy  or  a  girl  is
usually  in  attendance  upon  each  sheep.  In  the  evening  I  have  often  seen  them  bringing  the
sheep  to  the  springs  and  pools  of  water,  and  pour  the  water  plentifully  over  them,  I  suppose
to  cool  them."  In  some  places  they  are  fed  at  home  with  mulberry-leaves,  which  are  squeezed
up  into  balls  and  thrust  into  their  mouths.  Under  these  circumstances  the  sheep  takes  the
position  of  a  much  valued  and  highly  petted  animal,  and  seems  to  be  perfectly  conscious  of  its
consequence  and  importance,  stamping  and  butting  at  all  dogs  that  may  approach  the  door  of
its  owner,  near  which  it  is  generally  tied  up.

The  mutton  is  fat  and  well  flavoured  throughout  the  year,  except  for  a  few  weeks  in  the
spring,  and  the  want  is  then  supplied  by  excellent  lamb.  Rauwolff  states  that  the  sheep
brought  from  the  mountains  to  Jerusalem  are  allowed  to  feed  for  some  time  on  the  fragrant,
delicate,  and  wholesome  herbage  which  the  neighbourhood  affords,  and  that  the  mutton  of
that  city  has,  in  consequence,  a  peculiarly  pleasant  flavour.  Among  the  Arabs,  and  (from
them)  in  the  towns,  there  is  a  way  of  preserving  mutton  by  boiling  and  potting  it  in  large
earthern  jars,  covered  up  with  its  own  tallow  or  dripping,  which  is  poured  in  a  boiling  state
upon  the  meat  as  it  lies  in  the  jar.

The  consumption  of  animal  food  is  not  very  considerable  in  Syria,  or  in  any  other
Eastern  country.'"1  The  present  supply  of  sheep,  including  those  of  the  inhabiting  Arab  tribes,
is  not  by  any  means  equal  to  even  the  limited  demand,6  and  large  numbers  are  therefore  im-
ported from  Mesopotamia  and  the  pashalic  of  Erzeroum.  Epidemic  diseases  are  very  rare
among  the  flocks  of  the  Syrian  Arabs  ;  but  the  Kourd  sheep,  which  came  from  Mesopotamia,
are  very  subject  to  them.  Burckhardt  states  that  in  1810  not  less  than  10,000  of  them  died
in  a  pasture-ground  of  Lebanon.  The  Arabs  themselves  make  journeys  into  Northern
Arabia  (the  Nejed)  to  buy  up  sheep  (as  well  as  camels)  for  the  Syrian  market.  The  journey
is  so  timed  that  the  flocks  may  arrive  in  Syria  early  in  the  spring,  when  they  are  immediately
sold  to  the  butchers  of  Damascus  and  of  the  Druse  mountains,  who  kill  them  without  delay,
knowing  by  costly  experience  that  the  sheep  left  to  fatten  in  Syria  die  suddenly  about  a  month
after  their  arrival.

It  is  among  the  Arab  tribes  that  the  condition  of  the  sheep  corresponds  the  most  exactly
with  the  Scriptural  intimations.  Being  sources  of  great  emolument  to  the  nomades,  they  are
highly  valued  by  them.     They  give  them  titles  of  endearment,  and  the  ram  that  is  called  out  by

a  We  have  obtained  data  for  a  small  calculation  ou  this  subject  which  may  interest  the  reader.  More  meat  is  consumed  in
towns  than  in  villages,  and  in  large  towns  than  in  small  ones.  Therefore,  in  taking  Aleppo  for  the  standard  of  consumption  in
Syria,  the  average  is  certainly  not  underrated  but  exceeded.  The  population  is  60,000,  and  the  same  is  the  number  of  sheep
reckoned  to  be  annually  consumed  in  that  city — being  one  sheep  annually  to  each  person.  Now  in  London,  the  sheep  sold  in
Smithfield  alone  in  1838  was  1,403,400,  which  we  may  assume  to  be  about  the  population  of  the  district  which  Smithfield  Market
supplies.  So  far,  there  is  one  sheep  by  the  year  to  the  population  of  each  city.  But  then  the  sale  of  sheep  in  Smithfield  is  an
imperfect  measure  of  the  consumption  of  sheep,  seeing  that  considerable  numbers  are  sold  to  the  butchers  on  their  way  to  the
market,  and  a  large  quantity  of  slaughtered  meat  is  brought  to  other  markets  for  sale  from  the  country.  Then  the  Aleppineseat
scarcely  any  meat  but  mutton — no  pork,  very  little  beef,  and  scarcely  any  veal.  But  considering  that  the  Londoners  eat  about  as
much  beef  as  mutton,  and  adding  thereto  the  large  quantities  of  pork  and  veal  which  they  consume,  we  may  very  moderately
calculate  that  an  inhabitant  of  London  consumes  about  four  times  as  much  animal  food  as  an  inhabitant  of  Aleppo.

t>  We  learn  this  from  Dr.  Bowring's  *  Report,"  which  states  that — "  There  are  brought  annually  from  Erzeroum  and  Mesopo-
tamia about  80,000  sheep  for  the  consumption  of  Syria,  the  greater  part  of  which  are  sold  at  Hamah,  Homs,  Damascus,  and  in  the
South.  The  price  varies  according  to  the  demand,  from  65  to  80  piastres  (13s.  to  16s.)  each — the  average  price  is  70  piastres  (14s. )
each ;  making  for  80,000  a  total  sum  of  5,600,000  piastres  (56,000/.)  ;  the  sale  is  effected  partly  for  cash  and  partly  ou  credit.  The
returns  for  this  amount  are  made  mostly  in  specie,  in  new  and  old  gazzis,  which  is  a  heavy  drain  ou  the  capital  of  Syria  :  for  the
quantity  furnished  by  Arabs  and  other  pastoral  populations  for  the  consumption  in  Syria,  there  is  an  exchange  of  commodities  which
is  mutually  beneficial  ;  but  for  the  supplies  received  from  Erzeroum  and  Mesopotamia,  the  balance  of  the  trade  is  wholly  dis-
charged in  gold.  Ibrahim  Pacha  attempted  to  apply  a  remedy  to  this  by  increasing  the  number  of  sheep  produced  in  Syria,  lie
published  an  order  that  no  lambs  were  to  be  killed  for  one  or  two  years  ;  for  it  had  been  the  custom  by  the  population  to  kill  the
lambs  while  very  young.  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  measure  has  done  anything  towards  producing  the  effect  desired.  The
supplies  from  Mesopotamia  have  not  decreased,  and  the  price  of  mutton  in  every  part  of  Syria  is  from  three  to  three  and  a  half
piastres  per  oke  [about  twopence-halfpenny  per  lb.].  So  difficult  is  it  by  legislation,  however  despotic,  to  force  production,  and
give  direction  to  capital,  independent  of  profit.  To  prohibit  the  killing  of  lamhs  was  to  increase  the  demand  for  them,  and,  conse-
quently, to  increase  the  evil  it  was  intended  to  cure.

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.

CCCXC1X

its  master  marches  before  the  flock ;  hence  the  rulers  of  the  people  are  everywhere  called  in
Scripture,  "leaders  of  the  flock. "a  The  Bedouins  have  certain  names  by  which  they  call  the
sheep  either  to  drink  or  to  be  milked ;  the  sheep  know  the  voice  of  the  shepherd,  and  go  at
his  bidding.b  The  sheep  and  goats  are  milked  during  the  three  spring  months,  in  the
morning  and  evening.  They  are  sent  out  to  pasture  before  sunrise  while  the  lambs  and  kids
remain  in  or  near  the  camp.  About  ten  o'clock  the  flock  returns.  The  young  are  then
allowed  to  satiate  themselves,  after  which  all  the  ewes  belonging  to  one  tent  are  tied  to  a  long
cord,  and  milked  one  after  another.  When  an  ewe  is  feeble  in  health,  her  milk  is  left  wholly
for  the  lamb.  The  same  process  occurs  at  sunset.  From  one  hundred  ewes  or  goats  (the
milk  of  which  is  usually  mixed  together)  the  Arabs  expect  in  common  years  about  eight
pounds  of  butter  per  day,  or  about  seven  hundred  pounds  in  the  three  spring  months.  An
Arab  family  uses  in  the  year  about  two  quintals  of  butter ;  the  rest  is  sold  to  the  peasants  and
townspeople.  The  male  lambs  and  kids  are  sold  or  slaughtered,  except  two  or  three  which
are  kept  for  breeding.     In  years  of  scarcity  both  sheep  and  goats  prove  altogether  barren.

The  Arabs  on  the  borders  of  Syria  shear  their  sheep  once  a-year,  near  the  end  of  spring.
They  usually  sell  the  wool  before  the  sheep  are  shorn,  at  so  much  for  the  wool  of  a  hundred
sheep.  Habitually  by  the  settled  inhabitants,  and  by  the  Bedouins  when  they  possess  the
convenience,  the  sheep  are  before  the  shearing  collected  into  an  open  enclosure  surrounded  by
a  wall.  The  object  of  this  is  that  the  wool  may  be  rendered  finer  by  the  sweating  and  eva-
poration. These  are  the  sheep-folds  mentioned  in  Scripture.0  There  are  no  others  in
Western  Asia.  Among  the  ancient  Hebrews  sheep-shearings  were  great  festivals,11  being  to
the  sheep-master  what  the  harvest  was  to  the  agriculturist.  Sometimes  a  lamb  is  taken  into
the  tent,  and  tended,  and  brought  up  like  a  dog.e

Oxen,  except  for  agricultural  labour,  appear  to  be  of  much  less  importance  in  Syria  now
than  they  were  in  former  times.  For  this  reason  we  will  in  the  first  instance  state  what
appears  to  be  the  Scriptural  history  of  the  ox, — chiefly  following  Jahn.  Although  chiefly
employed  in  agriculture,  oxen  were  not  in  old  times,f  as  now,  excluded  from  the  possessions
of  the  nomades.  Herdmen  were,  however,  deemed  inferior  to  the  keepers  of  flocks,  but  they
possessed  the  richest  pastures  in  Bashan,  Sharon,  and  Achior.  Hence  the  oxen  and  bulls  of
Bashan,  which  were  not  only  well  fed,  but  strong  and  ferocious,  are  used  as  the
symbols  of  ferocious  enemies. s  The  horns  of  oxen,  bulls,  and  goats,  were  used  metaphorically
to  express  power.h  If  the  horns  are  represented  as  made  of  brass  or  iron,  they  indicate  great
power  ;'  hence  ancient  coins  represent  kings  with  horns.  Oxen  were  not  only  employed  in
drawing  carts  and  ploughs,  but  the  nomades  frequently  made  use  of  them  for  the  purpose  of
carrying  burdens  as  they  did  camels.  Cheeses  were  made  of  the  milk  of  cows  ;k  the  two
cheeses  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  xvii.  29,  appear  to  have  been  slices  of  coagulated  milk,  which
had  been  strained  off,  and,  after  what  remained  had  grown  hard,  it  was  cut  into  pieces  and  put
by  for  use.1     Butter  is  much  used  by  the  nomades,  as  it  was  by  the  Hebrews  until  they

a  Jer.  xxv.  34,  35 ;  Isa.  xiv.  9 ;  Zech.  3,  &c.  b  j0hn  x.  13,  14.

c  Num.  xxxii.  16. 24.  36  ;  2  Sam.  vii.  8  ;  Zeph.  ii.  6.  d  1  Sam.  xxv.  1. 4. 8 ;  3  Sam.  xiii.  23.  e  2  Sam  xli.  3.

f  Gen.  xxiv.  25  ;  Job  i.  3.  S  Ps.  xxii.  12;  lxviil.  30;  Isa.  xxxiv.  7;  Deut.  xxxii.  17;  Prov.  xiv.  17.

1>  Ps.  lxxv.  10 ;  lxxxix.  17.  24 ;  xc.  9,  10  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  25 ;  Lam.  ii.  3 ;  Ezek.  xxix.  21 ;  Dan.  vij.  7,  8. 24 ;  viii.  3—5 ;  Amos  v».
13;  Luke  i.  69.

>  1  Kings  xxii.  11  ;  2  Chron.  xviii.  10  ;  Mic.  iv.  13.  *  2  Sam.  xvii.  29.

1  An  account  of  the  modes  of  preparing  butter  and  cheese  will  be  interesting  to  the  reader.  The  following,  therefore  (chiefly
from  Burckhardt  and  Russell),  is  here  introduced.  The  goat's  or  sheep's  milk  (for  camel's  milk  is  not  used  for  the  purpose,  and
the  Bedouins  have  no  cows)  is  put  into  a  large  copper  pan,  called  keder,  over  a  slow  fire,  and  a  little  leben,  or  sour  milk,  or  a  small
piece  of  the  dried  entrails  of  a  young  lamb  thrown  in  with  it.  The  milk  then  separates,  and  is  put  into  the  goat-skin  called  zebu,
which  is  tied  to  one  of  the  tent-poles,  and  for  one  or  two  hours  constantly  moved  backward  and  forward  :  the  buttery  substance
then  coagulates,  the  water  is  squeezed  out,  and  the  butter  put  into  another  skin,  called  mekrush.  If  after  two  days  they  have  col-
lected a  sufficient  quantity  of  butter,  they  again  put  it  over  the  fire,  throw  a  quantity  of  burguul  [wheat  boiled  with  some  leaven,
and  dried  in  the  sun] ,  and  leave  it  to  boil,  taking  care  to  skim  it.  After  having  boiled  for  some  time,  the  burgoul  precipitates  all
the  foreign  substances,  and  the  butter  remains  quite  clear  at  the  top  of  the  keder.  The  buttermilk  is  once  more  drained  through
a  bag  of  camel's  hair,  and  whatever  remains  in  it  of  a  butter-like  substance  is  left  to  dry  in  the  sun,  and  thus  eaten  it  is  called
outlet,  or  khameid  jebsheb.  The  burgoul,  cleared  of  the  butter  with  which  it  is  boiled,  is  called  khelase,  and  eaten  by  children.
There  are  tribes  in  north-western  Arabia  which  never  eat  bread,  but  live  exclusively  on  dates,  and  food  prepared  from  milk.
Having  taken  off  the  butter,  they  heat  the  buttermilk  again  till  it  coagulates,  and  then  dry  it  till  it  becomes  quite  hard ;  they  then
grind  it,  and  each  family  collects  in  spring  two  or  three  loads  of  it.    They  eat  it  mixed  with  butter.

By  the  same  processes  the  butter  and  cheese  used  in  Syria  are  made.    In  fact,  the  towns  derive  their  chief  supply  of  those  com-

cccc

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

\j£

became  settled  in  Palestine,  when  olive-oil  supplied  many  of  its  uses.  Milk  and  honey
were  accounted  dainties  by  the  Hebrews ;  but  whenever  these  luxuries  were  in  abundance,
it  proved  that  there  had  been  previously  a  great  destruction  of  tbe  people ;  for  owing  to
the  depopulation  the  land  was  not  depastured,  and  the  bees,  being  less  disturbed,  were
enabled  to  gather  in  a  greater  quantity  of  honey.  This  is  elucidated  in  Isa.  vii.  15,  and
following  verses.

It  is  during  winter  that  cow's  milk  is  chiefly  in  use ;  and  is  not  so  much  valued  as  that  of
goats,  which  is  obtainable  in  Syria  from  the  beginning  of  April  to  September.  The  cattle  are
but  poorly  fed,  and  the  quality  of  the  milk  corresponds.  At  Aleppo,  the  animals  being  kept
within  doors  at  the  gardens,  the  milk  often  tastes  strongly  of  cabbage-leaves  or  garlic.  It
is  probably  the  same  in  other  Syrian  towns.

In  Syria  there  are  two  varieties  of  the  ox.  One  of  a  large  size,  with  a  thin  belly  and  long
slender  legs,  like  the  figures  of  that  animal  often  seen  in  antique  intaglios.  The  other  is  some-
what smaller  in  bulk  ;  the  horns  of  both  are  short.  There  are  but  few  black  cattle  to  be  seen
near  the  towns,  and  they  serve  chiefly  for  the  plough  and  water-wheels,  for  the  beef  is  poor,

and  very  seldom  eaten  by
any  class  of  the  inhabitants.
The  beef  is  in  best  condition
at  the  end  of  harvest,  and
is  then  tolerably  good.  Veal
is  seldom  brought  to  the
markets,  and  is  of  even  in-
ferior quality  to  the  beef.

The  quality  of  the  beef
was  no  doubt  better  when
more  attention  was  paid  to
the  ox,  as  in  the  time  of  the  Hebrews.  The  varieties  represented  in  the  Egyptian  sculpture
of  those  old  times  are  three,  and  exhibit  the  principal  distinctions  of  short-horned,  long-
horned,  and  one  with  the  India  hump.  The  two  last  do  not  now  exist  in  Egypt,  but  are
found  in  Abyssinia  and  Upper  Ethiopia.

Wild  Oxen  are  also  exhibited  in  the  Egyptian  sculptures,  and  the  chase  of  them  is  often
represented.  They  were  some-
times hunted  with  dogs  by  hunts-
men furnished  with  bows,  and
sometimes  they  were  caught  with
the  noose  or  lasso,  as  was  lately
stated  with  reference  to  the  ga-
zelle. Wild  Oxen  are  still  found
in  the  Syrian  Desert.a

Buffaloes  are  in  considerable
numbers  in  Syria.  Those  which
are  found  on  the  coast  are
larger  and  more  spirited  than
those  met  with  inland.     On  the

borders  of  Northern  Palestine,  even  some  of  the  Arab  tribes  keep  large  herds  of  buffaloes,
chiefly,  it  would  seem,  with  a  view  to  the  profit  which  may  be  made  by  the  sale  of  their  leben

[Oxen  from  Egyptian  Sculptures.]

[Wild  Ox  taken  in  Noose.]

modifies  from  the  nomade  tribes.  The  butter  is  generally  white,  having  the  appearance  and  consistence  of  lard  ;  and  we  cannot
say  it  was  much  relished  by  us,  or  by  other  Englishmen  who  have  eaten  of  it.  The  cheese,  exhibited  in  round,  thick  cakes,  is
well  enough  when  new ;  but,  from  the  smallness  of  the  cakes,  it  consolidates  soon,  and  at  last  becomes  intolerably  hard :  and  as
it  hardens  it  acquires  a  degree  of  saltness,  which  to  ourselves  (though  fond  of  salt)  seemed  detestable.  When  made  by  the  settled
inhabitants  of  towns  and  villages,  the  chief  difference  is  that  cow's  milk  is  also  employed  in  the  manufacture.

a  "  The  Wild  Cow,  belter  el  wahesk,  feeds  on  the  herbs  in  the  desert  of  the  district  of  Djof,  fifteen  days'  journey  from  Damascus.
It  was  described  to  me  as  resembling  in  shape  both  the  cow  and  large-sized  deer ;  its  neck  like  that  of  the  cow,  its  legs  thicker
than  the  deer's,  and  its  horns  short." — Burckhardt.    Some  of  the  Arabs  make  targets  of  its  hide.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

CCCCl

(sour  milk)  to  the  townspeople.  It  is  a  common  saying  and  belief  among  the  Turks,  that  all
the  animal  kingdom  was  converted  by  Mohammed  to  the  true  faith,  with  the  exception  of  the
buffalo  and  boar,  which  remained  unbelievers,  and  which  on  that  account  are  often  called
"  Christians."  That  the  boar  should  have  this  character  is  no  matter  of  surprise;  but  seeing
that  no  objection  to  the  flesh  of  the  buffalo  is  entertained,  while  its  leben  is  much  esteemed  by
the  Turks,  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  the  disgrace  into  which  it  has  fallen,  unless  it  be  that
the  buffalo,  like  the  hog,  has  a  habit  of  rolling  in  the  mud,  and,  in  summer,  of  plunging  into
the  muddy  ponds  up  to  the  very  nose,  which  alone  remains  visible  above  the  surface.

BIRDS.

The  ornithology  of  Palestine  will  not  require  much  of  our  notice.  We  possess  little
information  beyond  the  names  of  many  of  the  species  found  in  that  country.  As  it  is  useful
to  know  the  names  of  the  inhabiting  birds,  we  shall  give  them,  interspersing  such  remarks
on  the  more  important  species  as  the  scanty  information  of  travellers  enables  us  to  supply.

The  Aquiline  Vulture*  although  less  common  and  familiar  than  in  Egypt,  and  not  as  there
frequenting  the  towns,  is  found  in
every  part  of  Syria.  It  feeds  on
carrion,  and  is  therefore  of  great  use
in  clearing  away  offal  and  dead  car-
cases. For  this  service  the  bird  is
respected,  notwithstanding  its  unplea-
sant and  savage  aspect.  Monro  saw
it  disputing  with  a  wolf  the  possession
of  a  dead  buffalo  in  the  plain  of
Sharon.  Most  writers  acquiesce  in
the  conclusion  of  Bochart,  that  this
bird  is  the  Dm  racham  of  Scrip-
ture. The  fact  is,  that  this  bird  bears
the  same  name  among  the  Arabs,
and  we  know  of  no  other  vulture  in
Palestine.  It  is,  however,  only  men-
tioned in  Scripture  to  be  prohibited
for  food.  Our  public  version  ren-
ders the  word  by  "  the  gier  eagle. "b
The  vultures  are  sometimes  seen  in
flocks  in  Palestine,  but  more  fre-
quently solitary.  They  appear  to
abound  most  around  the  Lake  of
Tiberias,  and  in  the  plains  of  Phi-
listia ;  the  number  even  at  any
one  time  depends  on  circumstances.
Wherever  there  is  plenty  of  carrion,
there  are  they.c  Hasselquist  seems
to  say  that  he  saw  a  vulture  of  some
other  species  near  Cana  in  Galilee.

Eagles  are  rather  frequently  noticed  by  travellers  in  Palestine,  not  one  of  whom,  however,
names  the  species.  There  may  be  different  species,  but,  from  various  slight  intimations  tire-
some to  recapitulate,  as  well  as  from  the  fact  that  it  is  found  in  all  the  countries  bordering

[Vultur  Percnopterus.]

a  Vultur  percnopterus.
b  Lev.  xi  18;  Dent.  xiv.  17.

c  See — Rauwolff,  12rf  ;  Buckingham's  Palestine,  i.  1 39  ;   Monro,  ii.
Burckhardt  often,  under  the  name  of  Ralih'im.

VOL.   I.

15G;    Lindsay,  ii.  31;  and  various  other  travellers.

3  f

CCCC11

PHYSICAL  HTSTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

Palestine,  we  conclude  that  the  Im-
perial Eagle  is  the  one  chiefly  in-
tended.a  Antelopes  and  large  birds
are  said  to  be  its  chief  prey ;  and  it
builds  its  nest  upon  the  tops  of  the
highest  trees  and  steepest  cliffs.  In
the  Scriptures  there  are  many  very
striking  allusions  to  the  eagle  and  its
habits,  which  suffice  to  show  how
well  it  was  known  in  Palestine  and
Edom.b

The  Osprey,c  or  Sea  Eagle,  is  not
unknown  in  Syria  ;d  and  it  is  sup-
posed by  many  to  be  the  bird  called
Peres  in  Scripture,  and  the  flesh  of
which  is  forbidden  for  food.e

The  Kite  is  also  common  in  Pales-
tine, and  there  are  seven  species  or
varieties  of  hawk,  of  which  we  know
only  the  specific  distinctions  of  two,
the  Falcon  Gentil,f  and  the  kestrel. e
Hasselquist  saw  the  Arabs  in  Galilee
riding  "  with  fine  dogs,  and  falcons,"
which,  it  appears,  were  of  the  former
species  :  the  other  he  met  with  in  the
mountains  near  Nazareth.

Of  Owls,  Syria  possesses  the  Great
Owl,h  the    Common  Barn  Owl,1  and
the  Little  Owl.k
The  Crow  family  (Corvidae)  in  Palestine  is  composed  of  the  well-known  birds,  the  Raven}

the  common  Carrion  Crow,m  the  Royston  Crow,n  the    Jackdaw0    (of  which    Hasselquist

noticed  numbers  in  the  oak  woods  near  Galilee),  and  the  Magpie?

a  This  is  one  of  the  two  eagles  found  in  Egypt.  It  is  the  Falco  Mogolnilt  of  Linn.,  Lath.,  and  Cuv.,  the  Aigle  de  Thebes  and
Aquila  Heliaca  of  Viell.  and  Savig.,  the  Imperial  Eagle  of  Temminck,  and  the  Russian  eagle  of  Luthua.

b  Job  xxiv.  28.  °  Falco  Ossifragus.

d  Rauwolff,  175;  Russell,  ii.  195.  e  Lev.  xi.  13;  Deut.  xiv.  12.  f  Falco  Gentilis.

S  Falco  Tinnunculus- — Dr.  Russell  has  a  long  and  valuable  note  respecting  the  hawks  of  Syria,  which  we  think  it  right  to  intro-
duce in  this  place.

"  Seven  different  kinds  or  varieties  of  hawks,  according  to  the  natives,  are  employed  hy  the  sportsmen  :  but  having  never  seen
some  of  them,  and  being  doubtful  as  to  the  specific  names  of  others,  I  venture  only  to  give  the  Arabic  names  in  the  following  list,
and  mark  the  game  for  which  such  bird  is  appropriated.    The  li»t  was  drawn  up  by  one  of  the  most  skilful  falconers  of  Aleppo.

1.  Al  Huz,  or  Baraban.  2.  Al  Sophy.  These  two  hawks  are  employed  for  antelope  and  hare  hunting;  the  first  also  takes  par-
tridges, and  the  second  bustards,  herons,  and  other  large  birds.  They  are  sold  at  Aleppo  at  the  rate  of  fifty  or  sixty  dollars  each,
to  be  sent  to  Baghdad.

3.  Al  Skaheen.  4.  Al  Zj/granuz.  The  first  of  these  is  the  Falcon  Gentile,  and  is  employed  for  birds  of  all  kinds,  especially  of
the  larger  sort ;  the  second  for  wild-geese,  wild-ducks,  and  other  aquatic  game.  There  are  two  varieties  of  the  Zygramiz,  of  which
the  one  called  the  Indian,  is  less  fierce  than  the  other.

5.  Al  Dugran.  6.  Al  Jspcer.  The  first  is  used  for  francolines  and  partridges  ;  the  other  for  partridges,  and  is  brought  from  about
Constantinople.    It  is  rare  at  Aleppo,  and  costs  between  300  and  400  dollars.

7.  Al  Basha.lt,  whose  game  is  quails  and  small  birds  of  all  kinds."

Russell  goes  on  to  state  that  the  shaheen,  unless  taken  from  the  nest,  cannot  be  well  trained.  It  is  so  fierce  that  it  will  fly  at
any  game.  Although  not  larger  than  a  pigeon,  large  eagles  are  taken  with  this  hawk.  In  former  times  it  was  taught  to  seize  the
eagle  under  the  wing,  and  thus  depriving  him  of  the  use  of  one  wing,  both  birds  fell  to  the  ground  together  ;  but  afterwards  the
mode  was  to  teach  the  hawk  to  fix  on  the  back  between  the  wings,  which  has  the  same  effect,  only  that,  the  bird  falling  more  slowly,
the  falconer  has  more  time  to  come  to  the  assistance  of  his  hawk  ;  but  in  either  case,  if  he  be  not  very  expeditious,  the  falcon  is
inevitably  destroyed.     This  certainly  is  a  most  extraordinary  instance  of  the  well-known  courage  of  the  Falcon  Gentile.

Dr.  Patrick  Russell,  in  his  edition  of  his  brother's  work,  adds — "  I  never  saw  the  shaheen  fly  at  eagles,  that  sport  being  disused
in  my  time ;  but  I  have  often  seen  him  take  storks  and  herons.  The  hawk  when  thrown  off,  flies  for  some  time  in  a  horizontal
line  not  six  feet  from  the  ground ;  then  mounting  perpendicularly,  with  astonishing  swiftness,  he  seizes  his  prey  under  the  wing,
and  both  together  come  tumbling  to  the  ground.     If  the  falconer  be  not  expeditious,  the  game  soon  disengages  itself."

h  Strix  bubo.  i  S.flammen..  k  S.  passerina.  1  Corvuscorax.

m  C.corone.  n  C,  comix.  °  C.  Manedula.  VC.pica.

[Eagle — Aquila  Heliaca.]

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

CCCC1U

[Osprey.— See  p.  ccccii.]

- 1 :  .

The  Common  Roller*  is  distin-
guished by  the  name  of  Kawis
Nidges  —  "  the  heautiiul  im-
pure,'' which  indicates  the  light
in  which  it  is  regarded  by  the
Moslems.  The  name  is  we  be-
lieve founded  on  the  observation
that,  although  carrion  is  not  their
natural  food,  they  will  resort  to
it  in  the  scarcity  of  their  proper
food  which  winter  occasions.
This  has  been  affirmed  by  some
naturalists,  and  denied  by  others.
The  beauty  of  the  bird  consists  in
its  vivid  plumage.  It  is  also  called
shikrak.

The  Golden  Oriole*  andths
Cuckoo,c  are  among  the  winter
residents  of  Syria,  to  which  they

come  in  autumn,  and  depart  in  spring.      Early  in  April,  Buckingham,  travelling  across  the

mountains  from  Damascus  to  Sidon,
heard  the  voice  of  the  cuckoo,  loud,
distinct,  and  clear,  at  the  time  the
ground  was  covered  with  deep  snow.
The  Arabs  call  it  Teer-el-Yakoob,  or
Jacob's  Bird,  from  supposing  him
to  utter  the  name,  the  Arabic  sound
of  which,  indeed,  the  sound  closely
resembles.

That  beautiful  bird,  the  Wry-neck,
appears  and  withdraws  about  the  same
time  as  the  cuckoo..  The  timid  Greater
Spotted  Woodpecker d  inhabits  the
hollow  trees.  There  are  three  species
of  the  Kingfisher ,e  namely,  the  Com-
mon Kingfisher ;f  the  Halcyon;?  and
the  Smyrna  Kingfisher.  The  Bee-
EalerJ*  called  in  Arabic  Wurwar,
formerly  not  known  in  England,  but
now  an  occasional  visitant,  appears  in
Syria  in  the  spring  and  remains  till
autumn.  At  their  first  appearance
they  are  very  lean,  but  soon  become
fat,  and  are  then  reckoned  delicate
eating.  Hasselquist  saw  them  in  the
groves  and  plains  between  Acre  and
Nazareth.
Volney  reports  that  a  species  of  Humming-Bird  is  found  in  Syria.     M.  J.  B.  Adanson  met

[Bee-Eater.}

a  Coracias garrula.  •>  Oriulus  galbula.  c  Cuculus  canorus.  J   Yunx  torquilta.

e  Alcedo  ispidia.    We  are  aware  'that  this  is  not  the  common  kingfisher,  although  very  nearly  so  ;  but  as  our  authority  (Russell)
gives  both  names,  we  must  follow  him,  as  we  cannot  know  whether  the  bird  be  really  the  common  species  or  realty  A.  ispidia.
1  Alcedo  halcyon.  S  Alcedo  Smyrnensis.  u  Merops  apiaster.

3  f  2

CCCC1V

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIIL

[Hoopoe.]

with  one  in  the  territory  of  Sidon.  "  Beau-
tifully crested  Hoopoes " a  were  seen  by
Buckingham  at  Jerash,  early  in  March.

The  Anatid^e,  or  birds  of  the  Duck  kind,
which  frequent  the  waters  of  Syria,  are
various  and  abundant.  Few  of  them  need
more  than  to  be  named.  The  Swan ; b
the  Goose0, — wild  and  tame.  Tame  geese
are  not  very  commonly  seen  in  Syria,  or  in
any  other  part  of  Western  Asia,  as  they  are
not  in  demand  among  the  Moslems,  who
very  rarely  eat  them.  This  is  true  also  of
the  Duck,  and  equally  so  of  wild  water-
fowl. Neither  can  we  discover  any  trace
that  they  were  eaten  by  the  ancient  Hebrews,
nor  does  any  name  which  can  be  recognised
as  applicable  to  the  goose  or  duck  be  re-
cognised in  the  Scriptures.  Not  being
named,  they  were  not  interdicted  for  food  to
the  Hebrews,  and  the  probability  is  that
they  were  eaten,  considering  the  extent  to
which  they  had  seen  them  used  for  food  in
Egypt,  where  water-fowl,  principally  geese,

ducks,  and  quails,  were   caught  in   large  quantities  upon  the  waters,  and  formed  a  large

article  in  the  consumption  of  the

people.     The  Egyptian  goose  was

of  a  peculiar  and  very  fine  species,

and  is  abundantly  figured    in  all

their  monuments.

We  proceed   to  the  other  spe-
cies : — The    Common    Duck     and

Mallard.^      Elliot    describes    the

Lake  of  Tiberias  as  "  covered  with

wild-ducks"  when  he  was  there.

The  Shoveller  ;e  the   Sheldrake  ;f

the  Scaup  Duck  ;S    the  Scoter  or

Black  Diver  ;l1  the  Wigeon ;*  the

Teal ; k    and  the  Sirsceir  Teal1  of

Forskal.     The  Pelican™  has  been

often  noticed  in  Palestine  of  large

size   and  in  abundance.     Rauwolff

takes  particular    notice  of  them;

and  Buckingham,  in  the  north  of

Syria,  saw,  floating    silently  down

a  stream,  one  of  the  largest  peli-
cans  he    had    ever   beheld.      On

first  perceiving  it  at  a  distance,  its  white  body  appeared  like  the  swollen  carcase  of  a  sheep

or   other    dead  animal,  and  its  broad  bag  and  bill  seemed  like  some  large  bird  of  prey

regaling  on   it.     It  exhibited  little   alarm  when  quite  near,  but  on  being  purposely  roused

[Shoveller.]

a  Upupa  Epops.

d  Anna  boschas,  var.  a-  and  £.  Linn.

h  A.  nigra.

m  PeHcanus  nnocrutalus.

b  Anas  Cygnus.

e  A.  clypeati.
A.  penelnpe.

c  A.  Anser.
t  A.  tado  na.
k  A.  c.ecca.

B  A.  marila.
1  A.  sirs&'tr.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

ccccv

«Wj£'W

[Pelican.]

to  fly,  it  displayed  a  breadth  of  wing

which  appeared  to  be  at  least  nine

feet  across.     This   bird  is  called  by

the    Arabs     Jimmel  -  el  -  Bahar,    the

River  Camel :  in  the  Scripture  it  is

called     J"lNp  kaath,    and     is    several

times  mentioned. a     Rauwolff  speaks

of  birds  quite  black  with  long  necks,

whereof    he    saw   abundance  in    his

travels  in  the  Land  of  Promise,  es-
pecially near  Acre,  among  the  rocks

and  crags  of  the  sea.     As  well  as  he

could   judge    from  the    distance,  he

thought  them  sea  eagles  (Ossifrages) ;

but  Ray  objects  that  no  eagles  have

long  necks,    and    suspects  that  they

were  Cormorants.

The  Little  Grebe,h  and  the  Common

Gull,c  are   the   only  other   birds    of

this  class  which  our  lists  contain.
The   Grall^;  or  Wading  Birds

are  also  numerous  in  Syria  and  Palestine,  including  a  considerable  proportion  of  species  not

known  in  England.

The  FlamingoA  is  rare,  but  is
sometimes  seen ;  and  must  from
its  size  and  colour  reckon  among
the  most  conspicuous  of  the  birds
of  whatever  country  it  is  found  in.
The  Spoon-bill  ;  e  the  common
Heron?  which  abounds  in  the
Haouran;  the  Stork.  The  last-
named  bird  is  often  mentioned  in
Scripture  under  the  pleasant  name
of  i~T~PDn,  chasidah,  "  pious,"  or
"  gracious,"  on  account  of  its
kindness  to  the  parent  birds  and
to  the  young.  For  this  reason,
as  well  as  on  account  of  the  con-
fidence it  reposes  in  man  by  build-
ing its  large  nest,  and  intrusting
its  own  conspicuous  person,  with-
in his  reach,  by  taking  up  its
abode  in  towns  and  upon  human
habitations,  this  bird  has  been  in
all  countries  regarded  with  re-
spect, and  nowhere  more  than  in
Syria  and  Palestine.  There  is  not
the  least  doubt  that  the  nest  and
its  inmate  figured  as  conspicuously
upon  the  highest  points  in  the
towns     and    villages    of    ancient

[Flamingo.]

a  Lev.  xi.  18  ;  Teut.  xiv.  17  ;  Psalm  eii.  7  ;  Isa.  xxxiv.  11 ;  Zeph.ii.  14.

ll  Phcenicoptertts  ruber.  e  Flatulea  leucorodia.

b  Colymbus  auritas.
f  Ardea  Cinerea.

c  L.  cants.

CCCCVl

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

mm  wk

[Stork .]

Canaan,  as  they   do  in  the  modern  Palestine
Multitudes  of  these  birds  congregate  on   the
borders  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.      There  are
two  species  in  Syria,  the  Whitea  and  the  Black
Storks.b

Syria  also  possesses  the  Numidian0  and  the
Common  Cranes  ;d  the  Little  Bittern  ;e  Cur-
lew ; f  Woodcock ;  R  Snipe ;  h  Jack  Snipe  ;  '
Grey  Sand-piper  ;k  Green  Plover  ^  Slone  Cur-
lew im  Lapwing  ;n  Coot ;°  Rail  p  Water-Rail  ;<*
Bustard  f — this  last  is  of  frequent  occurrence.
Its  flesh  is  excellent,  and  it  is  taken  with  hawks
and  hunted  with  greyhounds.  It  runs  exceed-
ingly fast,  but  cannot  perch,  and  rises  on  the
wing  with  difficulty.  The  bird  is  not  altogether
unknown  in  England,  and  is  the  largest  land-
bird  we  possess.  The  other  species  in  Syria  is
the  Arabian  Bustard'  which  is  nearly  as  large
as  the  other,  but  exhibits  a  considerably  differ-
ent plumage.

Ostriches   are  named    several   times  in  the
Bible.'     They  still  inhabit  the  great  Syrian  de-

^s

=}(£.

[The  Ostrich.]

a  Ardea  ciconia.
S  S.  rusticola.
1  Charadrius  pluviales.
P  Rail  as  Crex.

b  A.  nigra.  c  A.virgo.  d  A.  grus.  e  A.  minuta.  f  Sculnpax  arquata.

h  S.  Gallinago.  >  S.  Oallinula.  k  Tringi  squatarula.

m  C.  Oedicnemus.  n  C.Spinosus.  "Fulicaatra.

1  R.  Aquaticus.  *  Otis  tarda.  »  O.Arabs.

«  Lev.  xi.  19  ;  Deut.  xiv.  15  ;  Job  xxx.  22  ;  Isa.  xiii.  21  ;  xxxiv.  13;  xliii.  20  ;  Jer.  1.  39  ;  Lam.  iv.  3  ;  Mic.  i.  6.

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccccvii

sert,  especially  the  plains  extending  from  the  Haouran  towards  the  Jebel  Shammar  and  Nejed.
Some  are  found  in  the  Haouran;  and  a  few  are  taken  almost  every  year,  even  within  two  days'
journey  of  Damascus.  The  bird  breeds  in  the  middle  of  winter,  and  lays  from  twelve  to
twenty-one  eggs.  The  nest  is  generally  made  at  the  foot  of  some  isolated  hill.  The  eggs  are
placed  close  together  in  a  circle,  half  buried  in  sand,  to  protect  them  from  rain,  and  a  narrow
trench  is  dug  round,  whereby  the  water  runs  off.  At  ten  or  twelve  feet  from  this  circle  the
female  places  two  or  three  other  eggs,  which  she  does  not  hatch,  but  leaves  for  the  young  ones
to  feed  upon  immediately  after  they  are  hatched.  The  parent  birds  sit  on  the  eggs  in  turn ;
and  while  one  is  so  employed,  the  other  stands  keeping  watch  on  the  summit  of  the  adjacent
hill,  which  circumstance  enables  the  Arabs  to  kill  them  and  to  take  their  eggs.  This  is
effected  by  stratagem  ;  for  the  hunting  of  the  ostrich  is  not  practised  in  the  Syrian  or  northern
Arabian  deserts.  It  is  thus  seen  that  the  report  that  the  sun  alone  hatches  the  ostrich's  eggs
is  erroneous.  For,  besides  the  positive  fact  that  the  old  birds  sit  on  the  nest,  there  is  the
consideration  that  the  incubation  takes  place  during  the  rainy  season,  and  that  the  eggs  are
hatched  in  spring,  before  the  sun  gives  forth  any  considerable  degree  of  heat.  The  Arabs
reckon  the  eggs  delicious  food,  and  sell  them  for  about  a  shilling  each.  The  townspeople  hang
up  the  shells  as  monuments  in  their  rooms :  ostrich  feathers  are  sold  at  Aleppo  and  Damascus,
principally  at  the  latter  city.  The  male  has  black  feathers  with  white  ends,  except  the  tail
feathers,  which  are  wholly  white :  the  feathers  of  the  female  are  speckled  with  gray.  The
Sherarat  Arabs  often  sell  the  whole  skin  with  the  feathers  on  it,  producing  at  Damascus  about
ten  Spanish  dollars.  The  skin  itself  is  thrown  away  as  useless.  At  Aleppo,  in  the  spring  of
1811,  the  price  of  ostrich  feathers  was  from  about  21.  10s.  to  6/.  The  finest  feathers  are  sold
singly  at  from  one  to  two  shillings.  The  people  of  Aleppo  sometimes  bring  home  ostriches
which  they  had  killed  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  days'  journey  eastward.

Galling.  In  this  class  we  find  the  Peacock,  the  Turkey,  the  Domestic  Fowl.  The  latter
are  good,  plentiful,  and  cheap.  Much  larger  quantities  are  consumed,  in  proportion  to  the
population,  than  in  any  European  country.  Indeed,  in  this  and  other  countries  of  Western  Asia,
the  consumption  of  the  common  fowl  greatly  exceeds  that  of  all  other  animal  food  excepting
mutton.

Four  species  of  Tetrao  are  very  numerous  in  and  around  Palestine.  These  are  the  Francoline?
the  Katta,h  the  Red-Legged  or  Barbary  Partridge^  the  Greek  Partridge?  and  the  Quail.e
All  these  may  require  some  observations.  The  Francoline  is  a  fine  and  handsome  bird,  about
the  size  of  the  partridge,  and  feeding  on  seeds  and  insects.  It  frequents  humid  places  and
perches  on  trees.  Its  flesh  is  excellent,  and  is  highly  valued  in  some  Asiatic  countries;  for
the  bird  itself  is  found  almost  everywhere  in  Asia.

The  Katta  is  one  of  the  most  common  birds  in  and  on  the  borders  of  Palestine.  The  stony
districts  of  the  country  beyond  Jordan  swarm  with  them.  They  are  so  numerous  in  this
quarter,  that  they  actually  appear  like  clouds  in  the  distance.  In  fact,  there  is  no  place  in
which  they  are  known  to  be  equally  abundant,  not,  certainly,  in  Arabia  Petraea.  Burckhardt
notices  them  often.  Near  Boszra  he  says — "  The  quantity  of  Kattas  here  are  beyond  descrip-
tion ;  the  whole  plain  seemed  sometimes  to  rise  :  and  far  off  in  the  air  they  were  seen  like  large
moving  clouds."  In  the  country  east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  in  the  mountains  of  Edom,  their
numbers  are  the  most  excessive  and  incredible ;  and  so  dense  are  the  flocks  in  which  they  fly
that  the  Arab  boys  often  kill  two  or  three  at  a  time  merely  by  throwing  a  stick  among  them.
According  to  Russell  the  bird  is  found  at  all  seasons,  but  thus  numerously  chiefly  in  May  and
June,  when,  even  in  Northern  Syria,  a  quantity  sufficient  to  load  an  ass  has  sometimes  been
taken  at  one  shutting  of  the  clasp-net.

The  Turks,  among  whom  the  more  delicate  kinds  of  wild  fowl  are  not  in  much  request,  are
remarkably  fond  of  this  bird ;  but  by  the  Franks  in  Syria  the  flesh  is  considered  black,  hard,
and  dry,  and  the  bird  never  appears  at  their  tables.  The  Katta  deposits  upon  the  ground  two
or  three  eggs  of  a  greenish  black  colour,  and  about  the  size  of  a  pigeon's.     The  Arabs  collect

*  Tetrao  francolir.us.  b  T.  al  ihata.  c  T.  petrosus.  A  T.  saxatilis.  c  T.  coturnix.

CCCCV111

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap   VIII.

large  quantities  of  them  and  eat  them
fried  in  butter.  Burckhardt  suggests
the  probability  that  this  bird  is  the
Selav,  with  which  the  Israelites  were
fed  to  satiety  in  the  wilderness  :
Hasselquist  was  of  the  same  opinion.
It  is  undoubtedly  his  Tetrao  Israelit-
arum  which  he  first  noticed  in  the
deserts  near  the  Dead  Sea.  All  the
circumstances  evince  that  this  and  no
other  was  the  bird  he  had  in  view?
although  Linnaeus,  not  knowing  what
is  now  known  respecting  the  Katta,
unfortunately  deemed  his  account  to
refer  to  the  common  quail,  although
Hasselquist  himself  was  careful  to
distinguish  them,  and  gives  a  separate
account  of  the  latter  bird.  The  lo-
cality of  his  bird  is  that  inhabited  by
the  Katta,  which  he  could  not  fail  to
notice,  and  which  must  have  been
new  to  him,  which  the  common  Euro-
pean quail  was  not.  After  the  in-
formation we  have  laid  before  the
reader,  he  will  be  convinced  that  he
has  the  Katta  in  view,  when  he  writes
— "  I  found  the  partridge  of  Arabia
or  the  Holy  Land,  which  has  never
been  before  described,  and  which  I
think  is  alone  worth  a  journey  (from
Jerusalem)  to  the  Dead  Sea.  These
birds  are  undoubtedly  the  quails  of  the  Israelites."  In  a  letter  to  Linnaeus  himself,  he
again  speaks  of  the  same  birds,  and  the  same  occasion,  and  says,  "  If  natural  history  can
give  any  information  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Bible,  this  bird  is  certainly  the  same  with
the  quails  of  the  Israelites ;  and  they  alone  would  deserve  a  journey  to  the  Jordan.  For  my
part,  I  was  so  pleased  with  this  discovery  that  I  forgot  myself,  and  almost  lost  my  life  before
I  could  get  one  into  my  possession."  He  adds  that  about  Whitsuntide  the  Arabs  carry  many
thousands  of  them  to  Jerusalem  for  sale.  This  fact  is  true  of  the  Katta,  but  not  of  the  quail.
It  is  a  pity  that  information  so  positive  should  have  been  neglected  ;  but  it  arose  probably  from
his  not  giving  the  bird  its  native  name  of  Katta,  which  would  have  indicated  the  distinction.
The  whole  question  as  to  the  Selav  of  the  Israelites  certainly  lies  between  this  bird  and  the
common  quail,  which  is  much  less  common  in  these  quarters  than  the  Katta.  This  bird  is
about  the  size  of  the  partridge,  with  a  fine  plumage,  which  differs  considerably  in  the  different
subjects.

The  Red-legged  Partridge  is  very  common  in  Palestine.  Monro  shot  one  in  the  plains  of
Philistia,  and  says  that  in  plumage  it  resembled  the  red-legged  partridge  of  France,  but  was
nearly  twice  the  size,  being  little  less  than  a  hen-pheasant.  "  He  adds,  this  is  the  Tetrao
rubricollis  of  Linnaeus;"  but  this  we  imagine  is  a  mistake,  as  we  know  of  no  traveller  who
mentions  the  red-necked  partridge  as  existing  in  Palestine.  Burckhardt  mentions  the  bird  as
a  powerful  runner.  Monro  shot  another  partridge  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem.  It
was  perched  upon  a  stone,  and  differed  not  in  size  from  that  he  shot  the  day  before,  and  the
only  variation  in  its  plumage  was  observable  on  the  breast,  which  was  marked  with  regular
black  bars  instead  of  chestnut-coloured  spots,  "but  it  is  considered  to  be  a  different  species  by

[The  Katta.     Telras  al  Chata.]

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccccix

Linnaeus,  and  called  Tetrao  sexatilis."  It  is  tiresome,  in  a  sketch  like  the  present,  to  argue
points  of  nomenclature.  We  are  therefore  content  to  express  our  impression  that  the  appro-
priation of  names  to  these  two  species  is  very  uncertain  ;  but  that  the  Barbary*  and  Greekh
Partridges  are  probably  their  representatives  :  both  are  "  Red-legged ;"  which  may  have  occa-
sioned some  confusion  in  the  appropriation  of  that  term  as  a  description.

There  are  some  interesting  allusions  to  partridges  in  Scripture.  From  one  passage, c  it  is
clear  they  were  hunted  by  the  Jews.  The  Arabs  often  get  near  enough  to  throw  a
destructive  fire  into  a  covey,  by  advancing  undercover  of  an  oblong  piece  of  canvass,  stretched
over  a  couple  of  reeds  or  sticks,  like  a  door.  Also,  observing  that  these  birds  become  languid
and  fatigued  after  they  have  been  hastily  put  up  once  or  twice,  they  immediately  run  in  upon
them,  and  knock  them  down  with  their  staves.  This  strikingly  agrees  with  the  mode  of
hunting  to  which  the  Scriptural  allusion  appears  to  refer.  Tame  partridges  in  cages  are  also
employed  to  decoy  into  a  net  the  coveys  within  hearing :  and  to  this,  also,  there  appears  to  be
a  reference  in  Eccles.  xi.  30.d

The  Quail  has  lately  been  mentioned,  and  an  opinion  expressed  that  either  it  or  the  Katta
is  to  be  regarded  as  the  Selav  of  Scripture.  It  is  not  our  office  to  examine  the  question  here  :
nor  perhaps  can  it  ever  be  determined  which  of  the  two  birds  of  such  similar  form  and  habits
has  the  preferable  claim.  Both  are  migratory  birds ;  and  it  is  evident  that  the  birds  which  fed
the  Israelites  were  in  the  act  of  migration.  The  Quails  are  plentiful  in  Syria  in  the  spring  :
in  the  autumn  they  return,  but  not  in  such  numbers  as  before.  Hasselquist  noticed  them  in
Galilee.  The  bird  is  good  eating ;  and  large  numbers  were  caught  in  nets  by  the  ancient
Egyptians,  and  consumed  as  food.  In  the  same  country  they  are  still  taken  in  the  same  man-
ner and  still  eaten.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  take  these  birds  when  they  have  recently  arrived,
exhausted  by  their  aerial  pilgrimage.

Passeres. — Syria  has  an  interesting  collection  of  Columbidce,  of  which  the  ascertained
species  are,  the  Wood  Pigeon  f  the  Common  Dove  ;f  the  Cropper  Dove ;?  the  Jacobine
Dove ;h  the  Turbit  Dove;1  the  Broad-tailed  Shaker ;k  the  Carrier  Pigeon;1  the  Ring
Dove  ;m  the  Turtle  Dove;11  the  Indian  Turtle ;°  and  the  C.  Testaceo-incarnaia  of  Forskal.

Some  of  these  require  remark.  And  first,  a  few  words  of  pigeons  generally.  The  inhabit-
ants of  Syria  and  Palestine  are  fond  of  pigeons — like  the  Western  Asiatics  generally.  Con-
spicuous dovecots  are  seen  profusely  in  most  of  the  villages,  and  vast  flocks  of  wild  doves  ap-
pear about  the  time  the  corn  begins  to  ripen,  and  remain  till  the  harvest  is  over.  In  Scripture
the  allusions  to  doves  and  pigeons  are  so  numerous  as  to  evince  that  they  were  equally  com-
mon, and  equally  valued  in  ancient  times.  In  Egypt  also  now,  as  anciently,  incredible  numbers
of  these  birds  are  kept;  and  in  the  villages  the  dwellings  made  for  them  are  at  the  least  as
conspicuous  as  those  which  man  builds  for  himself.  The  species  thus  domesticated  is  the
Columba  (Enas  seu  Vinago,  and  Sonnini  makes  the  curious  remark,  that  they  alight  every
moment  in  the  water,  even  in  the  most  rapid  part  of  the  stream,  and  remain  upon  its  surface
often  longer  than  half  a  minute.  He  thinks  that  this  habit  is  probably  owing  to  the  great  heat
of  the  climate  ;  and  it  is  common  to  all  the  species.

The  Carrier  Pigeon  has  been  from  very  ancient  times  employed  throughout  the  East  in  con-
veying intelligence.  Bochart  has  collected  numerous  authorities  for  the  antiquity  of  this  custom
both  in  Syria  and  Greece;  and  much  curious  information  on  the  subject  may  be  found  in
Pennant,^  and  under  circumstances  analogous  to  those  which  the  Scriptures  intimate.    Although

a  Tetrao petrosus-  b  T.  seratilis.  c  1  Sam.  xxvi.  20.  d  See  Shaw,  part  iii.  chap.  3.  sect.  10.

e  Columba  amas,  var.  a.  t  C.  cenas,  var.  £.  g  C.  guttorosa.  h  C.  cucullata.

i  C.turbita.  k  Q.  laticauda.  '  C.palumhus.  m  C.turtur.

"  C.  Risoria.  °  Hieroz  ii.  453,  ed.  Rosenmuller.

P  Biitish  Zoology,  284.  We  are  tempted  to  throw  into  a  note  Dr.  Russell's  statement  on  the  subject :—"  This  pigeon,  in  former
times,  was  employed  by  the  E  nglish  factory  to  convey  intelligence  from  Scanderoon  of  the  arrival  of  the  Company's  ships  in  that
part.  The  name  of  the  ship,  the  hour  of  her  arrival,  and  whatever  else  could  be  comprised  in  a  small  compass,  being  written  on
a  slip  of  paper,  was  secured  in  such  a  maimer  under  the  i  igeou's  wing  as  not  to  impede  its  flight ;  and  her  feet  were  bathed  in
vinegar,  with  a  view  to  keep  them  cool,  and  prevent  her  1  eing  tempted  Ly  the  sight  of  w  ater  to  alight,  by  which  the  journey
might  have  been  prolonged,  or  the  billet  lost.  The  practice  has  been  in  disuse  manyyeais,  but  I  have  heard  it  asserted  by  an
English  gentleman,  in  whose  time  it  still   subsisted,  that  he  had  known  the  pigeons  perform  the  journey  in  two  hours  and  a  half.

VOL.   I.  3    g

ccccx

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

a  denizen  of  the  woods,  the  favoured  condition  of  its  existence  among  the  Moslems  encourages
large  numbers  to  establish  themselves  near  the  towns,  and  even  to  build,  their  nests  in  the  trees
(surrounded  by  inhabited  building)  in  the  court-yards  of  the  houses,  where  they  exhibit  as  little
timidity  as  the  domestic  pigeon  with  us.  They  are  much  admired  and  liked  by  all  Orientals,
and,  to  enjoy  their  constant  presence,  they  are  sometimes  kept  in  cages,  as  they  are  with  us  for
another  reason — their  rarity.

It  has  been  doubted  whether  the  common  Turtle  or  the  Collared  Turtle  is  that  which  the  sacred

writers   indicate    as    the    Turtle,  distinctively
from   the  pigeon.     The   difficulty  arises   from
the  similarity  in  the  form  and  habits  of  the  two
birds,  and  the  consequent  absence  of  identifying
circumstances.    Both  are  migratory ;  a  charac-
teristic applied  to  the  turtle  in  Jer.  iii.  7.     We
see  that  the  country  possesses  both,  and  there-
fore both  may  be  intended  by  the  name.   But  if
one  is  to  be  preferred  we  should  incline  to  the
collared  turtle  ;  for  this  bird  is  plentiful  in  all
the    countries  of   South- Western  Asia,  and  in
Egypt.   Buckingham  took  notice  of  a  wild  pigeon
beyond  Jordan,  the   species  of  which  we  are
unable  from  his  slight  notice  to  ascertain.     He
says — "  The  pigeons  are  nearly  double  the  size
of  the  common  pigeon  of  Europe,  and  are  nearly
all  distinguished  by  a  fine  rich  blue  plumage.
They  are  held  in  such  esteem  as  food,  that  the
people  of  Soof,  where  I  had  first  seen   them,
blind  one  of  them  as  a  decoy  bird,  by  thrusting
a  needle  into  its  eyes,  and  drawing  a  thread  from
one  eye  to  the  other,  after  which  they  are  put
into  trap-cages  to  allure  others  into  the  snare.     It  is  said  also  that  they  were  birds  of  passage,
being  known  to  go  to  Abyssinia  in  the  end  of  spring,  to  stay  there  during  the  rainy  season  of
that  country,  and  to  return  again  to  these  mountains  to  enjoy  the  winter  rains  here."

There  are  in  Syria  four  species  of  the  lark,  namely — the  Sky -lark,*  the  Wood-lark^  the
Tit-lark,0  the  Crested-lark,A  and  the  Calandra-lark  e — all  birds  of  fine  song.  There  is  also
the  Starling.*

In  the  Thrush  genus  the  species  are — the  Missel-thrush,^  the  Fieldfare,^  the  Song-thrush,1
the  Fox-coloured  thrush,^  the  Blackbird,1  the  Ring-Ouzel,m  and  the  Locust-Bird.111  The  Black-
bird was  heard  by  Lord  Lindsay  in  Edom.  Monro  in  Galilee  heard,  for  the  first  time  since
leaving  England,  "  the  joyous  note  of  the  blackbird."  He  adds  that  "  his  [natural]  song  is
always  monotonous  and  without  melody ;"  but  associations  being  imbibed  by  recollection  [of
educated  birds]  he  was  much  enraptured  by  the  sound.

The  Locust  Bird  is  about  the  size  of  the  starling.     The  bill  and  legs  are  black  ;  the  plumage

[Collared  Turtle.     Columba  Risoria.]

The  messenger  had  a  young  brood  at  Aleppo,  and  was  sent  down  in  an  uncovered  cage  to  Scanderoon,  from  whence,  as  soon  as  set
at  liberty,  she  returned  with  all  expedition  to  her  nest.  It  was  usual  at  the  season  of  the  arrival  of  the  annual  ships  to  send
pigeons  to  be  ready  at  the  port,  and,  by  all  accounts,  if  the  bird  remained  absent  ahove  a  fortnight,  she  was  apt  to  forget  her
young,  and  therefore  not  fit  to  be  trusted.  Upon  inquiring  into  the  manner  of  training  the  pigeon  for  this  service,  I  was  told  by
some  that  she  was  at  once  sent  down  to  Scanderoon  in  a  cage  ;  but  I  am  rather  inclined  to  believe  what  was  affirmed  by  others,
that  she  was  taught  by  degrees  to  fly  from  shorter  distances  on  the  Scanderoon  road.

"  The  Editor  was  informed  that  the  pigeons,  when  let  fly  from  Scanderoon,  instead  of  bending  their  course  towards  the  high
mountains  surrounding  the  plain,  mounted  at  once  directly  up,  soaring  still  almost  perpendicularly  until  out  of  sight,  as  if  to
surmount  at  once  the  obstacles  intercepting  the  view  of  their  place  of  destination."

a  Alauda  arvensis.  b  A.  arborea.  c  A.  pratensis.  d  A.  cristata.

c  A.  calandra.  This,  the  Wood-lark,  Is  not  in  Russell's  list.  We  introduce  it  on  the  authority  of  Monro,  who  heard  it  in  Galilee.
See  his  "  Rambles,"  ii.  19.

f  Sturnus  vulgaris.  8  Turdus  viscivorous.  h  T.pVaris.  '   T.  cantur.

k  T.rufus.  '  T.mertdu.  m  T.  torquatus.  n  T.ruseus.

Chap.  VUf.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccccxi

of  the  body  is  of  a  flesh  colour ;  that  of  the  head,  neck,  and  wings,  black.  The  bird  appears
in  Syria  in  June,  about  the  time  the  white  mulberries  are  ripe,  and  feeds  chiefly  on  that  fruit,
when  no  locusts  are  to  be  found.  Of  this  insect  this  bird  is  the  most  formidable  enemy,  and
it  makes  its  appearance  about  the  time  they  may  be  expected.  Other  birds — starlings,  spar-
rows, swallows,  feast  largely  upon  the  locusts  ;  but  their  operations  seem  slight,  compared  with
the  havoc  committed  by  the  Smwmur.*  For  this  important  service  the  bird  is  much  respected,
and  its  appearance  hailed  with  gladness.  There  is  a  pretty  fable  that  those  places  which  are
determined  not  to  miss  the  services  of  the  locust  bird  provide  themselves  with  a  supply  of
water  from  the  country  from  which  [not  said  where !]  the  bird  comes ;  and  that  the  birds
scenting,  in  their  flight,  the  water  of  their  own  dear  land,  are  attracted  in  swarms  to  the
neighbourhood.11

Of  Buntings,  Syria  has  the  Yellow  Hammer  c  and  the  Ortolan*  which  might  be  mistaken
for  it.  We  are  not  aware  that  in  Syria  the  Ortolan  enjoys  that  reputation  as  a  table  delicacy
which,  in  a  fattened  state,  it  has  acquired  in  the  south  of  Europe.  There  is  also  the  Black-
faced  Bunting*

These  are  all  the  more  common  Finches;  namely: —

The  Chaffinch?  the  Goldfinch,^  the  Red  Linnet,11  the  Sparrow}  This  last  impertinent
cosmopolite  is  in  prodigious  numbers;  sparrows  swarm  in  the  towns,  and  sometimes  visit  the
houses,  and  build  their  nests  about  them  to  such  an  extent  as  to  become  a  serious  annoyance.

Of  the  multitudinous  genus  Muscicapidce  or  Fly-catchers,  only  one  species,  the  Pied  Fly-
catcher*- has  beenparticularly  noticed  in  Syria.

Of  the  still  more  extensive  genus  of  Wagtails  or  Warblers,  Palestine  offers  an  interesting
collection  ;  but  none  of  them  occur  with  much  frequency.  Most  readers  will  remember  that
there  is  little  allusion  in  Scripture  to  the  singing  of  birds ;  and  we  used  to  think  that  the  almost
perfect  silence  of  the  Hebrew  poets  respecting  the  songs  of  birds,  which  supply  so  many  beau-
tiful allusions  in  the  poetry  of  western  nations,  might  be  understood  to  imply  that  song-birds
were  scarce  in  Palestine.  And  this,  now  at  least,  proves  to  be  the  fact.  There  are  a  few
favourite  localities  which  the  song-birds  frequent,  and  where  their  sweet  voices  are  heard.
But,  speaking  generally,  Paxton  says  : — "  The  singing  of  birds  is  not  often  heard  in  Palestine.
There  are  a  few  species  of  birds,  with  a  gaudy  plumage,  but  their  notes  are  not  melodious.
The  sweet  plaintive  note  of  the  nightingale  is  sometimes  heard,  but  oftener  the  harsh  cawing  of
the  crow."

The  Nightingale}  thus  introduced  to  our  notice,  is  heard  during  the  greater  part  of  the  garden
season,  singing  delightfully  in  the  daytime  from  amid  the  pomegranate  groves,  and  from  trees
of  loftier  growth  in  the  night-season.  In  the  larger  towns  there  are  persons  who  keep  night-
ingales in  cages,  and  let  them  out,  at  a  small  rate,  to  nocturnal  assemblies ;  so  that  most
entertainments  of  ceremony  during  the  spring  have  a  concert  of  nightingales.  This  might
seem  an  incongruous  employment  of  a  bird  so  proverbially  "  mournful ;"  but  those  who  know
him  will  sav  he  is —

A

"  The  merry  nightingale
That  crowds,  and  hurries,  and  precipitates,
With  fast  thick  warble,  his  delicious  notes,
As  he  were  fearful  that  an  April  night
Would  be  too  short  for  him  to  utter  forth
His  love-chant,  and  disburthen  his  full  soul
Of  all  its  music." — Coleridge.

After  the  nightingale  comes  the  Petty  -Chaps,™  the  White  Water-  Wagtail,"  the  Win-Chat  °
the  Robin  Redbreast,?  and  the  Wren.^

a  The  native  name,  framed  like  a  large  number  of  the  Arabic  names  of  birds,  in  imitation  of  the  note  or  sound  which  the  bird
gives  forth.
b  "  Meraoires  des  Missions,"  viii.  113.  c  Emberizahortulana.  A  E.citrineWi.

e  E.quelea.  f  Fringilla  coslebs.  s  F.  varduelia.  h  R.Unaria.

'  E .  dumestica .  k  Muscicapa  atricapella.  >  Mutacilla  luscinia.  to  M.  ficcdala.

n  M.ulba.  °  M.ruberta.  P  M.rubicuta.  q  M.  troglodutis.

3g2

ccccxii  .  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

The  Common  Martin?  and  the  Purple  Martin?  and  the  European  c  and  American  Goat-
suckers? complete  the  list  of  hirds  known  to  exist  in  Syria.  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  others
are  there  of  which  this  list  takes  no  cognisance ;  and,  from  the  intimations  of  travellers,  there
would  appear  to  be  many  not  often  seen  in  Europe.

REPTILES.

Turtles,  or  Sea  Tortoises,  would  seem  to  be  plentiful  along  the  coast,  from  the  numbers
that  often  strew  the  shore  after  a  storm.  Those  that  remain  on  the  shore  are,  of  course,  such
only  as  have  been  cast  upon  their  backs ;  and  they  must  perish,  unless  some  good-natured
persons  set  them  upon  their  feet,  which  is  often  done.  We  cannot  learn  that  they  are  eaten.
Small  turtles  sometimes  advance  a  considerable  way  up  the  rivers.  Fresh  Water  Tortoises
occur  in  the  lakes,  and  even  in  some  of  the  rivers.  They  are  sometimes,  but  very  rarely,
eaten,  and  then  only  by  Christians.  This  objection  does  not  extend  to  the  Land  Tortoise,
which  is  often  found,  and  is  esteemed  more  wholesome.  Its  eggs  are  used  medicinally.  They
are  of  small  size :  we  find  no  instance  of  one  being  found  more  than  four  or  five  pounds
weight.

The  marshy  pools  of  Palestine  and  Syria  abound  in  Frogs?  and  they  are  of  large  size  and
excellent  quality,  but  are  not  eaten  by  the  natives  of  any  class.  There  is  also  the  Tree  Frog  ;f
and  the  Toads  abounds.

Lizards  of  different  species  are  exceedingly  abundant  both  in  the  settled  country  and  in
the  deserts  around  Palestine.  The  species  have  not  been  well  distinguished.  In  p.  cxcii
the  reader  will  find  some  notice  of  alleged  crocodiles  in  the  river  and  lake  near  Csesarea ;  and
will  find  a  suggestion  that  they  were  probably  not  Croco  diles,  but  some  large  member  of  the
Lizard  family.  We  now  are  even  more  inclined  to  this  opinion,  and  have  little  doubt  that
the  animal  is  the  same  as  the  Nilotic  Tupinambis?  which  is  the  largest  of  all  the  race.  The
Egyptians  indeed  pretend  that  the  animal  is  produced  from  the  eggs  of  the  crocodile  hatched  in
a  dry  place.  The  animal  is  more  aquatic  than  any  other  Lizard,  although  much  less  so  than
the  Crocodile.  It  attains  a  length  of  five  or  six  feet,  and  is  figured  on  the  old  monuments  of
Egypt.  There  is  another  species,  the  Desert  Tupinambis^  which  is  frequent  in  the  deserts
bordering  Egypt  and  Palestine.  It  differs  chiefly  from  the  other  in  its  smaller  size,  and  in
the  less  aquatic  adaptations  of  the  tail.  This  is  no  doubt  the  Land  Crocodile  of  Herodotus,
and  probably  the  true  Scincus  of  the  ancients.  The  Arabs  call  both  species  by  the  name  of
Waran,  distinguishing  the  former  as  Waran  el-bahr,  the  River  Lizard,  and  the  latter  as
Waran  el-houd,  the  Land  Lizard.  Hence  the  names  introduced  by  Merrem  in  his  work  on
'  Reptiles,'  and  adopted  by  recent  naturalists,  of  Varanus  draceenus  for  the  former,  and
Varanus  scincus  for  the  latter.  The  desert  species  differs  much  in  habit  from  its  aquatic
congener.  Instead  of  throwing  itself  with  avidity  upon  the  aliments  presented  to  it,  and
exhibiting  much  irritation  and  desire  to  injure,  as  the  latter  does  in  captivity — the  former,  in
bondage,  altogether  refuses  food,  and  it  is  necessary  to  put  the  morsels  into  its  mouth,  and
compel  it  to  eat.

The  Scincus  of  the  ancients  has  been  sought  in  other  species.  It  has  been  usually  identified
with  the  Lacerto  Scincus  of  Linnaeus  and  Hasselquist.  This  species  is  extensively  diffused
in  Africa,  Arabia,  and  the  warm  deserts  of  southern  Syria ;  and  is  celebrated  in  the  East  for  the
property  of  its  body  and  tail,  under  various  forms  of  preparation,  of  restoring  exhausted  vigour,
on  which  account  high  prices  have  been  given  for  it  in  those  places  where  it  is  scarce.  It  is
not  impossible  that  this  conceit,  exploded  in  Europe  and  declining  in  Asia,  originated  in  the
very  extraordinary  vigour  which  the  animal  itself  manifests  in  diving  into  the  sands  of  the

a  Hirundo  urbica.  t>  H.  purpurea.  c  Cuprimulgus  Europceus.

d  C.  Americanus.    A  specimen  was  shot  at  Aleppo  in  1778  ;  how  far  it  may  be  common  we  know  not.
e  Rana  esculenta.  f  R.  arborea.  &  R.bufn.

h  Tupinambis  Nilotica,  Daud.  and  Geoff.  St.  Hilaire  :  the  Lacerta  NiloHca  of  Lianaeus,  Hasselquist,  and  Cuvier.
Tupinambis  arenarius.

Chap.  VIII.]

ZOOLOGY.

CCCCXlll

ill

desert  when  it  perceives  occasion  for  alarm.     This  is  perhaps  the  ITQ,  coach,  rendered  "cha-
meleon" in  Lev.  xi.  32.

Notwithstanding  the  similarity  of  name  this  species  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Skinkore
of  Shaw,  which  is  an  aquatic  lizard,  and  differs  little  from  the  water  efts,  save  in  the  extent  and
fashion  of  the  fins.  Shaw  himself  perhaps  laboured  under  some  misconception  when  he
describes  this  creature  as  the  animal  to  whose  alleged  aphrodisiac  virtues  we  have  alluded.  But
the  natives  have  strange  conceptions  as  to  the  medicinal  properties  of  the  various  lizards,  that
it  is  not  absolutely  impossible  that  the  same  virtues  might  be  ascribed  to  both  the  species.

The  Starry  Lizard"1  is  that  which  appears  to  be  the  most  common  in  Palestine,  and  particularly
in  Judea,  where,  Bel  on  affirms,
that  it  sometimes  attains  the  size
of  a  weasel.  This  is  the  lizard
which  infests  the  pyramids,  and
which,  in  Syria  and  in  the  other
countries  it  inhabits,  harbours  in
the  crevices  and  between  the
stones  of  old  walls,  feeding  on
flies  and  other  winged  insects.
This,  we  presume,  is  the  species
principally  (but  not  exclusively)
intended  by  Bruce  when  he  says,
"  I  am  positive  that  I  can  say
without  exaggeration  that  the
number  I  saw  one  day,  in  the
great  court  of  the  temple  of  the
sun  at  Baalbec,  amounted  to
many  thousands  :  the  ground,
the  walls,  the  stones  of  the  ruined
buildings,    were     covered     with

them ;  and  the  various  colours  of  which  they  consisted  made  a  very  extraordinary  appearance,
glittering  under  the  sun,  in  which  they  lay  sleeping  and  basking."  In  like  manner,  Lord
Lindsay  describes  the  ruins  at  Jerash  as  "  absolutely  alive  with  lizards."

We  cannot  undertake  to  discriminate  species  in  the  desert  on  the  strength  of  the  very  slight
intimations  of  travellers.  Near  Suez,  Lord  Lindsay  noticed  "a  species  of  grey  lizard  ;"  and
on  the  ascent  towards  Mount  Sinai,  "  hundreds  of  little  lizards,  of  the  colour  of  the  sand,  and
called  by  the  natives  Sarabandi,  were  darting  about."  And  in  the  Syrian  Desert,  Major
Skinner  writes : — "  The  ground  is  teeming  with  lizards  ;  the  sun  seems  to  draw  them  from
the  earth,  for  sometimes  when  I  have  fixed  my  eye  upon  one  spot,  I  have  fancied  that  the
sands  were  getting  into  life,  so  many  of  these  creatures  at  once  crept  from  their  holes."

The  small  greyish-brown  lizard  called  the  Turkish  Lizard,h  we  find  named  as  one  of  the
Syrian  species.  We  could  name  several  species  which  we  suspect  to  be  among  those  found  in
Palestine,  but  from  this  we  refrain.

The  Chameleon  is,  however,  known  to  be  one  of  the  species  which  that  country  possesses.  It
is  common  enough  in  the  gardens,  as  well  as  in  the  rocky  hills.  It  is  said  to  be  usually  of  a  green
colour  when  found  upon  the  grass,  or  of  the  colour  of  the  earth  on  which  it  happens  to  rest ;
and  if  perched  upon  a  branch  or  trunk  of  a  tree,  its  colour  is  nearly  that  of  the  bark.  The
result  of  various  observations  made  by  Russell  is  that  the  animal  frequently,  but  not  always,
goes  through  a  succession  of  colours  before  assuming  that  of  the  body  nearest  to  it ;  that  its
most  permanent  colour  in  a  state  of  repose  was  that  of  the  ground  on  which  it  lay,  provided
the  ground  was  not  of  those  colours  which  it  never  does  assume,  such  as  red  or  blue :  and  that
the  animal  appears  duller  at  some  times  than  at  others,  and  captivity  seems  to  abate  its  alacrity

[Lizard. — Lacertu  Stellio.]

-1  Larerta  stellio.

b  Lacerta  turcica.

CCCCX1V

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

[Chameleon.]

of  changing.  For  which  last  conclusion
we  should  be  disposed  to  substitute,  the
conjecture,  that  the  wonder  proved  really
less  than  it  seemed,  when  the  captivity
of  the  animal  offered  the  means  of  close
examination.  Dr.  Madden,  in  whose
observations  we  may  place  much  re-
liance, states  that  he  paid  much  atten-
tion to  this  animal  when  he  was  in
Egypt.  He  had  one  that  lived  for  three
months,  another  two  months,  and  several
that  he  kept  ten  or  fourteen  days.  He
says  : — "  Of  all  the  irascible  little  ani-
mals in  the  world,  there  are  none  so
choleric  as  the  chameleon.  I  trained
two  large  ones  to  fight,  and  could  at  any  time,  by  knocking  their  tails  against  one
another,  ensure  a  combat,  during  which  their  change  of  colour  was  most  conspicuous.
This  change  is  only  effected  by  paroxysms  of  rage,  when  the  dark  green  gall  of  the  animal
is  transmitted  into  blood,  and  is  visible  enough  under  its  pellucid  skin.  The  gall,  as  it  enters
and  leaves  the  circulation,  affords  the  three  various  shades  of  green  which  are  observable
in  its  colour.  The  story  of  the  chameleon  assuming  whatever  colour  is  near  it,  is,  like  that
of  its  living  upon  air — a  fable.  It  is  extremely  voracious.  I  had  one  so  tame  that  I  could  place
it  on  a  piece  of  stick,  opposite  a  window,  and  in  the  course  of  ten  minutes  I  have  seen  it  devour
half  a  dozen  flies.  Its  mode  of  catching  them  is  very  singular ;  the  tongue  is  a  thin  carti-
laginous dart,  anchor  shaped :  this  it  thrusts  forth  with  great  velocity,  and  never  fails  to  catch
its  prey.

"  The  mechanism  of  the  eye  of  the  chameleon  is  extremely  curious  ;  it  has  the  power  of  pro-
jecting the.  eye  a  considerable  distance  from  the  socket,  and  can  make  it  revolve  in  all  direc-
tions. One  of  them,  which  I  kept  for  some  months,  deposited  thirteen  eggs  in  a  corner  of  the
room ;  each  was  about  the  size  of  a  large  coriander  seed.  The  animal  never  sat  on  them.  I
took  them  away  to  try  the  effects  of  the  sun,  but  from  that  period  she  declined  daily  in  vivacity
and  soon  after  died."

Serpents. — With  respect  to  this  class  of  animals  our  information  is  very  deficient.  We  cannot
find  that  a  single  species  has  been  named,  without  a  note  of  interrogation  or  some  other  inti-
mation of  doubt.  We  shall  therefore  merely  state  what  we  know,  without  attempting  any  very
definite  indications  of  species.  One  thing  is  clear,  that  there  are  no  serpents  of  large,  size,  and
few  of  noxious  qualities  in  Syria.

Few  houses  are  free  from  snakes ;  but  they  are  harmless,  and  no  accidents  are  known  to
have  been  occasioned  by  them.  They  usually  haunt  the  wood-house,  or  other  offices,  seldom
appearing  in  the  lodging  apartments,  although  they  are  now  and  then  heard  rattling  on  the
shelves  among  the  ornamental  china  in  the  less  frequented  chambers,  or  detect  themselves  by
diffusing  a  strong  musky  scent.  They  destroy  mice,  and  small  ones  have  sometimes  been
caught  in  mouse-traps,  where,  after  gorging  themselves  upon  the  prisoner,  they  are  unable  to
make  their  escape.  We  have  ourselves  noticed  that  in  the  midst  of  summer  the  house  serpents
are  prone  to  resort  to  the  places  where  the  water-jars  are  kept — but  more,  we  imagined,  for
coolness  than  for  drink.  This  serpent  is  of  a  whitish  grey  colour,  about  two  and  a  half  feet
in  length,  and  is  seldom  found  except  in  houses.  In  the  absence  of  more  determinate  indi-
cations we  will  not  hazard  a  conjecture  as  to  the  name  of  this  species.  Serpents  of  a  more
noxious  kind  are,  in  the  hot  months,  found  in  the  open  country.  But  the  ground  being  at
that  season  bare  and  arid,  they  perceive  objects  at  a  distance,  and  withdrawing  at  the  approach
of  man,  they  are  little  exposed  to  be  trod  upon,  or  to  be  otherwise  provoked,  and  it  is  rare  to
hear  of  any  injury  inflicted  by  them.  Russell  declares  that  during  his  long  residence  in  Syria
he  never  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  a  venomous  serpent.      Burckhardt    mentions  such

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccccxv

serpents  as  abundant  in  the  desert  south  of  Judea,  and  on  the  borders  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf— in
short,  in  the  land  through  which  the  Israelites  passed  when  they  journeyed  from  Mount  Hor,
by  the  way  of  the  Red  Sea,  to  compass  the  land  of  Edom,  and  in  which  they  were,  for  their
sins,  afflicted  by  "  serpents  of  burning  bites."  As  one  of  the  localities  is  named  from  the
serpents,  Ras  Om  Haije,  we  may  conjecture,  with  tolerable  safety,  that  the  species  is  the
Hal  Coluber  of  Linnaeus,  the  cruel  venom  of  whose  bite  has  been  well  ascertained  in  Egypt,
where  it  abounds ;  and  which  is  there  one  of  the  principal  of  the  serpents  on  which  the
serpent  charmers  exercise  their  mystic  craft.

In  the  '  Pictorial  Bible,'  on  Gen.  xlix.  17,  it  is  conjectured  that  the  word  lSPBttf  shephiphon,
rendered  "  adder  "  in  our  version  ["  Dan  shall  be  a  ser-
pent by  the  way,  an  adder  in  the  path  "],  meant  the
Cerastes  or  Horned  Snake.  This  has  since  been  re-
markably confirmed  by  Addison  (ii.  235),  who,  on  the
road  to  Palmyra,  "  killed  on  the  path  a  Cerastes,  or
horned  snake,  the  most  venomous  reptile  of  Syria."
This  is  also  found  in  Arabia  and  Egypt.

Russell  says  that  Vipers  are  not  common  in  Syria,
and  that  dried  specimens,  required  for  medicinal  pur-
poses, are  brought  from  Egypt.  He  adds  that  broth
made  of  the  common  house  snake  is  sometimes  eaten  by
Christians,  but  is  never  prescribed  as  a  medicine.

Scorpions  hold  a  principal  place  among  the  noxious
animals  which  infest  the  houses.  They  are  often  found
under  or  at  the  bottom  of  neglected  boxes ;  and  are
met  with  in  the  summer  nights  crawling  in  the  streets
or  on  the  stairs,  and  sometimes  even  among  the
mattresses  spread  on  the  terraces.  The  people  are
sometimes  stung  by  them ;  but,  although  followed  by
considerable  pain  for  several  hours,  'the  wound  is  not
followed  by  serious  consequences.  Females  suffer
most  from  the  bite,  but  not  very  seriously.  The  com-
mon remedy  is  oil,  in  which  the  bruised  body  of
the  animal  has  been  steeped.  This  is,  of  course,  a
prejudice :    plain   oil   would   do   quite   as   well.      The

sting  is  in  the  tail ;    hence  a  scorpion  is  usually  seized  by  that  part,  and  its  head  crushed  by
the  foot.

FISHES.

So  little  has  been  observed  by  travellers  respecting  the  Fish  on  the  shores  and  in  the  lakes
and  rivers  of  Palestine,  and  perhaps  there  has  been  so  little  to  say,  that  we  at  first  thought  of
dismissing  the  subject  with  this  observation.  It  may,  however,  be  best  to  set  down  such
information  as  we  do  possess ;  as,  however  inconsiderable,  it  may  be  received  as  a  contribution
towards  this  branch  of  the  natural  history  of  Palestine.  These  are,  however,  so  few,  that  it
seems  scarcely  worth  while  to  digest  them  in  a  scientific  order.  We  will  rather  state  the  facts
with  reference  to  the  localities  with  which  they  are  connected.

Mediterranean  Fish. — In  connection  with  the  fact  that  to  the  towns  of  Israel,  and
Jerusalem  in  particular,  fish  was  brought  for  sale  by  the  Phoenician  fishermen,a  it  is
interesting  to  learn  that  fish  abound  in  the  waters  about  Tyre  and  Sidon,  and  that  they  form
a  principal  article  in  the  fare  of  the  inhabitants.b  When  Dr.  Clarke  was  standing  on  the
beach  at  Jaffa,  an  Arab  fisherman  ran  to  exhibit  a  fish  he  had  just  caught,  with  an  animation
which  suggested  that  it  could  not  be  very  common.     It  was  like  a  small  Tench,  but  of  a

[Scorpion. — a.  Head  and  mandible.]

"  Neh.  xiii.  16.

b  Buckingham's'  Arab  Tribes,'  417-

ccccxvi  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

bright  emerald  green  colour,  such  as  the  Doctor  never  saw  before  or  after,  nor  was  it  described
by  any  author  with  which  he  was  acquainted. a  Wilde  observed  large  numbers  of  Flying
Fish  off  the  coast  near  Jaffa.b  Red  Mullet,  Sturgeon  (rare),  and  two  sorts  of  Cod  have  been
noticed  in  the  bay  of  Scanderoon,  which  abounds  in  fish :  of  these,  one  equals  in  quality  the
best  English  cod ;  the  other,  named  Leeche,  is  much  inferior .c

At  Tripoli  the  sea  abounds  in  fish  and  shell-fish.  Burckhardt  procured  a  list  of
the  best  from  a  French  merchant.  Dorade  ;d  Rouget ;  Loup ;  Severelle ;  Leeche  (the
kind  of  cod  just  mentioned);  Malaye ;  Maire  noire;  Maire  blanc ;  Vieille.  From  our
inability  to  find  the  synonymes  of  some  of  these,  we  infer  that  the  names  in  these  cases  are
merely  local,  and  therefore  apply  to  species  less  known  than  the  others :  as  people  seldom
give  new  names  to  creatures  whose  names  are  known.  These  are  caught  with  small  baskets
into  which  bait  is  put:  the  orifice  is  made,  so  that  if  the  fish  enters  it  cannot  get  out  again.
It  is  said  that  no  other  fish  is  found  in  the  baskets.  Oysters  are  found  on  some  parts  of  the
coast.e

The  following  are  the  names  of  Fishes  assigned  to  the  Mediterranean  shore  by  the  naturalists
of  the  French  expedition  :f — 'Three  species  of  Sargus — namely,  the  Hoarse  Sargus,%  the  Common
Sargus, h  and  the  Ringed  Sargus;'1  the  Saw-Jish^  two  species  of  Perch;1  the  Brazen
Serran  ;m  the  Salt-water  Barbel  ;a  the  Sea-  Camel ;°  three  species  of  the  genus  Caranx?  in
the  Mackerel  family ;  two  species  of  real  Mackerel  ,,C1  and  six  species  in  the  Linnsean  genus
of  Rays  (raia).'

Red  Sea  Fish. — It  may  be  worth  while  to  state  what  we  know  respecting  the  fish  of  the  Gulf
of  Akaba.  Burckhardt  obtained  from  some  fishermen  some  excellent  fish,  of  a  species  resem-
bling a  Turbot,  and  very  common  there.  Another  fish,  called  boury,  is  caught  in  large  quantities.
On  one  occasion  Burckhardt  bought  for  fourpence-halfpenny  thirty-two  salted  fish,  each
about  two  feet  in  length ;  and  a  measure  of  the  dried  shell  fish  called  zorombat,  which  in  this
state  the  Arabs  call  bussra.  For  the  smaller  kinds  of  fish  the  fishermen  employ  hand-nets,
which  they  throw  into  the  sea  from  the  shore.  The  large  fish  they  slay  with  lances,  cast
from  the  shore,  there  being  no  boats  or  rafts  on  the  western  coast.  Shoals  of  Porpoises  have
been  noticed ;  and  there  is  a  large  undescribed  fish,  the  dried  skin  of  which  is  an  inch  thick,
and  is  employed  by  the  Arabs,  instead  of  leather,  for  their  sandals.  One  evening  the  same
traveller  saw  a  great  number  of  shell-fish  leaving  the  water,  and  crawl  to  one  hundred  or  two
hundred  paces  inland,  where  they  passed  the  night,  and  at  sunrise  returned  to  the  sea.8  At
the  head  of  this  gulf,  near  Akaba,  Lord  Lindsay  notes : — "  Numbers  of  diminutive  Crabs
were  running  about  on  the  sands ;  and  little  fish,  and  small  Sharks  in  great  numbers,  sporting
in  the  shallows."  To  these  we  add  the  following,  as  being  found  in  the  Red  Sea,  on  the
authority  of  M.  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire,' — two  species  of  Serran  ;u  and  the  Leaping  Caranx.x

The  western  coast  of  the  gulf  is  not  inhabited,  and  is  only  occasionally  visited  by  fishermen,
and  by  those  who  collect  wood  for  charcoal,  and  the  herb  from  which  soda  ashes  are  obtained.
The  former  cure  their  fish  on  the  spot  (bay  salt  is  abundant)  ;  and  when  they  have  collected
a  sufficient  quantity  of  fish,  they  fetch  a  camel,  and  transport  it  to  Tor  or  Suez.  At  the
former  place  a  camel's  load  of  about  four  hundred  pounds  may  be  purchased  for  about  three
dollars.  The  fishermen  also  prepare  a  sort  of  lard,  by  cutting  out  the  fat  adhering  to  the  fish,
and  melting  it :  they  then  mix  it  with  salt,  and  preserve  it  in  skins.  They  use  it  all  the
year  round  instead  of  butter,  both  in  their  cookery  and  for  anointing  their  bodies.  The  taste
is  not  disagreeable.

a  Clarke,  iv.  443.  b  wilde.ii.  433.  c  Russell,  ii.  218,  219.

d  Sparus  aurata— lunated  gilt-head.     This  fish  was  much  esteemed  by  the  aticient  Greeks  and  Romans.     It  sometimes  weighs
eight  or  ten  pounds.

e  Rauwolff,  262.  f  *  Histoire  Naturelle  des  Poissons  de  la  Mer  Rouge  et  de  la  Mediterranee.'  e  Sargus  mucus

h  /S.  vulgaris.  >  S.  annularis.  k  Scitvna  aqui'a.  1  Perca  punctata  and  P.  sinuosa.

m  Serranus  ccneus.  n  Mullus  barbutus.  °  So  called  by  the  Arabs— jimel-tl-bahr, — Vomer  Alexandrinus.

V  Curanx  luna  ;  C.  rhonchus;  C.fusus.  1  Scomber  quadripunctatus ;  and  S.  uniculor.

'  Trugnn  grabatus ;  T.lymma.    Myliobatis  marginata;  M.bovinn;  Itaia  virgata ;  Rhinobatus  cemiculus.

a  Burckhardt,  517,  522,  524,  532,  &c.  t  HUt.  Nat.  c'.es  Poisons,'  &c.,  par  M.  G.  St.  Hiluire.

>i  Serranus  tauvina;  and  S.  melanin  us.  x  Caranr  petaurista  ;  Seriola  speciosa  of  Cuvier.

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.

CCCCXV11

Lake  Tiberias  contains  plenty  of  excellent  fish,  and  it  is  obvious  that  fishing  operations  of
extent  and  importance  were  carried  on  there  in  the  time  of  Christ.  This  is  abundantly-
intimated  in  the  Gospels.  But  the  case  has  long  been  far  otherwise;  and,  until  within  these
few  years,  there  was  scarcely  a  boat  upon  the  lake,  nor  any  fishing  carried  on  but  by  ano-lino-
from  the  shore.  The  northern  part  of  the  Lake  abounds  in  fish,  but  Burckhardt  did  not  notice
any  at  the  southern  extremity.  The  most  common  species,  named  by  him,  are  the  Binny,  which
is  a  species  of  Carp  ;a  and  a  fish  called  Mesht,  which  is  a  foot  long,  and  five  inches  broad,  with
a  flat  body  like  the  sole.  Hasselquist  examined  some  of  the  fish  of  this  Lake,  and  thought  it
remarkable  that  the  same  kinds  should  be  met  with  as  in  the  Nile, —  Charmuth  Silurus
Binny  (as  before),  Mulsil,  and  Sparus  Galilceus.  "This,"  says  Dr.  Clarke,  "explains  the
observations  of  certain  travellers,  who  speak  of  the  Lake  as  possessing  fishes  peculiar  to  itself  •
not  being  perhaps  acquainted  with  the  produce  of  the  Nile.  Josephus  considers  the  Lake
Gennesareth  as  having  fishes  of  a  peculiar  nature  ;b  and  yet  it  is  very  worthy  of  notice  that  in
speaking  of  the  fountain  of  Capernaum,  his  remarks  tend  to  confirm  the  observation  of
Hasselquist :  '  Some  consider  it  as  a  vein  of  the  Nile,  because  it  brings  forth  fishes  resem-
bling the  Coracinus  of  the  Alexandrian  Lake.'"  Monro  speaks  with  admiration  of  a  fish
from  the  Lake,  on  which  (fried  in  oil)  he  feasted.  It  is  called  Abou  Sookn,  but  no  description
is  given.

Of  the  fishes  in  the  Lake  Houle  we  have  no  information.  But  the  presence  of  valuable  fish
is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  its  fisheries  are  rented  of  the  government  by  some  inhabitants  of
the  town  of  Saphat.c

In  the  Lake  el  Taka,  which  communicates  with  the  Orontes,  there  are  vast  numbers  of
fish,  which  resort  there  in  winter  from  the  river.  It  is  principally  of  the  species  called  by
the  Arabs  the  Black  Fish,  on  account  of  its  ash-coloured  flesh :  its  length  varies  from  five  to
eight  feet.  The  fishing  season  is  from  November  to  January.  The  men  fish  during  the
night,  with  harpoons,  in  small  boats  which  carry  six  or  eight  men  ;  and  so  numerous  are  the
fish,  that  by  throwing  their  harpoons  at  random,  they  fill  their  boats  in  the  course  of  the
night.  The  fish  are  salted  on  the  spot,  and  carried  all  over  Syria  and  to  Cyprus,  for  the  use
of  the  Christians  during  their  long  and  rigid  fasts.  Besides  the  black  fish,  Carp  are  also  taken
with  nets,  and  carried  to  Homs  and  Hamah,  where  the  Turks  are  very  fond  of  them.d

In  a  small  lake  near  the  castle  of  Mezereib,  beyond  Jordan,  there  is  an  abundance  of  fish,
equal  in  size  and  not  inferior  in  beauty  to  the  gold  and  silver  fishes,  which  are  kept  suspended
from  glass  globes  in  England.e  Burckhardt  says, — "It  abounds  with  fish,  particularly  Carp
and  a  species  called  Emshatt."

In  the  basin  of  a  mosque  at  Tripoli  are  a  number  of  fish,  not  suffered  to  be  taken  or  eaten.
Buckingham  saw  about  two  thousand  within  a  circumference  of  less  than  one  hundred  paces.
Some  of  them  were  large  enough  to  weigh  five  or  six  pounds.  They  were  flat-headed,  and
covered  with  scales  of  a  silvery  grey  colour.f

It  would  appear  that  all  the  streams  which  flow  from  the  east  into  the  Jordan  are  full  of
fish,  in  general  small,  but  of  excellent  flavour.  In  some  of  the  streams  they  are  most  abundant.
Burckhardt  describes  the  Shenat  el  Mandhour  as  "  full  of  fish;"  and  in  the  Wady  Wale,
"  innumerable  fish  were  playing,"  and  he  killed  several  of  them  merely  by  throwing  stones.?

Dr.  Russell  has  a  chapter  on  the  Fishes  noticed  at  Aleppo  ;  and  as  might  be  expected,  the
predominant  genus  seem  to  be  the  same  as  in  the  waters  of  Palestine,  and  it  may  therefore  be
conceived  that  the  species  do  not  differ.  The  small  river  Kowick  might  not  be  supposed
very  rich  in  fish;  it  nevertheless  contains  seventeen  species,  and  among  them  some  not
previously  described.  Of  the  latter,  one  was  called  the  Aleppo  Eel  by  the  Franks,  from  the
resemblance  of  its  shape  to  that  of  the  Eel ;  but  it  is  of  a  different  genus,  and  being  less  oily

a  Sonniui  having  established  that  the  Binny  of  the  Arabs  is  the  ZfpMo'ws  of  the  ancients,  this  fine  and  abundant  species  of  carp
is  now  known  as  Cyprinus  lepidotus  {i.e.  the  Scaly  Carp).     It  is  frequent  in  the  Nile  and  in  all  the  fresh  waters  ol  Syria.

b  De  Bell.  Jud.  iii.  18.  c  Burckhardt,  16.  d  Buckingham's  '  Arab  Tribes,' 167

e  '  Syria,'  242.  f  Buckingham's  '  Arab  Tribes,'  163.

8  Burckhardt,  235,  273,  358,  370 ;  Buckingham's  '  Arab  Tribes,'  148.

vol.  i.  3  h

ccccxviii  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.  [Chap.  VIII.

is  esteemed  lighter  and  more  delicate  food.  They  are  very  abundant,  and  oftener  appear  at
the  tables  of  the  English  at  Aleppo  than  any  other  fish.  The  two  other  nondescripts  were  both
of  the  genus  Silurus*  and  are  seldom  eaten,  not  being  much  esteemed.

Only  two  of  the  fishes  of  the  river  are  eaten  by  Europeans, — one,  the  Aleppo  Eel  already
mentioned  ;  and  the  other  the  Loche,h  which  is  excellent  and  abundant.  There  are  also  the
Binny,  the  Barbel,  and  the  Chub.  The  others  are  mostly  of  the  genus  Cxjprinus  (Carp),  and
of  very  indifferent  quality,  but  are  eaten  by  the  Christians  during  Lent.  Indeed,  most  of  the
fish  is  consumed  by  the  native.  Christians,  as  the  Moslems  eat  but  little.  An  account  of  these
Cyprini,  some  of  which  appear  to  be  distinct  varieties,  may  be  seen  in  Russell's  book.

The  supply  from  the  river  is  not  equal  to  the  demands  of  the  native  Christians.  Fish  are
therefore  brought  to  the  Aleppo  market  from  Scanderoon  (as  already  noticed),  from  the
Orontes  and  Euphrates,  and  from  the  lakes  of  Antioch  and  Taka.  Among  the  fish  brought
thus  to  Aleppo  are  found  the  Eel  f  the  Sheat  Fish  ;d  the  T&nia  f  the  Carp  ;f  and  the
Barbel.s

The  market  is  also  abundantly  supplied,  from  the  beginning  of  winter  till  March,  with  the
"  Black  Fish  "h  which  has  already  been  noticed.  It  is  a  species  of  Silurus.  Though  it  has  a
rank  taste,  and  is  deemed  unwholesome  by  the  doctors,  large  quantities  are  consumed  by  the
native  Christians.

Of  Mollusca,  a  species  of  Cuttle  FtsA/of  Limax^  (snail),  and  of  Murex,1  are  noticed  as  of
common  occurrence.  The  last  is  the  marine  animal  which  furnished  the  celebrated  Tyrian
dye.  Mariti  describes  it,  and  suspected  its  identity  with  the  shell-fish  producing  the  celebrated
purple  of  Tyre;  and  this  conjecture  has  been  confirmed  by  Wilde,  who  found  a  concrete  mass
of  these  shells  in  some  of  the  ancient  dye-pots  of  that  city.  A  very  curious  and  instructive
memoir  on  the  subject  may  be  found  as  an  appendix  to  the  first  volume  of  Wilde's  '  Narrative.'

Of  Worms  (Vermes)  there  is  of  course  the  Earth-Worm  ;m  and  two  species  of  the  Leechn  are
found  in  the  waters.  It  is  an  accident  not  uncommon  for  the  peasants,  in  drinking  incautiously
from  the  brook,  to  take  a  leech  into  the  mouth,  without  perceiving  it  at  the  time,  and  which,
fixing  in  the  fauces,  remains  several  days  before  they  can  find  means  to  expel  it.  The  same
happens  to  animals.  Captain  Frankland  nearly  lost  a  fine  dog  by  this  means.  The  valuable
medicinal  use  to  which  the  blood-sucking  propensities  of  the  leech  may  be  turned  is  not
known  in  Syria.

Among  Crustaceous  animals,  we  have  to  mention  the  Crab.  Lord  Lindsay  mentions  a
number  of  small  crabs  swarming  the  sands  near  Akaba ;  and  Belon  and  Russell  speak  of  a
species0  found  in  the  rivers,  and  very  different  from  any  known  in  England,  and  by
the  Franks  at  Aleppo  and  elsewhere  esteemed  one  of  the  greatest  delicacies  of  their  tables.
It  is  of  great  service  also  to  the  Christians  in  their  fast-days,  being  procurable  at  all  times  of
the  year.  But  it  is  in  highest  perfection  at  the  season  of  white  mulberries,  when,  straying
from  the  river,  it  pampers  itself  with  the  ripe  fruit  scattered  upon  the  ground  under  the  trees.
A  sea-crab,  called  by  Hasselquist  the  Running- Crab, v  is  mentioned  by  him  as  living  on  the
coasts  about  Egypt  and  Syria.  These  animals  come  up  from  the  sea  about  sunset,  and  run
very  fast  along  the  sands  in  considerable  numbers.  The  only  other  crustaceous  animal  of
which  we  find  any  notice  is  a  species  of  Oniscus.'i

Arachnioes.  The  Common  Spider  often  attains  a  much  larger  size  than  it  ever  exhibits
in  our  northern  clime.  Hasselquist  mentions  "  the  Spider  of  Galilee"r  which  he  found  near
the  Fountain  of  Solomon  in  Galilee.  Russell  speaks  of  "  a  spider  which  emits  a  deleterious
juice"  as  being  greatly  dreaded  by  the  people  of  Syria.     Doubtless  this  is  the  same  which

a  Silarus  Pelusius  and  S.  caus.  b  Colitis  barbatula.  c  Murcena  anguilla.

>1  Silurus  glanis.  e  Cubitis  taenia.  f  Cyprinus  carpio.

B  C.niloticus,  says  llussull;    but  we  feel  safe  in  saying  C.  lepidotus,  which  used  formerly  to  be  confounded  with  C.  niluticus,
from  which  it  is  now  clearly  distinct.

b  C.  nasus.                                    »  Sepia  luligo.  k  Umax  agrcs  is.  '  Murex  trunculus.

111  l.amlricus  tcrrcstris.  n  Ilirudo  medicinalis  and//,  sangwfuga.  °  Cancer fluviatilis.

P  Cam  er  cursor.  1  Oniscus  asellus.  r  AraneaGal'uaa.

Chap.  VIII.]  ZOOLOGY.  ccccxix

Burckhardt  had  occasion  to  notice  in  Sinai.  After  his  party  had  lighted  the  evening  fire  he  was
startled  hy  hearing  the  cries  of  one  of  the  Arabs  "  to  take  care  of  the  venomous  animal !"  He
then  saw  him  kill  a  reptile  like  a  spider,  to  which  the  Bedouins  give  the  name  of  Aboxt.
Hanahein,  or  "  the  two-mouthed,"  hana  meaning  two-mouthed  in  their  dialect.  It  was
about  four  inches  and  a  half  in  length,  of  which  the  body  was  three  inches  ;  it  had  five  long
legs  on  both  sides,  covered  like  the  body  with  setae  of  a  light-yellow  colour ;  the  head  long
and  pointed,  with  large  black  eyes  ;  the  mouth  armed  with  two  pair  of  fangs,  one  above  the
other,  recurved,  and  extremely  sharp.  Burckhardt  was  informed  that  it  never  makes  its
appearance  but  at  night,  and  is  principally  attracted  by  fire.  The  Bedouins  entertain  the
greatest  dread  of  it,  and  say  that  its  bite,  if  not  always  mortal,  produces  a  great  swelling,
almost  instant  vomiting,  and  excruciating  pains.  He  takes  it  to  be  the  Galeode  phalangisie,
from  its  exact  resemblance  to  the  figure  of  that  animal  given  in  Olivier's  Travels.

There  are  two  species  of  Scolopendra  the  wound  inflicted  by  one  of  which,a  is  considered
little  less  venomous  than  the  sting  of  the  scorpion  ;  but  the  animal  is  seldom  seen  within  doors.

INSECTS.

In  this  large  division  of  the  animal  kingdom,  the  following  appear  to  be  the  only  species
whose  existence  in  Palestine  has  been  ascertained : —

Besides  the  Common  Beetle  there  is  the  Carob-tree  Beetle?  and  the  Sacred  Beetle^  of
Egypt,  which  so  often  occurs  in  the  hieroglyphic  monuments  of  the  Egyptians.  A  very
entertaining  account  of  their  operations  in  forming  the  balls  of  clay  and  camel's  dung  in
which  the  female  deposits  her  eggs,  may  be  found  in  Wilde's  '  Narrative'  (i.  367).

Next  we  come  to  the  Glow-worm  ;d  three  species  of  Cantharis  or  Blistering  Flies  ;e  the
Staphylinus  maxillosus  ;  the  Earwig  ;f  the  Religious  Mantis, %  so  called  from  the  position  in
which  it  raises  its  anterior  legs,  or  arms,  which  resembles  that  of  supplication,  on  which  account
the  Turks  hold  the  insect  in  great  respect.  Five  species  of  Grullits,h  or  grasshopper,  including
the

Locust  (G.  migratorius) . — Locusts  in  Syria  and  Arabia  are  observed  to  come  invariably  from
the  East,  and  hence  the  popular  tradition  that  they  are  produced  by  the  waters  of  the  Persian
Gulf.  Some  few  of  them  are  seen  every  year,  but  great  flights  only  in  every  fourth  or  fifth  year.
There  are,  however,  exceptions  to  this  rule.  Syria  is  not  equally  with  Arabia  exposed  to  their
ravages.  The  province  of  Nejed  in  particular  is  sometimes  overwhelmed  to  such  a  degree,  that,
having  destroyed  the  harvest,  they  penetrate  by  thousands  into  the  private  dwellings,  and  devour
whatever  they  can  find,  even  the  leather  of  the  water  vessels.  Those  locusts  which  come  in
the  first  instance  from  the  East  are  not  considered  so  formidable,  because  they  only  fix  upon
trees,  and  do  not  destroy  the  grain.  But  they  give  birth  to  a  new  brood,  and  it  is  the  young
locusts,  before  they  are  sufficiently  grown  to  fly  away,  which  consume  the  crops.  The  locusts
are  said  to  breed  three  times  in  the  year.

It  was  in  the  country  east  of  the  Dead  Sea  that  Burckhardt  first  obtained  a  view  of  a
swarm  of  locusts.  They  so  completely  covered  the  surface  of  the  ground  that  his  horse  killed
numbers  of  them  at  every  step,  while  he  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  keeping  from  his  face
those  that  rose  up  and  flew  about.  Various  passages  of  Scripture  evince  the  extent  of  the
ravages  committed  by  these  destructive  insects  in  ancient  times ;  and  we  have  ample  proof
that  such  still  occur,  although  with  less  regularity  and  frequency  than  in  some  other  countries.
"  The  devastations  of  the  locust,"  says  Dr.  Bowring,  in  his  Report,  "  are  often  a  great  detri-
ment to  the  agriculturist :    they  sometimes  cross  the  country,  destroying  everything  before

a  Scolopendra  morsitans ;  the  other  is  S.  co'eoptrata.  b  Scarabceus  ceratonia.

"  Scarabtzus  sacer.  &  J.ampyris  noctiluca.

c  Namely,  the  Common  Spanish  Fly  (M:  loe  vesieatnrius)  ;    the  Syrian  {M.  Syriacus)  ;  and  the  succory  species  (M.  chicoirT)  ;
this  last  is  described  by  Hasselquist  as  "  the  Blistering  Fly  of  the  ancients,  which  lives  and  feeds  on  the  flowers  of  succory."
f  Fvrficula  auricularia.  B  Mantis  religiosa.

h  Gryllus  domcsticus ;  G.nasutus;  G.  gryllo-talpa;  G.migratnrius  :  G.  falcatus.

3  h2

ccccxx

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

[Locust.]

them.  A  few  years  ago  the  army  of  Ihrahim  Pasha,  in  the  attempt  to  extirpate  them,a
gathered  up  no  less  than  65,000  ardebs.h  No  one  can  estimate  the  damage  caused  by  these
creatures;  when  they  are  grown  to  a  certain  size,  it  is  impossible  to  conquer  or  resist  them;
they  come  like  flights  of  birds,  darkening  the  air,  and  the  destruction  of  hundreds  of  thousands
seems  in  no  respect  to  diminish  their  numbers."

Locusts  are  eaten  by  the  Bedouins  they  collect :  them  in  great  numbers  in  the  beginning  of
April,  when  the  sexes  cohabit,  and  when  they  are  easily  caught.  After  having  been  roasted  a
little  upon  the  iron-plate  on  which  bread  is  baked,  they  are  dried  in  the  sun,  and  then  put  into
large  sacks,  with  the  mixture  of  a  little  salt.  Another  way  is  to  throw  them  alive  into  boiling
water,  in  which  a  good  deal  of  salt  has  been  mixed  ;  after  a  few  minutes  they  are  taken  out  and
dried  in  the  sun ;  the  heads,  feet,  and  wings  are  then  torn  off,  the  bodies  are  cleansed  from  the
salt  and  perfectly  dried,  after  which  they  are  stowed  away  in  sacks.  They  are  never  served
up  as  a  dish,  but  every  one  takes  a  handful  of  them  when  hungry.  They  are  sometimes  eaten
broiled  in  butter ;  and  they  often  contribute  materials  for  a  breakfast  when  spread  over  un-
leavened bread  mixed  with  butter.  In  some  parts,  after  being  dried,  the  Arabs  grind  them  to  a
powder,  of  which  a  kind  of  bread  is  made  in  small  cakes.  It  may  be  worthy  of  remark,  that  of
all  Bedouins  known  by  Burckhardt,  those  of  Sinai  alone  abstain  from  using  locusts  as  an  article
of  food.  In  the  towns  of  Arabia  there  are  shops  in  which  locusts  are  sold  by  measure.  They
are  not  eaten  by  the  peasants  of  Syria;  although  some  poor  fellahs  in  the  Haouran  will  make
a  meal  of  them  when  pressed  by  hunger.  They  break  off  the  heads  and  take  out  the  entrails
before  drying  them  in  the  sun,  whereas  most  of  the  Beduuins  swallow  them  entire.

That  natural  enemy  of  the  locusts,  the  Smurmur,  or  Locust  Bird,  has  already  been  noticed.  It
is  of  the  size  of  a  swallow,  and  devours  vast  numbers  of  them ;  and  it  is  even  said  that  they  take
flight  at  its  cry.  But,  as  Burckhardt  remarks,  "  If  the  whole  feathered  tribe  of  the  district
visited  by  locusts  were  to  unite  their  efforts,  it  would  avail  little,  so  immense  are  the  numbers
of  these  dreadful  insects."

a  Those  that  had  been  bred  in  the  country,  and  before  they  could  fly,  we  presume.  Those  that  come  from  the  East  are  called
"  Flying  Locusts,"  while  those  bred  in  the  country  from  them  are  called  "  Devouring  Locusts ;"  the  reason  of  this  distinction  has
already  been  stated.

b  Each  equal  to  five  English  bushels,  and  therefore  the  whole  equal  to  325,000  bushels.

Chap.  VIII. ]  ZOOLOGY.  ccccxxi

Russell's  list  contains  the  word  "  Cicada"  but  the  species  is  not  indicated.  The  Arabic
synonyme  (ferfer),  which  he  introduces,  denotes  the  Cricket.  In  the  larger  stagnant  waters
the  singular  movements  of  one  of  the  Water  Scorpions11  may  be  observed.  There  are  very  few
houses  in  Syria  in  which  the  Red- Bug0  is  not  found;  and  where  the  divan  cushions  or  mat-
tresses happen  to  be  stuffed  with  wool  instead  of  cotton,  they  are  always  to  be  found  in  vast
numbers.  Hasselquist  reports  that  in  the  Mount  of  Temptation  he  found  "a  very  curious  and
new  species  of  Cimex  or  Bug ;"  but  he  gives  no  further  information  about  it.  Silkworms0
have  been  slightly  noticed  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Monro  acquaints  us  with  the  rather
remarkable  fact  that,  as  soon  as  the  eggs  are  laid  in  the  plains  under  Lebanon,  they  are  sent
away  to  Canobin  or  other  places  in  the  higher  and  colder  region,  where  they  can  be  kept  cool
without  danger  of  hatching,  until  the  mulberry-buds  are  ready  for  them  in  the  spring.  More
information  respecting  the  treatment  of  silk- worms  may  be  found  in  Hasselquist  (234).  The
Almond- Mot  he  and  the  Fig -tree  Moth{  are  also  mentioned  by  Hasselquist;  and  Russell  says,
"  There  are  some  beautiful  varieties  of  the  moth  tribe.  At  the  gardens  (at  Aleppo)  in  spring
they  afford  amusement  after  supper,  visiting  in  endless  succession,  and  displaying  their  finery
to  advantage  in  the  Venetian  Finars,  used  in  protecting  the  candles  from  the  wind."

The  Lion  Ant"  forms  its  funnel-shaped  trap  in  the  sands  of  Syria.  Hasselquist  indicates  a
species  of  Tenthredo,  which  he  surnamed  sodomitica  because  he  found  it  "  in  the  mad  apples
near  Mount  Tabor  and  the  Dead  Sea."

There  are  two  species  of  Wasps,h  and  two  of  Bees} — To  those  who  remember  the  Scriptural
descriptions  of  Palestine  as  "  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honeij"  it  will  he  interesting  to
know  that  in  many  parts  of  the  country  bees  are  still  numerous,  and  are  reared  with  great
success.  Thus  Hasselquist  describes  the  inhabitants  of  Sepphoris  as  breeding  a  great  number
of  bees,  to  their  considerable  advantage,  and  with  very  little  trouble.  They  make  their  bee-
hives of  clay,  four  feet  long  and  half  a  foot  in  diameter,  as  in  Egypt.  Ten  or  twelve  of
these  are  placed  on  the  bare  ground  without  anything  under  them,  but  they  are  covered  by  a
roof,  which  gives  them  much  of  the  appearance  of  dog-kennels.  In  those  in  which  the  bees
are  at  work  the  opening  is  closed  up,  leaving  only  small  apertures  through  which  the  bees
may  pass  in  and  out.  The  bee  is  held  in  some  veneration  by  the  Moslems,  and  is  spoken  of
in  the  Koran  as  "  a  sign  unto  the  people  that  understand."  Antsk  are  exceedingly  numerous.
At  Bethlehem,  Turner  writes  that  he  saw  "  a  great  number  of  small  Red  Ants,  and  of  Black
Caterpillars,  about  four  inches  long,  with  innumerable  feet  along  the  whole  length  of  their
body."

Fleas  cannot  by  any  means  be  excluded  from  the  neatest  houses  and  the  most  cleanly  persons.
The  long  eastern  habit,  affording  shelter  to  them,  is  a  favourite  conveyance,  and  the  streets
and  dusty  bazaars  so  swarm  with  them  that  it  is  impossible  to  walk  about  without  collecting
a  colony.  People  of  condition  sometimes,  for  this  reason,  change  their  dress  on  their  return
home ;  but  persons  in  humbler  circumstances,  who  cannot  use  this  precaution,  are  tormented
to  an  extent  which  might  be  beyond  any  powers  of  endurance  but  those  which  habit  gives.
The  fleas  are  particularly  partial  to  the  rich  juices  of  Europeans  fresh  from  the  West,  and
their  presence  never  fails  to  prove  a  great  attraction  to  their  countless  hosts.  Fleas  make
their  appearance  in  the  spring,  and  riot  without  stint  until  the  hot  weather  sets  in,  when  they
lose  their  wonted  agility,  and  their  numbers  gradually  diminish.  It  is  a  popular  saying  in
Palestine  that  "  The  King  of  the  Fleas  holds  his  court  in  Tiberias."  It  may  be  so;  but  there
are  other  places  which  might  safely  compete  the  distinction  with  that  town.  Lice  are  almost
equally  abundant.  There  are  perhaps  few  persons,  excepting  in  the  very  highest  ranks,
entirely  free  from  them,  probably  because  the  state  of  exemption  could  only  be  preserved  by
a  degree  of  constant  and  sedulous  attention  which  is  not  found  convenient.  Europeans  can
keep  themselves  free  when  they  are  at  home ;  but  during  a  journey,  the  most  fastidious
traveller  finds  that  he  has  no  alternative  but  to  abandon  himself  to  this  infliction.

a  Nepa  linearis-  b  Cimex  lectularius.  c  Phalama  mori.

ll  Phalcenu  amygddli  fmctus.  e  P.Jicus.  f  Myrmeleon  formica  leo.

8   Vcspacrabro;  V.vulyaris.  1>  Apis  longicornis  ;  A.  mellifica.  '  Formica  ruf a.

ccccxxu

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

[Chap.  VIII.

When  the  flea,  on  the  increase  of  the  heat,  relinquishes  the  office  of  torturing  the  Syrians,  their
duty  is  taken  up  with  alacrity  by  the  Mosquitos,  whose  reign  lasts  throughout  the  summer,
and  are  particularly  annoying  at  night.  But  the  inhabitants  seldom  use  mosquito  nets  or
curtains,  but  are  content  with  the  very  inadequate  protection  of  a  handkerchief  thrown  over
the  face.

The  Common  Flies  are  very  troublesome  at  meal  times,  but  at  other  times  it  is  easy  to
elude  them  by  darkening  the  room.  In  the  garden-houses,  towards  the  end  of  spring,  they
become  intolerably  vexatious,  and  at  dinner  in  the  open  divans  they  rush  to  the  assault  in  such
swarms  that  servants  are  obliged  to  stand  around  with  green  branches  in  their  hands,  to
protect  the  table.  On  a  journey,  both  the  mosquitoes  and  common  flies  are  exceedingly
annoying  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  which  is  one  reason  why  travelling  by  night  is  preferred
during  summer.  The  manner  in  which  the  khans  and  villages  are  infested  by  fleas,  also
affords  one  powerful  inducement  to  the  very  common  travelling  practice  of  resting  in  the  open
air,  or  in  tents.

[Gazelles  and  Hares.]

End  of  the  Physical  History.

INDEX

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    PALESTINE.

[*#*  The  star  (*)  placed  after  the  Roman  numerals  denotes  that  the  reference  is  to  the  note  at  the  foot  of  the  page  of  the  work]

Abakim,  mountains  of,  situation  of,  xlii

Abdallatiff,  his  description  of  the   earthquake  of  May  20th,

1202,  lxxxviii,  lxxxix
Abilene,  valley  of,  situation  of,  cxiii
Aboomungar,  ccclxiv*
Abou  Sookn,  ccccxvii

Hauakein  or  two-mouthed  hana,  ccccxix

Abrotanum  fcemina,  ccxl

Absinthium  romanum,  cclxx*

— ■  —  santonicum  judaicum,  ccxv

Abulfaragi,  his  notices  of  earthquakes  in  Syria,  lxxxviii

Abu  harb,  supposed  Antelope  leucoryx,  cccxciii*

Acacia,  ccli

albida,  ccli*

farnesiana,  id.

gummifeva,  ccli

lebbek,  ccli*

— —  nilotica,  ccli
pterocarpa,  ccli*

petrified,  lxix

seyal,  ccli

vera,t<2.

Aceldama  or  field  of  blood,  its  situation,  cxxii

■  its  earth  carried  to  Rome  by  order  of  the  Empress

Helena,  id.
Achillea  santolina,  cclxx*
Acta  sanctorum,  viii

Adam's  apple  or  plantain,  ccxlv,  cclxxviii
Addax,  cccxciii
Adder-cucumber,  cclxxxi

Addison,  his  description  of  the  rains  in  the  Desert,  cccxliv
Adianthum  capillus,  cclxx*
Adjeloun,  district  of,  situation  of,  xli
Adjrem  herb,  cclxvii

iEgypti,  Itineiarium,  &c.  by  Christ.  Finer,  x
iEgyptum,  Preregrinatio  in,  &c.  by  Martini  a  Baumgarten,  x
Agriculture  of  the  Hebrews,  dissertations  on,  xxi*
Agricultural  produce  of  Svna,  cccli
Aigle  de  Thebes,  ccccii
Ail,  ccxxxvii*
Aleppo,  earthquakes  at,  lxxxvii

■  Dr.  Russell's  observations  on  eathquakes  at,  id.

—    Journey  from,  to  Jerusalem,  by  Maundrell,  xv
Natural  History  of,  by  Dr.  Russell,  xxii

Ailim,  ccxxxvii*

Ailon,  ccxxxvii*

Ain  Rogel  or  fuller's  fountain,  cxcvii

Ainbroot,  village  of,  its  situation  and  description  of,  cxx

Air  and  water  of  Palestine,  qualities  of,  ccvii,  ccviii

Akko,  supposed  to  be  the  Akkak  or  Akkim,  also  the  Kebsch,

cccxcvi
Alah,  (elm)  ccxxxvii*

(teil-tree)  ccxxxvii

(oak),  ccxxxvii*

Alauda  arborea, ccccx*

arvensis,  id.

calandra,  id.

cristata,  id.

pratensis,  id.

Al  Bashak,  hawk,  ccccii*

Album  Promontorium,  or  white  cape,  ciii

Alcedo  halcyon,  cccciii*

ispidia,  id.

Smyrnensis,  id.

Al  Dugran,  hawk,  ccccii*

Alexander  the  Great,  supposed  to  have  made  the  road  on  the

White  Cape,  cii

VOL.   I.

Al  Huz,  or  Baraban,  hawk,  ccccii*
Alim,  ccxxxvii*
Al  Jspeer,  hawk,  ccccii*
Allium  ascalonicum,  ccxxxii*

cepa,  ccxxxii,*  cclxix*

mochatum,  ccxxxii*

pallens,  id.,  cclxviii*

paniculatum,  ccxxxii*

—  porrum,  id.

— sativum,  id.

sub-hirsutum,  id.

Alluvial  soil  of  the  plain  between  Sherm  and  Nakb,  lxix
Almond,  cccxxii

oil  not  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures,  ccxii

tree,  ccxii,  ccxviii,  ccxxiii

Aloe,  ccxlv
Alon(oak),  ccxxxvi*

(plain),  ccxxxvii

Al  Saphy,  hawk,  ccccii*
Al  Shakeen,  hawk,  ccccii*
Althaea  ficifolin,  ccxii

rosea,  ccxii*

Alyssum  campestre,  ccxii*

minimum,  ccxii*

strigosum,  ccxii*

Al  Zygranuz,  hawk,  ccccii*
Amaryllis  montana,  ccxl*

oriental  is.  ccxlii*

Amman,  remains  of  the  City  of,  cxxxix

Ammonites,  land  of  the,  its  situation,  supposed  extent,  &c,

cxxxviii,  cxxxix
Amos,  vision  of,  dated  before  the  earthquake,  lxxxvi
Amurca  plaster,  cclxii  "

Amygdalus  persicara,  or  peach-tree,  ccxii
Amyris  opobalsamum,  cclxxv
Anabatis  spinosissima,  ccxciii
Anagallus  arvensis,  ccxl*

flore  caeruleo,  id.

Analysation  of  the  water  of  the  Dead  sea— its  results,  clxxxi
Anas  anser,  cccciv*

boschas,  id.

clypiata,  id.

crecca,  id.

cygnus,  id.

marila,  id.

nigra,  id.

penelope,  id.

sirsaeir,  id.

tadorna,  id.

Auastatica  hierochuntica,  cclxxxiv

Anatida?,  cccciv,  ccccv

Androsace,  ccxxxi

Anemone,  ccxv,  ccxix,  ccxxx,  cccxlvii

alpina,  ccxlii

■  coronana,  ccxv'
—  scarlet,  ccxxxiii

Anethum  graveolens,  ccxcii
Anise,  ccxxxiii
Ammi  copticum,  ccxcii
Annual  mercury,  cclxx
Ant,  lion,  ccccxxi

red, id.

Antaradus  or  Tartous  to  south  border  of  Palestine,  coast  of,

described,  c,  ci
Antelope  Arabica,  cccxciii

dorcas,  id.

subgutturosa,  id.

3  i

CCCCXXJV

INDEX  TO  THE

Anthyllis  vulneraria,  ccxli*

Antirrhinum  Halepense,  id.

Antirrhinum  pelisserianum,  ccxli*

Anti-Libanus,  its   position,   xxxii;    sometimes  called   Mount

Hermon,  xxxvii
Antirrhinum  caiycinum,  ccxli*
Apis  longicornis,  ccccxxi*

mellifica,  id.

Apium  graveolens,  ccxxx*

Appendix  on  the  present  condition  of  Syria,  ccel,  ccclii

Apple-tree,  ccxxiii

Apple,  early,  ccxlv,  cclxxii

of  Lebanon,  cclxxiii

of  Scripture  supposed  to  be  the  citron,  ccxiii

of  Sinai,  cclxxiii

of  Sodom,  cclxxxii

discussion  upon  the,  cclxxxix,  ccxci,  and  note  B

Apricot,  ccxix,  cclxxii,  cclxxxvi

Apricot  tree,  ccxxiii,  ccxlv

April,  history  of  the  month  of,  ccxxxiii,  ccxiii

weather  during  the  month  of,  ccxxxiii,  ccxxxiv

Aquila  heliaca,  ccccii*

Aquilegia  sylvestris,  ccxli*

Araba,  or  Wady  Araba,  great  valley  of,  description  of,  cxi,  cxii

Arabia  Petraea,  greyhound  of,  ccclxiii

Arabian  jasmine  tree,  cclxix

Arabs,  their  love  of  independence,  cxlii

of  Syria,  cccli

Arachnides,  ccccxviii

Aranea  Galilaea,  ccccxviii*

Arar  fruit,  cclxxxvii

'  Arboretum  Biblicum,'  by  John  Henry  Ursinus,  v

Arbutus  tree,  ccxlv

andrachne,  id.

unedo,  id.

Archangel  Plant,  cclxviii
Arctium  lappa,  ccxli*
Arctomys,  ccclxxvi
Ardea  ciconia,  ccccvi*

cinerea,  ccccv*

grus,  ccccvi*

minuta,  id.

nigra,  id.

virgo,  id.

Argob   and  Bashan,  districts  of,  their   situation,  extent,  &c,

cxxxii,  cxxxiii,  cxxxiv
Ari,  or  full-grown  lion,  ccclxvii
Aria  triaristata,  ccxcii*
Ariel  antelope,  cccxciii
Aristolochia  longa,  ccxli*

maurorum,  id.

Armenians  in  Syria,  number  of,  cccli
Arnon  river,  now  called  Wady  Modjeb,  ccii
Artemisia  abrotatium,  ccxli*

cinerea,  ccxv.

fruticosa,  id.

judaica,  id.

— —  nilotica,  id.

Artichoke,  ccxxx,  ccxxxix,  cclxx

wild  or  khob,  ccxxx

Arum  arisarum,  ccxxxi

■ bysanlinum,  id.

colocasia,  id.,  ccxxxii

dracanculus,  ccxxxi

maculata,  id.

ovidue,  id.

— —  tenuifolium,  id.

tryphyllum,  id.

Arvieux,  Le  Chevalier  d' ,  memoirs  of,  xii

Ascalon,  torrent  of,  its  bed  contains  petrified  shells,  lxviii

Asclepias  gigantea,  cclxix

procera,  ecliii,*  ccxci*

Asheyr  tree,  ccxci

Ashtaroth  Carnaim,  s'  pposed  site  of,  cc

Asia  Minor,  Travels  through   part  of  Europe  and,  by  Van
Egmont  and  Heyman,  xvii

Aspen  tree,  ccl

Asphaltic  mines  at  Hasbeya,  lxxxii

Asphaltites,  lake,  bed  of,  probably  volcanic,  lxxxv

Asphaltum,  mines  of,  near  Hasbeya,  lxxiii

of  the  Dead  Sea,  lxxx,  lxxxi

Asphodel,  ccxxxi,  ccxxxiii

Ass,  ccclxxxii

Damascus,  ccclxxxiii

wild,  id.

oi  the  Desert,  ccelxxxiv

hoof  of,  worn  as  a  charm  or  amulet,  ccclxxxv

Assal  Beyrouk,  or  Beyrouk  honey,  cclxxxvi

Aster,  crimson,  ccxxxiii

white,  id.

Astragalus,  ccxli*

Aszef  tree,  cclii

Attaleph,  or  the  bat,  cccliv

Attar  of  roses,  eclxxxiv

Attarous,  Mount,  from  whence  Moses  is  supposed  to  have  viewed
the  promised  land,  xlii

Atun,  or  she  ass,  ccclxxxiii

Audouin,  Description  de  l'Egypte  (invertebrate  animals),  xxi,

xxii
August,  history  of  the  month  of,  ccci — eccx

weather  during  the  month  of,  ccci

Autumnal  rains,  cccxxiii

Ayesh,  made  with  flour  and  sour  camel's  milk,  cccxc

Baaras-root,  eclxv

Bactrian,  or  two-humped  camel,  ccclxxxvii

Babr-el-Houle,  or  Waters  of  Merom,  situation,  description,  ex-
tent, &c,  of,  clxi,  clxii

Lout,  the  Sea  of  Lot  or  Dead  Sea,  clxxv

Mutneh,  the  Stinking  Sea  or  Dead  Sea,  id.

Bakirah,  ccxxviii

Balm,  ccxli

or  balsam  trie  of  Jericho,  cclxxiii,  eclxxv

of  Gilead,  eclxxv

BaUam  ot  Mecca,  described,  id.

wood,  eclxxv

Balsamum  judaicum,  eclxxv

Banana  fruit,  eclxxix

Barbel,  ccccxviii

salt  water,  ccccxvi

Barley,  ccxiv,  ccxix,  ccxxix,  ccxxxix,  ccxciii

Barn,  the,  eclxii

Basal  or  onion,  ccxxxii

Basalt  between  Cana  and  Tooran,  lxv

or  black  stone  of  Sinai,  id.

Base-rocket,  ccxl

Basel  flower,  cclxix

Bashan  and  Argob.  districts  of,  situation,  extent,  &c,  cxxxii,
cxxxiii,  cxxxiv

Basil,  common  sweet,  cclxx

Bastard-parsley,  ccxxxi

Bat,  cccliv

Bath,  ruins  of  an  ancient,  near  Hieromax,  lxxvi

Battecs,  a  species  of  melon,  cccxix

Baumgarten,  Martini  a,  Peregrinatio  in  -lEgyptum,  &c„  x

Bay  tree,  green,  cclxx

Bean,  common,  ccxv

or  Vicia  Faba,  ccxv

Beans,  ccxix,  ccxxx,  ccxxxix,  cccxix

food  for  mourning  and  affliction,  cccxix

mentioned  among  the  first-fruit  ofFerings,  id.

Bear,  Syrian,  ccclv

mouse,  ccclxxvi

Beatitudes,  Mount  of,  description  of,  lvi*

its  detached  situation,  cxi v

Beden  or  ibex,  cccxcv

chase  of  the,  cccxcvi

Bedouins,  almost  the  only  inhabitants  of  the  lands  of  Moab,
Ammon,  and  Edom,  cxlii

Bee,  ccccxxi

eater,  ccceiii

hives,  construction  of,  ccccxxi

Beech  tree,  cclxx

Beek,  Mr.  W.  G.,  and  Mr.  G.  Moore,  their  partial  survey  of  the
Dead  Sea,  clxxx\i

Beetle,  common,  ccccxix

carrot  tree,  id.

sacred,  id.

Behatta,  made  with  sweet  camel's  milk  with  rice  or  flour,  cccxc

Beirout,  town  of,  its  situation,  cii

Beker  el  wahesh  or  wild  cow,  cccc

Belad  Beni  Obeid,  district  of,  situation  of,  xli

Belka,  the  district  of,  situation  and  extent  of,  id.

Bell  flower,  ccxl

Belou,  Peter,  '  Observations,  &c,  en  Grece.  Asie,  &c.'  xx

Behts,  river,  now  Naln  Kardanus,  exci

glass  originally  made  from  its  sand,  id.

Belvidere,  or  summer  cypress,  cclxix

Benard,  his  '  Voyage  de  HierusaUm,'  xii

Beni  Hammad,  hot  springs  in  the  valley  of,  lxxviii

Ben  Hinnom,  valley  of,  exxii

Berry  bearing  chick-weed,  ccxl

Bertou,  Count  de.  his  description  of  the  Valley  of  Aiaba,  or
Wady  Araba,  cxi,  cxii

'  his  description  of  the  desolation  of  Esdiim,cxxxi,

cxxxii

Berytns,  the  ancient  name  for  Beirout,  ciii*

Beschreihung  der  Meerfahrt,  &c,  by  Steffans  Von  Gumpenberg,
xiii

der  Raiss,  &c,  by  Leonhart  Rauwolff,  xiii

Bethel,  valley  of,  exx

Bethesda,  pool  of,  exeviii

Bethshan  or  Scythopolis,  xxxvii

B>  thulia  or  Safet,  city  of,  xxxv

Betonica  orientalis,  ccxli*

Betony,  ccxli,  cclxviii

Bezor  biook,  supposed  to  be  the  Wady  Gaza,  exciv

Biar  el  Hommar,  or  asphaltic  mines  of  Hasbeya,  lxxxii

Binny  (carp),  ccccxvii,  ccccxviii

'  Biographic  Universelle,'  mistake  in,  concerning  Brocard,  viii*

Birds,  cccci — ccccxxii

live  by  and  fly  over  the  Dead  Sea,  clxxxii

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

ccccxxv

Bird's-foot,  ccxli
Bird-lime,  cclxxi

weed,  Syrian,  or  scamm-.my,  eclxx*

wort,  cexli

Birket  Abou  Ermeil,  civ

^—  el  Ram,  id.

Bittern,  little,  ccccvi

Bitumen  of  the  Dead  Sea  described,  lxxx

■ mentioned  by  Josephus  as  found  in  the  Dead  Sea,

clxxvi
Blackbird,  ccccx
Black  fish,  ccccxvii,  ccccxviii

stone  of  the  Haouran,  lxv

of  Sinai,  id.

combustible,  found  all  over  the  Haouran,  Ixxxiv

•  thorn,  ccxxiii,  ccxlvi
■  trap  or  black  stone,  lxv

Blood  used  as  manure,  cccxlvi

Boar,  wild,  ccclxxviii

Boars  and  buffaloes,  superstition  concerning,  cccci

Bochart,  Samuel,  his  '  Hierozoicon,'  iv

•  his  '  Phaleg,'  vii

observations  on  his  '  Hierozoicon,'  xxiii*

Boccore  or  early,  or  first  ripe  figs,  ccxxx\iii,  cclxxix
Borage,  ccxl,  ccxli,  celxxxi
Borago  officinalis,  ccxli

Borith,  the  Hebrew  woid  translated  '  soap,'  celxvii*
B>stra,  mountain  of,  composed  of  chalk,  lxvi
Botany  of  the  Bible,  works  upon,  v
Buttle  gourd,  eclxxxviii

Boucher,  his  holy  nosegay,  or  '  Bouquet  Saere,'  ix,  xxvi*
Boury  fish,  ccccxvi

Bowring,  Dr.,  his   '  Report  on   the  Commercial   Statistics  of
Syria,'  cccvii

his  account  of  the  population  of  Syria,  cccxxviii*

Syrian  cotton  and  tobacco,  cccxliii

the  coal  mines  of  Mount  Leba

non,  cccxlvii

cccli

the  agricultural  produce  of  Syria,

the  consumption  of  sheep  in  Syria,

cccxcvm*
Boxthorn,  eclxviii
Bran k-ursine,  ccxxxi
Brassica  arvensis,  cccxx

cauliflora,  ccxv

oleracea,  ccxv*

Brazier,  the  original  word  for  hearth,  cccxlviii*

Bread  in  the  wilderness,  eclxxvii

Bieuning,  '  Orientalische  Reise  in  die  Turkie,'  xiv

Breydenbach,  Beinh.  de,  '  Opus  transmarine  Feregrinationis,

&c.,'  account  of,  ix
British  Isles  furnished  supplies  of  tin  to  the  Phoenicians,  lxxiii
Broom,  ccxxxi

rattam,  a  species  of,  ccxxviii

rape,  ccxli

Broad-tailed  shaker,  ccccix

Biocard,  his  '  Descriptio  Terrae  Sanctae,'  viii

he  is  often  confounded  with  a  Dominican  monk  of

the  same  name,  viii*
Brnce,  his  reputation  for  veracity  as  a  traveller  and  a  naturalist

referred  to,  ccelxxvi
Brushwood,  used  for  fuel,  cccxlviii

Bruyn,  Cornelius  van,  '  Reysen  door  den  Levant,'  &c,  xiv
B>yse,  meal  from  the  fruit  of  the  rhamnus  lotus,  ccxxxvi
Buckingham,  'Travels  among  the  Aral)  Tribes,'  xviii

-—  in  Palestine,'  id.

his  description  of  the  limestone  of  Jebel  Ainneto,

lix

his    discovery  of  hot  springs  at  Ora   Keis  and
Tahhbahh,  lxxvi

his  description  of  bath  near  Hieromax  or  Sheirat

of  the  hot  baths  at  Tahhbahh,  xcv

el  Mandhour,  lxxvi

Buckthorn,  eclxviii
Buffalo,  cccc
Bug,  red,  ccccxxi
Bugloss,  ccxl

wild,  ccxeii*

Buhle,  J.  G.,  his  prize  essay  referred  to,  ccv
Bunias,  ccxxxvi
Bunting,  black  faced,  ccccxi
Buphthalmnm  commune,  eclxviii*

dentatum,  eclxx*

foliis  oblongis  dentatis,  eclxviii*

Bupleurum  minimum,  ccxciii

Burckhardt,  '  Travels  in  Syria  and  the  Holy  Land,'  xviii

his  description  of  the  construction  of  the  mountains

enclosing  Wady  Sal,  lxiii

his  account  of  saltpetre  in  Palestine,  lxxiv*

Burdock,  ccxli

Burnet,  ccxxxi

Burnt  saxifrage,  eclxx

Bussra  or  dried  zorombat,  ccccxvi

B  istard,  ccccvi

Butter,  usually  made  of  goat's  or  sheep's  milk,  ccccxc

Bitter,  mode  of  preparing,  cccxcix*
Byblus  or  .lebail,  town  of,  ci

Cabbage,  ccxv*

Cachrys  libanotis,  ccxeii

Cactus  ficus  Indicus,  ccxxii*,  ccxeii*

Cosle-Syria  or  Hollow  Syria,  xxxii

or  El  Bekaah,  situation  of,  cvi

Csesarea,  ruins  of,  civ
Calamus  aromaticus,  ccxxxix

Calcareous  rock  is  the  stone  of  the  mountains  of  Syria,  lix
Caiman,  W.,   his  account  of  the  appearance  of  Gish,   Safet,
Tab  ereah,  and  Lubia  after  the  earthquake  of  1837,

lxxvii

his  account  of  the  earthquake  of  1837,  xci>  xe"

Calmet,    '  Dictionary    of   the    Bible,'  Taylor's    '  Fragments'

appended  to,  vi

account  of  his  works,  xxv*

Caltha  palustvis,  eclxviii

C  iltrops,  ccxxxi

Cama  cigas,  lxix

Camel,  general  account  of,  ccclxxxv,  ccclxxxvi

little  known  of,  and  why,  ccclxxxvi

birth  of  the,  id.

and  dromedary,  distinction  between,  ccclxxxvii

two  humped,  or  Bactrian,  id.

importance  of  its  hump,  id.

its  growth  and  time  of  breeding,  cccxc

food  of,  ccclxxxviii

"  feedson  its  own  hump,"  meaning  of,  id.

price  of,  ccclxxxviii

mode  of  mounting  the,  id.

speed  of,  ccclxxxix

its  patience,  sagacity  and  quarrelsomeness, id.

capability  of  enduring  thirst,  id.

its  flesh  eaten  by  the  Bedouins,  cccxc

its  blood  mixed  with  borgoul,  id.

grease  of,  id.

milk  of,  id.

its  hair  or  wool,  id.

decorations  of,  cccxci

death  of,  id.

Campanula  pentagonia,  ccxl*

Campbell,  Colonel,  his  account  of  the  population  of  Syria,

cccxxviii*
Camomile,  eclxviii
Cancer  cursor,  ccccxviii*

fluviatilis,  id.

Cannabis  vulgaris,  eclxviii*

Cantharis  or  blistering  fly,  ccccxix

Caper,  celxxxi

Capo  Bianco  or  White  Cape,  ciii

Caprification,  process  of,  described,  cclxxix*

Caprimulgus  Americanus,  ccccxii*

Europajus,  id.

Caracal,  ccclxix
C  iranx,  ccccxvi

fusus,  ccccxvi*

luna,  id.

petaurista,i'rf.

rhonchus,  id.

Carduus  mollis,  ccxlvii

Syriacus,  ccxlvii '

Carica  or  Summer  Hi:,  cclxxix

Carmel,  Mount,  its  situation,  &c.  xxxvii  —  xxxviii,  Hi*

Carobtree,  ccxxvii,  eclxviii,  eclxx,  cccxi

Carp,  ccccxvii — ccccxviii

scaly,  ccccxvii*

Carraway,  celxxxi

Carrier  pigeon,  ccccix

Carthamus  tinctorius,  ccexxi

Castor-oil  plant,  eclxviii,  cccxx

Castillo,  Ant.  del,  his  El  Devoto  Peregrino,  &c,  x

Cat,  domestic,  not  mentioned  in  Scripture,  ccclxix

unowned,  semi-wild,  in  to«ns,  ccclxx

Persian,  id.

sacred  among  the  Egyptians,  id.

supposed  to  convey  plague,  id.

Caterpillars,  black,  ccccxxi

Cauliflower,  ccxv,  ccxix,  ccxxx,  eclxiv

Cedars  of  Lebanon,  cccv  -  cccvi

Cedrum,  or  cedria,  gum,  cclxxix

Celery,  ccxxx

Celsius,  Olaus,  his  '  Hierobotanicon,'  v

Centaurea  scabiosa,  ccxli*

Cepa  montana,  eclxviii*

Cephir,  or  young  lion,  ccclxvii

Cerastes  or  horned  snake,  ccccxv

Ceratonia  siliqua,  ccxxvii

Cervidae,  no  appearance  of  in  Syria  or  Palestine,  cccxciii

Chaffinch,  ccccxi

Chameleon,  account  of,  ccccxiii— ccccxiv

its  change  of  colour,  ccccxiv

its  irritability,  id.

eye  of  the, id.

Chalk,  prevalentiu  Mountains  of  Carmel,  lxvi

3  i  2

CCCCXXV1

INDEX  TO  THE

Chamor  or  lie  ass,  ccclxxxiii

Chaus,  ccclxix

Charadrius  cedicnemus,  ccccvi*

pluviales,  id.

spinosus,  id.

Charlock,  ccxxxi

Cliarmuth,  ccccxvii

Chasidah  or  stork,  ccccv

Chaste-tree, cclxvin,  cclxix

Chateaubriand,  Itineraire  de  Paris  a  Jerusalem,  xvi

his  opinion  on  the  bed  of  the  Dead  Sea,  lxxix

Cheese,  mode  of  preparing,  cccxcix

Chenar-tree,  eel

Chenopodium  fruticosum,  cclxix*

maritimum,  cclxix*

ruderum,  cclxviii*

scoparia,  cclxix*

'  viride,  cclxviii*

Cheron,  Anne,  '  Voyage  a  Jerusalem,'  viii
Cherry,  ccxlv

laurel-tree,  cclxix

Chichling  or  Lathyrus,  ccxv

Cliiek-pca,  cccxviii

Chickweed,  ccxxxi

Clioled  or  Mole,  ccclv

Christians  in  Syria,  number  of,  cccl

Christ's  thorn,  the,  ccxxxvi

Chub,  ccccxviii

Cicada,  ccccxxi

Cicer  arietanum,  c.hiches,  or  chick-pea,  ccxv,  cccxviii

Cicer-fleld,  legend  of,  cxxiii,  cxlviii*

Cichorum  intybus,  cclxx*

Cicuta  virosa,  cclxx*

Cimex  or  Bug,  ccccxxi

lectularius,  ccccxxi*

Cinnereth,  city  and  district  of,  clxiii

probably  corrupted  into  Gennesareth,  id.

Sea  of,  ancient  name  of  Lake  Tiberias,  clxiii

Cinquefoil,  ccxli

Cistern  of  the  kings,  cxxiii

Cistus,  dwarf,  ccxli*

helianthemum,  ccxli

oligophyllus,  ccxcii*

rosaeus,  ccxli

rose-flowering,  ccxli*

Citron-tree,  ccxii

■ the  '  goodly  tree'  of  the  Scriptures,  ccxiii

Citrus  medica  or  citron,  id.

Ckutweh,  irrigation  by  the,  ccxciv

Clarke,  travels  in  various  countries,  Sec.,  xviii

his  notice  of  basaltic   phenomena  between  Cana   and

Tooran,  lxv

his  mention  of  gold  in  Palestine,  lxxiii

his  discovery  of  the  '  black  fetid  limestone  '  under  the

pyramids  of  Sakkara  in  Upper  Egypt,  lxxxii

his  description  of  the  sea  of  Tiberias,  clxiv,  clxv

his  thermometrical  observations,  eclxxxv

Clary,  wild  and  garden,  ccxxxi

Clethra  arborea,  ccxxxvi

Clivers,  ccxxxi

Climate  of  Palestine,  ccvi,  ccvii

Clove  gilliflower,  ccxxxi

Cnicus  tomentosus,  cclxviii*

Coach  (translated  chameleon)  or  scincus,  ccccxiii

Coal  indicated  in  the  Lebamn  mountains,  Ixviii

recent  discovery  of,  in  Lebanon,  lxxi

mines  on  Mount  Lpbauon,  cccxlvii

use  of  the  word  in  the  Bible,  how  to  be  understood,  lxvii,

cccxlviii
Coast  of  Palestine  from  Antaradus  to  south  border  described,

c,  ci

from  Tartous  to  Tripoli,  id.

■ ■ from  Tripoli  to  Beirout,  ci,  cii

from  Beirout  to  Tyre,  cii

from  Tyre  to  Mount  Carmel,  cii,  ciii

from  Carmel  to  Joppa,  or  Jaffa,  ciii,  civ

from  Jaffa  to  El  Arish,  cv,  cvi

Cobebo,  sea  of,  or  waters  of  Merom,  clxi,  clxii
Cobitis  barbatula,  ccccxviii

taenia,  id.

Coccus,  ccxlix

mannifera,  eclxxvi

Cochineal,  cccli

Cod,  ccccxvi

Colchicus,  ccxv

Coleseed  cultivated  for  its  oil,  cccxx

Colewort,  common  sea,  ccxv*

Collection  of  '  Curious  Voyages  and  Travels, 'by  Ray  ;  contains

Rauwollf,  translated  by  Nicholas  and  Staphorst,  xx*
Coloquiutida,  eclxxxix
Colson,  Rev.  J.  and  Kev.  J.  D'Oyley,  their  translation  of  Cal-

met's  '  Dictionnaire    Historiipie,  &c,   de   la   Bible,'

account  of,  xxv*
Columba  cenas,  ccecix*

• cucullata,  id.

guttorosa,  id.

Columba  laticauda,  ccecix*

palumbus,  id.

turbita,  ccecix*

turtur,  id.

Columbine,  ccxli

Colymbus  auritas,  ccccv*

Comfrey,  ccxl

'  Commentaire   Litteral   sur   tous  les  Livres  de   l'Ancien  et

Nouveau  Testament,'  by  Calmet,  account  of,  xxv*
Coney  of  Scriptures  supposed  to  be  the  jerboa,  ccclxxv
Convolvulus,  cclxx

althaeoides,  cclxx*

batatas,  id.

cairicum,  id.

scammony,  id.

cneorum,  id.

daryenum,  id.

hederaceus,  id.

siculum,  id.

silvery,  large,  ccxxxi

Coot,  ccccvi

Copher  (plant),  eclxxxiii

Copper,  early  use  of,  lxxii

generally  obtained  from  the  Egyptiatis  and  Phoenicians,

lxxii
Coracias  garrula,  ccociii*
Coracinus,  ccccxvii
Corchorus  olitarius,  eclxxxi*
Cordia  myxa,  cccxii

sebesten,  cclxx,  cccxii

Coriander,  eclxxxi
Cormorant,  ccccv
Corn  of  Syria,  the,  ecliv

gathering,  cclv

Indian,  ccxciii

poppies,  ccxl

sallad,  id.

Corvus  corax,  ccccii*

cornix,  id.

corone,  id.

■ monedula,  id.

pica,  id.

Costigan,  Mr.,  his  death  at  Jerusalem,  clxxxv

Cotovic,  John,  his  '  Itinerarium  Hierosolymitanum ,
Cotton,  culture  of,  eclxvi

plant,  eclxvii.  ccxciii,  cccx,  cccxliii

amount  of  its  produce,  id.

Syrian,  inferior  to  others,  id.

Cow,  cccxcix

wild,  cccc*

Cow's  milk,  cccc
Crab,  ccccxvi,  ccccxviii

sea,  or  running  crab,  ccccxviii

Crane,  common,  ccccvi

Numidian,  id.

Crataegus,  ccxlvi

azarolus,  ccxlvi*

oxyacantha,  id.9

tryginia,  id.

Cress  eclxxxi

Cricket,  ccccxxi

Crocodile  (alleged),  exeii,  ecccxii

Crocus  (saffron),  ccxv

Crow,  carrion,  ccccii

Royston,  id.

Crowfoot,  ccxli,  cclxviii

Crucifera  Thebaica,  ccxxvi,*  ecliii*

Cuckoo,  cccciii

Cuculus  canorus,  id.

Cucumber,  ccxxxix,  eclxiv,  eclxxxviii

apple-shaped,  eclxxxviii

—bitter,  eclxxxix

globe,  id.

hairy,  eclxxxviii

snake,  id.

for  pickling,  cccxix

Cucumis  chate,  celxxxviii

colocynthis,  eclxxxix*

dudaim,  eclxxxviii

flexuosus,  eclxxxi*  eclxxxviii*

melo,  eclxxx

prophetarum,  eclxxxix

&c.:

■  sativus,  ccxxxix*

Cucurbita  lagenaria,  eclxxxviii

pepo,  eclxxxviii*

Cumin,  horned  wild,  ccxxxi

hot,  ccxxxiii

sweet  or  anise,  id.

Cumino  aigro,  id.

dolce, id.

Cuminum  cyminum,  ccxxxii*
Cupressus  sempervirens,  ccxxiii

(stricta),  ccxxiv

Curlew,  ccccvi

— stone,  id.

Currant,  eclxv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

CCCCXXVll

Cuttle-fish,  ecccxviii
Cyclamen  hedeioefolium,  ccxlii

ivy-leaved,  ccxlii*

spring  flowering,  ecxxxi

Cynara  cardunculus,  cclxx*

scolymus,  ccxxxix*

Cynoglossum  creticum,  ccxli*

hispidum,  cclxx*

Cypress,  ccxxiii

summer,  cclxix

Cyprinus  carpio,  ecccxviii*

nasus,  id.

Niloticus,  id.

Daffodil,  ccxli

Dagan,  sometimes  translated  corn,  sometimes  wheat,  its  mean-
ing, cccxxiv*
Daisy,  ccxix

Date  palm,  ccxxiv,  ccxxv
Daman  Israel,  ccclxxvii
Dame's  violet,  ecxxxi

Dandelion,  eclxxxi

Dindini,  'Missione  Apostolica,  &c,  del  Monte  Libano,'  xi
Dapper,  Olfert,  '  Naukerige  Beschryving,'  &c,  xiv

Date,  eclxxiii,  eclxxxvi

Dead  Sea,  its  various  ancient  names,  clxxv

its  measurement  according  to  Josephus,  id.

description  of,  by  Robinson  and  Smith,  ex,  cxi

situation,  extent,  and  description  of,  clxxv,  clxxxix

southern    termination    of,   explored    by   Irby  and

Mangles,  elxxxvii,  clxxxviii

partial  survey  of,  by  M  >ore  and  Beek,  elxxx  vi

tour  of  the,  described,  id.

view  of,  described  by  Elliot  and  by  Paxton,  clxxxiii

— clxxxv

volcanic  appearance  at  the,  lxxviii,  lxxix

whether  its  bed  be  the  crater  of  a  volcano  consi-
dered, xevi — xcviii*

analysation  of  its  water,  clxxxi

buoyancy  of  the  water  of  the,  clxxxi,  clxxxiv,  cciv*

Death,  vale  of,  or  Waad-el-Ajal,  ciii

December,  history  of  the  month  of,  cecxlvi — cccxlix

weather  in  the  month  of,  cecxlvi

Defle  tree,  ccxxxv,  eclxxxii

Delisle,  'Description  de  l'Egypte'  (plants),  xxi

'  Florae  iEgyptiaca?  Illustratio,'  id.

Deloul  or  riding  dromedary,  ccc'.xxxvii

Delphinium,  ccxli

arvense,  ccxli*

incanum,  ccxeii*

segetum,  ccxli*

Denon,  his  description  of  the  simoom,  cxlix,*  cl*

'  Descriptio  Terrae  Sanctae'  by  Brocard,  viii

'  Description  of  the  East '  by  Pococke,  xvii

'Description  de  l'Egypte' (invertebrate  animals)  by  Savigny
and  Audouin,  xxi,  xxii

(mammalia)  by  St.  Hilaire,  xxii

(mineralogy)  by  de  Rosiere,  xxi

(ornithology)  by  Savigny,  xxii

(plants)  by  Delisle,  xxi

(reptiles)  by  St.  Hilaire,  xxii

'  Descriptiones  Animalium,'  by  Peter  Porskal,  xxi

Desert  tupinambis,  cccxii

Deserts,  valleys,  and  plains,  xcix — cli

extent  and  description  of,  cxl — cxlvii

Devil's  Candle,  the,  eclxvi

meat,  the,  celxv

Dew,  fall  of,  in  August,  ccci

Diadelphia,  ccxl

Dianthus  monadelphus,  ccxeii

Nazaraeus,  id.

Dibs,  sometimes  translated  by  the  word  honey,  cccxxxiv*

'  Dictionnaire  Histoiique,  Chronologique,  &c,  de  la  Bible,'  by
Calmet,  account  of,  xxv*

Dill,  sometimes  used  by  translators  for  anise,  ccxxxiii

Dioscorides's  moly.,  ccxxxii*

Diospolis,  city  of,  or  Lod,  its  situation,  cxeiii

Dittander,  ccxli

'  Divotissimo  Viaggo  di  Gerusalemme,'  by  Giovanni  Zuallardo,
xi

Dochan,  whether  it  be  millet  or  dourra,  cccxvi

Dog,  ccclv

fox,  ccclix

shepherd's,  ccclxiii

street  or  bazaar,  ccclvi

watch,  ccclxiii

Dogs,  number  of  in  Constantinople,  ccclvii*

value  of,  as  guardians  of  property,  ccclvii

charitable  donations  among,  id.

their  value  as  scavengers,  id.

of  ancient  Egypt,  ccclix

the  dicta  of  Mahomet  concerning,  ccclviii

unclean  animals,  ccclvi

mummies  of,  ccclix

river,  or  Nahar  el  Kelb  or  Lycus,  ci

Doom  tree,  ecliii

Doom,  or  theder  tree,  eclxxxvii

Dorade,  cecexvi

Dormouse,  ccclxxi

Dothan,  plain  of,  situation,  extent,  history,  &c,  of,  cxv

Doubdan,  '  Voyage  de  la  Terre  Saiute,'  &c,  by,  xii

Doum  palm  tree,  ccxxvi

Dourra,  Syrian  or  Indian  corn,  or  millet,  cccxiii,  cccxiv

Dove,  common,  ccccix

cropper,  id.

jacobiue,  id.

ring,  id.

turbit,  id.

turtle,  id.

Dove's  dung,  cccxiv

D'Oyley,  Rev.   S.,  and  Rev.  J.  Colson,  their  translation  of

Calmet's  '  Dictionnaire  Historique,  &c,  de  la  Bible,'

account  of,  xxv*
Draba  verna,  ccxli*
Dracocephalum  Moldavica,  ccxli*
Drag,  threshing  by,  eclviii
Dragon-wort,  ccxli
Dromedary  and  camel,  distinction  between,  ccclxxxvii

Nubian,  ecclxxxviii

Druses,  the,  in  Syria,  cceli
Dubbah  or  hyaena,  ccclxvi
Duck,  common,  cccciv
Dudaim  or  mandrake,  eclxiv
Dung,  dried  for  fuel,  cccxlviii

■  cakes,  making,  for  fuel,  cccxlix

various  sorts  of,  used  by  the  Israelites,  cccxiv

hills,  id.

gate  of  Jerusalem,  id.

Durham  mustard,  ecliii

Dyeing,  plants  cultivated  for,  cccxxi — cccxxii

tails  of  horses  and  asses,  custom  of,  eclxxxiii

the  hands  and  feet,  id,

Dzuba  or  hyaena,  ccclxvii

Eaole,  imperial,  ccccii

sea,  or  osprey,  id.

Earthquake,  lxxxvi — xcviii

volcanic  indications  and,  lxxvii — xcviii

of  31  B.C.,  lxxxvii

of  July  21,  365,  felt  in  Palestine,  id.

of   447    at  Constantinople,   Antioch,   and    Alex-
andria, id.

1 in  the  reign  of  Justinian,  probably  felt  in  Pales-
tine, id.

of  748,  in  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Copronymus,

lxxxviii

of  242  a.h.

noticed,  id.

of  1 170,  id.

of  May  20,  1202,  in  Syria  and  Kgypt,  described,

id.,  lxxxix

of  1759  described,  id.,  xc

of  1822  at  Aleppo,  xci

of  1837  in  Palestine,  id.,  xcii

of  1837.  list  of  towns,  houses,  and  persons  of  Syria

destroyed  by,  xciii

■  villages  in  district  of  Shara,  ditto,  xciv

552  a.h.  (ad.  1157),  and  a.d.  1034,

Earth-pea,  ccxv
worm,  ecccxviii

Earwig,  ccccxix

'  East,  Description  of  the,'  by  Pococke,  xvii

Ebal ,  Mount,  situation  of,  xxxviii

Echinops  grandiflora,  ccxeii*

Echium  violaceum,  ccxl*

vulgare,  id.

Ecklin,  Daniel, '  Reise  zum  Heilige  Grab,'  xiv

'  Economical   Calendar  of  Palestine'  of  Buhl,  translated  by

Taylor,  ccvi
Edar,  tower  of,  or  of  Jacob,  exxiv
Eel,  ecccxviii

Aleppo,  ccccxvii,  ecccxviii

Egg-plant,  eclxxxi

Egmont,  Van,  and  Heyman, '  Travels  through  part  of  Europe,

Asia  Minor,  &c.,'  xvii
'  Egypt,  Travels  in,'  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  xviii
Elaeagnus  augustifolia,  ccxxxiv

oriental  is,  id.

Elah,  valley  of,  or  Terebinth  Vale,  exx

El  Ahsa,  valley  of  the,  hot  spring  at,  lxxviii

El  Bekaah,  or  the  valley  (the  great  valley  of  Lebanon),  cvi,

cvii
El  Bekka,  xxxii

'  El  Devoto  Peregrino,'  by  Ant.  Castillo,  x
El  Eibayn,  or  the  Forty  (Martyrs),  Convent  of,  1
Eleutheropolis,  its  situation,  cxeiv

Eleutherus,  river,  the  Kasmia  sometimes  mistaken  for,  exci
El  Foura,  plain  of,  wells  in,  exxx
El  Ghoeyr,  valley  of,  situation  and  description  of,  xiv
El  Ghor,"  or  valley  of  the  Jordan,  cix
El  Hamam,  or  Emmaus,  lxxvi
El  Hosn,  valley  near,  described,  exxxv
Elliot,  Rev.  C.  B.(  '  Travels  in  the  Three  Great  Empires,'  xix

CCCCXXV111

INDEX  TO  THE

Elliot,  Rev.  C.  B.,  his  description  of  the  Dead  Sea,  clxxxiii
; of  the  mode  of  cultivating

the  vine,  cccxxix
El  Madaruh,  or  Kadeseh,  hill  of,  cxxx
El  Nafileh,  plain  of,  cxxxi
El  Tyh  (the  Wandering),  the  name  of  the  Great  Desert,  cxlii,

cxliii

mountains,  situation  and  description  of,  xlvi,  xlvii

desert  of,  composed  of  chalky  soil  and  flint,  lxvii

Embalming,  asplialtum  of  the  Dead  Sea  used  by  the  Egyptians

in,  lxxxi
Emberiza  citiinella,  ccccxi*

domestica,  id.

hortulana,  id.

quelea,  id.

Emmaus,  or  El  Hamam,  Ixxvi

Emshatt,  ccccxvii

Engeddi,  Monro's  account  of,  cxxvii,  cxxviii

desert  of,  its  situation  considered,  id.

Ephedra  distachia,  cclxviii*

Epidote  forms  part  of  the  rocks  of  Arabia  Petraa,  lxiii

Erica  simplex  fruticosa,  cclxix*

Erinaceus  Europaeus,  cccliv

Errin  (sumach),  cclii

Eruca  halapensis,  ccxli*

latifolia,  id.

Ervum  lens,  or  common  lentil,  ccxv,  cccxvii

Eryngium  stellatum,  ccxl*

Eryngo,  id.

Erysimum  officinale,  ccxli*

repandum,  id.

Eschol  of  Scripture,  the  modern  Mamre,  cxxvi,  cxxix

the  brook,  its  probable  situation  considered,  cxxvi

Esculent    vegetables,    ccxv,    ccxix,  ccxxiv,    ccxxxix,    cclsiv,

cclxxx,    cclxxxii.    cclxxxvii — ccxci,    cccx,    cccxvii—

cccxix,  cccxlii,  cccxlvi,  cccxlvii
Esdraelon,  plain  of,  or  plain  of  Megiddo,  situation,  extent,

&c,  of,  cxv,  cxvi
Esdum,  its  desolation  described,  cxxxi
Euphorbia  chamcesyce,  cclxvii*

foliis  ohlongis,  &c,  cclxviii*

peplus,  cclxvii*

poi  tlandica,  id.

retusa,  id.

serrata,  id

' thymifolia,  id.

viminalis,  id.

Ewes,  milking  of,  cccxcix

Exportations  of  Syria,  their  value,  ccclii

Ezub,  or  hyssop,  ccxxx

Faber,  Felix,  his  account  of  the  Holv  Land,  ix
Fagus  sylvatica,  cclxx*
Falco  gentilis,  ccccii*

mogolnik,  id.

■  os>ili-agus,  id.

tiununculus,  id.

Falcon,  ccccii

Farah,  or  field-mouse,  ccclxxi

February,  history  of  the  month  of,  ccxvi— ccxix

■ weather  in,  ccxvi,  ccxvii

Fekhr-ed-Deeu,  the  emir,  his  grove  of  pines,  cii

Feldsp.itli,  crystals  of,  very  rare  in  the  porphyry  of  Sinai,  lxiii

Fens  chaus,  ccclxix

nimr,  ccclxviii

Fellah,  or  peasant  of  Syria,  ccclii

Fellowes,  Mr.,  his  description  of  the  Syrian  plough,  cccxli

Fennel,  ccxxx,  cclxxxi

Fennel  flower,  cclxxxi

Fenugreek,  cclxxxi,  cccxix

Ferfer,  ccccxxi

Fermentation,  cccxxxii

Fescue  grass,  cclxviii

Festuca  fusca,  cclxviii*

myuros,  id.

reptatrix,  id.

Feverfew,  cclxviii

Ficus  sycamorus,  cccviii

Field  basil,  ccxxxi

Fieldfare,  ccccx

Field-mouse,  short-tailed,  ccclxx

Fig-tree,  ccxiii,  ccxxxviii,  cclxviii,  ccxxvii,  ccxxviii

Fig,  early,  or  boccore,  cclxxix

summer,  or  carica,  id.

Indian,  ccxcii

wort,  ccxli

Fir  tree,  ccxlvi

Fir,  Scotch,  id.

First  rains,  cccx

Fish,  believed  not  to  be  in  the  Dead  Sea,  clxxvii

in  the  lake  of  Gennesareth,  cxlvii

Fishes,  ccccxv — ccccxix
Flail,  the,  cclx
Flamingo,  ccccv
Flax,  ccxl
— —  common,  ccxxxi

Flax,  hairy,  id.

knotted,  ccxxxi

Flea,  ccccxxi

numerous  in  Palestine,  id.

Fleury,  Abbe,  '  Histoire  de  l'Ancien  et  Nouveau  Testament,'

xxvi*
Flickweed,  ccxxxi
Flies,  common,  ccccxxii
'  Flora  Palaestina,'  by  Strand,  xxi
'  Florae  jEgyptiacce  Illustratio,'  by  Delisle,  id.
Fly  catcher,  pied,  ccccxi
Flying  fish,  ccccxvi
Foreign  trade  of  Syria,  ccclii
Fork  and  shovel,  winnowing  by,  eclxi
Formica  rufa,  ccccxxi

Forskal,  Peter,  '  Descriptiones  Animalittm,'  &c,  xxi
Forticula  auricularia,  ccccxix*
Fossil  shells  on  the  borders  of  the  Red  Sea,  lxix
Fountain  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  or  of  Siloam,  cxcv
Fowl,  consumption  of,  very  great,  ccccvii

domestic,  id.

Fox,  ccclx*

of  Sampson,  whether  it  was  a  jackal,  ccclxv

Syrian,  ccclxvi

'  Fragments,'  by  Charles  Taylor,  vi

Fiancoline,  ccccvii

Frank  bandijan,  or  love  apple,  cclxxxi

Frank's  Mount,  the,  description  of,  xl

Fraxinus  ornus,  cclxxvi

Fringilla  eoelebs,  ccccxi*

carduelia,  id.

Frog,  ccccxii

tree,  id.

Fuel,  various  sorts  of,  cccxlvii — ccexlix

Fulica  atra,  ccccvi*

Furer,  Christ.,  his  '  Itinerarium  iEgypti,'  &c.,  x

Galega  vulgaris,  ccxli*
Galeode  phalangiste,  ccccxix
Galilee,  situation  of,  xxxvii,  xxxviii
Galium  album,  eexl*

arvense,  id.

luteum,  id.

Gallinae,  ccccvii — ccccix
Garden,  ancient  Egyptian,  ccc
Gardens  ol  Persia,  ccxcix

in  Syria,  id.

description  of,  ccxcviii— ecci

of  Solomon,  or  Hortus  Conclusus,  cxxiv,  cxxv

Gardening,  as  an  art,  ccc
Garlic,  ccxxxi,  cclxxxi
cultivated,  ccxxxii*

hairy, id.

musk-smelling,  id.

pale  flowered,  ccxxxii,*  cclxviii

panicled,  id.

Garner,  or  granary,  cclxi— cclxii
Gazelle,  ccclx,*  cccxci

mode  of  catching,  cccxcii,  cccxciii

catching  of,  with  the  lasso,  cccxcii

chase  of,  described,  cccxcii*

its  age,  cccxci

Ge-Hinnom,  valley  of,  cxxii

Genista  raetam,  ecxlvii,  cclii*

Gennesareth,  lake  of,  transparency  of  its  water,  clxvii

b''d  of,  probably  volcanic,  lxxxv

Geology  and  mineralogy  of  Palestine,  lviii— lxxvi
Geranium,  ccxix,  cclxviii

columbinum,  cclxviii*

; rotundifolium,  id.

Gerizim,  Mount,  situation  of,  xxxviii

'  Gerusalemme,    Divotissimo  Viaggo  di,'  by  Giovanni    Zial-

lardo,  xi
Gesneria,  ccxv*
'  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,'  viii
Gharkad  shrub,  cclxxix
Gharrab  tree,  cclxxxvi

Gibeon,  valley  of,  its  situation,  extent,  &c,  cxx
Gier  eagle,  cccci
Gihon,  valley  of,  situation  aud  description  of,  cxxiii

pools  of,  cxvcii

Gil  boa,  Mount,  situation,  &c,  of,  xxxvii

Gilead,  the  land  of,  its  situation,  extent,  and  description,  cxxxiv.

cxxxv
Gilliflower,  stock,  ccxxxi
Gladiole,  ccxl
Gladiolus  communis,  ccxl*

Glarus,  Tschudis  von,  '  Reyse  und  Rilgerfahrt,'  &c,  xiv
Glass,  originally  made  with  sand  of  the  river  Belus,  cxci

wort,  cclxix

Glaucium  luteum,  ccxl*

orientale,  id.

violaceum,  id.

Gleaning,  cclvi

Globe  thistle,  ccxcii*
Glow-worm,  ccccxix

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

CCCCXX1X

Gneiss,  abundant  in  tlie  peninsula  of  Sinai,  lxiv
Goad,  use  of  the,  cccxli
Goat,  cccxciii

description  of  varieties  of,  cccxciv — ccexcvi

Syrian  long  eared,  cccxcv

wild,  id.

Goats,  treatment  of,  in  flocks,  cccxciv
■  milk,  id.

skin ,  use  of,  id.

hair,  usefulness  of,  id.

rue,  ccxli

Goatsucker,  American,  ccccxii

European,  id.

Gold,  early  use  of,  lxxii

Palestine  believed  to  be  without,  lxxiii

of  pleasure,  cexxxi

Goose,  cccciv

berry, ccxlv

foot,  cclxviii

flax  leaved,  belvidere  or  summer  cypress,  cclxix

sea, id.

white  and  green,  cclxviii

grass,  great,  id.

Goldfinch,  ccccxi

Gor,  or  lion's  whelp,  ccclxvii

Gossypium  arboreum,  cclxvii

herbaceum,  id.

Grafting  vines,  cccxxvi

Grain,  ccxiv,  ccxix,  ccxxix,  ccxxxviii,  ccxxxix,  ccliv,  cclxxx,

cccx,    cccxiii  —  cccxvii,    cecxxxvi — cccxlii,    ccexlvi,

cccxlvii,  ccclxxxvii

stalks  used  for  fuel,  cccxlviii

Grallae,  or  wading  birds,  ccccv — ccccvii

Granaries,  cclxi

Granite  rocks  distinct  from  surrounding  substances,  lxiii

Grapes,  the  finest  of  the  Holy  Land  in  the  valley  of  Sorek,

cxxvi

clusters  and  size  of,  cccxxix,  cccxxx

Grasshopper,  ccccxix

Grebe,  little,  ccccv

Greenstone,  frequent  in  the  region  of  Sinai,  lxiii

Greyhound,  ccclx,  ccclxii

— ■ of  Arabia  Petrasa,  ccclxiii

GrSbeD,  Otto  von  der,  '  Orientalische  Reisbeschreibung,'  xiv

Grotto  of  Magharat  Esdum  (Sadiim),  cxxxi

Gromwell,  ccxl

Ground-pine,  ccxli

Gryllus  domesticus,  ccccxix*

falcatus,  id.

gryllo-talpa,  id.

migratorius,  id.

nasutus,  id.

Gumpenberg,  Steffans  von, '  Beschreibung  der  Meerfahrt,'  &c,

xiii

Habakkuk  the  prophet,  the  house  of,  cxxiii

Hadjar  Ain  el  Shems,  or  suu's  eye,  lx

Hai  Coluber,  a  venomous  serpent,  ccccxv

Hail  and  hailstones,  ccxliv

Hakil,  fish  embedded  in  lime  procured  at,  lxviii

Hamster,  ccclxxiii

Haourau  stone,  black,  lx

district  of  (proper),  situation  of,  Ixxxiii

description  of,  lxxxiv

plain  of,  its  situation,  extent,  and  description,  Ixxxiii,

cxxxvii,  cxxxviii
Hare,  ccclx*

cooking  of,  by  the  Arabs,  ccclxxv*

Syrian,  ccclxxiv

Harmer,  his  '  Observations  on  Various  Passages  of  Scripture,'

vi
Harpooning  in  Lake  el  Taka,  ccccxvii
Harris,  Dr.  Thaddeus   Mason,  his  '  Natural   History  of  the

Bible,'  vii
Hartwort,  ecxxxi

oriental  shrub,  id.

Harvest,  cclv,  cclvi
Hasbeya,  river,  cviii,  clix,  clx

asphaltic  mines  at,  lxxxii

Hasselquist,  Frederick, '  Voyages  and  Travels  in  the  Levant,'

&c,  xx

his  papers  published  by  Linnaeus,  id.,  xxi

his  description  of  the   hot   springs   at   Tiberias,

lxxv,  lxxvi
his  description  of  the  preparation  of  rice  for  food,

cccxvii
Hawk's  weed,  cclxviii
Hawthorn,  common,  ccxlvi

parsley-leaved,  id.

three-st>led,  id.

Hayes,  Des, '  Voyage  de  Levant,'  xii
Heart-wort,  Syrian,  cclxxxi

heath,  cclxix

Hedgehog,  cccliv

Hedjein,  or  riding  dromedary,  cxcclxxvii

Hedysarum  onobryches,  ccxli*

,  x\ui

Hedysarum  alhagi,  ecxeiii

Helbeh,  or  fenugreek,  cccxix

Helffrich,  Hans, '  Reise  nach  Hierusalem,'  &c.,  xiv

Heliotrope,  ccxcii*

Heliotropium  hirsutum,  id.

Hemlock,  cexxxi,  eclxx

Hemp,  cclxviii,  cccx

Henbane,  golden,  cclxviii

Henna  dye,  eclxxxiii

plant,  eclxxxii

Henniker,  Sir  F.,  his  description  of  the  summit  of  Mount
Sinai,  xlix

'  Herbarius  Sucer,'  by  John  Henry  Ursinus,  v

Hermon,  Mount,  or  Jebel  Essheikh,  xxxii

Little  Mount,  xxxvii

Heron,  common,  ccccv

Heyman  and  Van  Egmont, '  Travels  through  part  of  Europe,
Asia  Minor,'  &c,  xvii

Hheuzbhani,  Hasberia,  or  Hasbeya,  river,  clvii

'  Hierobotanicon,'  by  Olaus  Celsius,  v

Hieromax,  river,  or  Jarmuch,  cc

'  Hierophyticon,'  by  Matthew  Hiller,  v

'  Hierusalem,  le  Voyage  de,'  by  Benard,  xii

'  Hierosolymitanum,  ltinerarium,"  &c.,  by  John  Cotovic,  x

'  Hierozoicon,'  by  Samuel  Bochart,  iv

observations  on,  xxiii*

Higrometre  nalurel,  rose  of  Jericho,  so  calleil ,  eclxxxv

Hillel,  the  Rabbi  David  D'Beth,  his  statement  on  falling
manna,  eclxxviii

Hiller,  Matthew,  his  '  Hierophyticon,'  v

Hinnom,  valley  of,  its  situation,  &c.,  exxii

Hippocrepis  unisiliquosa,  ccxli*

Hirudo  medicinalis,  ccccxviii*

sanguifuga,  id.

Hirundo  purpurea,  ccccxii*

^— —  urbica,  id.

'Histoire  de  l'Ancien  et  Nouveau  Testament,'  &c,  by  the  Abbe
Flrury,  xxvi*

'  Historia  Orienialis,'  by  James  de  Vitry,  viii

'  Historian  Plantarum  Biblicae,'  by  John  Henry  Ursinus,  v

Hoeing,  cccxxx\ii

Hog,  ccclxxviii

Hogg,  Dr.,  '  Visit  to  Alexandria,  Jerusalem,'  &c.

Holcus  sorghum,  cccxiii

Hollow  stones  found  on  Mount  Carmel,  lxvi

Hollow  Syria  (Ccele-Syria),  situation  of,  cvi

Hollyhock,  cclxvii

common,  ccxli

fig-leaved,  ?d.

Holy  bramble,  ccxlvi

'  Holy  Land,  &c,  Excursions  in,'  by  Madox,  xviii

■ 'Incidents  of  Travel  in  Egypt  and  the,'  bv  Ste-
phens, xviii

; —  '  Letters  on   Egypt,   Edom,   and  the,'   by  Lord

Lindsay,  xviii

Relation  of  a  Journey  to,'  &c,  by  Sandys,  xv

'Travels  in  Syria  and  the,'  bv  Burckhardt,  xviii

Holy  Mountain  (Sinai),  the,  question  winch  is,  xlix,  1

Hommar  or  bitumen  of  Hasbeya,  lxxxii

Honey-Beyrouk,  eclxxxvi

Hoopoe,  cccciv

Hor,  mount,  the  death-place  of  Aaron,  description  of,  xliv

Horeb,  mount,  its  situation,  height,  &c,  xlvii

ascent  up  described,  xlviii

ancient  steps  to  the  summit  of,  id.

Greek  convent  at,  id.

Horehound,  cexxxi,  cclxviii

Homed  poppy,  ccxl

Horns,  why  ancient  kings  represented  with,  cccxcix

Horse,  ccclxxviii,  ccclxxxi

breeds  of,  ccclxxix

genealogies  of,  ccclxxix

treatment  of,  in  Syria,  ccclxxxi

mode  of  keeping  by  the  Arabs,  ccclxxx

vicious,  mode  of  curing,  ccclxxxii

superstition  of  the  Arabs  concerning,  ccclxxxi

threshing  by,  eclviii

Horse-shoe  vetcli,  ccxli

Horse-tail  shrubby,  cclxviii

'  Hortus  Aromaticus,'  by  John  Henry  Ursinus,  v

Hot  baths  at  Tahhbahh,  description  of,  xcv*

Hot  springs  in  the  lake  of  Tiberias,  lxxv

by  the  rivulet  Zerka  Mayn,  lxxviii

—  in  the  valley  of  Beni  Hammad,  id.

at  the  valley  of  the  El  Alua,  id.

Hot  wind  or  sirocco,  ccxxi,  ccxxii

Houle,  or  Samochonitis  lake,  clvii,  clviii,  clix

lake,  described,  elxi,  clxii

Hound,  ccclx

Hound's  tongue,  ccxli,  cclxviii,  eclxx

House-leek,  caltrops,  cexxxi

House  leprosy,  lxxiv*

Huen,  Nicole  de,  his  '  Le  Grant  Voyage  de  Hierusalem,'  x

Hummes  or  chick-pea,  ccxv

Humming-bird,  cccciii

Hunting  among  the  Egyptians,  ccclx— ccclxiii

ccccxxx

INDEX  TO  THE

Hussaya  Ulmedurra,  cxxx
Hyacinth,  ccxv,  ccxix

blue  grape,  ccxvi

garden,  id.

purple  grape,  id.

Hyacinthus  botryaides,  ccxvi*

comosus,  id.

Orientalis,  id.

Hydrophobia  little  known  in  hot  climates,  ccclvii
Hyaena,  ccclx,*  ccclxvi

superstitions  concerning,  ccclxvi — ccclxvii

Hyoscyamus  aureus,  cclxviii*
Hypericum  tenellum,  ccxciii
Hyrax  arboreus,  ccclxxvi
■  capensis,  id.

syriacus,  id.

Hyssop,  ccxxx — ccxli
Hyssopus  officinalis,  ccxxx
H\strix  cristata,  cclxviii*

Ibex,  ccclx,*  cccxciii,  cccxcv

Ierosolymitana,  Peregrinatio,  by  Prince  Radzivil,  x

Ignis  fattius,  ccxxxiv

'  Illustrations  of  Scripture,'  by  Professor  Paxton,  vii

Incidents  of  Travel  in  Egypt,  &c,  by  Stephens,  xvii

India,  '  Adventures  in   an    Overland  Journey  to,'   by   Major

Skinner,  xviii
Indian  corn  or  maize,  ccxv,  cccxiv

millet  or  dourra,  ccxiv

turtle,  ccccix

Indigo  plant,  cccxxi

of  Egypt  inferior  to  that  of  Syria,  cccxxii

cultivated  in  several  parts  of  Palestine,  cccxxi

Ingathering,  feast  of,  ccciv

Insects,  ccccxix,  ccccxxii

Investigator,  Rev.  T.  Plumptre's  dissertation  on  the  agriculture

of  the  Hebrews,  in  the,  xxi*
Irby  and  Mangles,  Travels  in  Egypt,  &c,  xviii
Iris,  or  yellow  jasmine,  cclxix

blue,  ccxxxiii

florentina,  cclxix*

Iron,  mentioned  by  Job,  lxxii

not  mentioned  in  the  Pentateuch,  id.

wrought  by  Tubal  Cain,  id.

mountain  mentioned  by  Josephus,  lxxi

abundant  in  Lebanon,  id.

carried  from  Shouair  for  smelting  to  Nabae  elMouradj,  id.

Ironwort,  ccxli

Irrigation,  account  of  various  modes  of,  ccxciii,  ccc

by  the  Ckutweh,  ccxciv

with  pails,  id.

'  Itinerario  de  Terra  Sancta,'  by  Pantaliam  d'Aveyro,  x

Itinerarium  jEgypti,  See.,  by  Christ.  Furer,  id.

. Hierosolymitanum,  &c,  by  John  Cotovic,  id.

Jabbok  river,  now  called  Zerka,  cci

■ confounded    by   travellers  with    the   Jarmouk,

exxxiv

Jackal,  ccclxiv

Jackdaw,  ccccii

Jacob,  tower  of,  or  of  Edar,  exxiv

Jacob's  Bridge,  or  Jissr  Yakoub,  description  of,  exxxiii,
cxlviii,*  cxlix*

bird,  cccciii

January,  history  of  the  month  of,  ccix,  ccxvi

weather  in,  ccix,  ccxi

Jarmouk  river,  also  called  Jarmucli,  Jarmuth,  and  Sheirat  el
Mandhour,  described,  cc,  cci

sometimes  mistaken  for  the  Jabbok,  exxxiv

hot-springs  and  bath  near,  lxxvi

Jasmine,  white,  eclxx

Jasminuiu  fruticans,  cclxix*

grandiflorum,  id.

officinale,  eclxx*

■ sambac,  cclxix*

Jebail,  or  Byblus,  town  of,  ci*

Jebah,cclxxxi

Jebel  Ainneto,  mountain  composed  of  limestone  and  an  ap-
pearance of  some  metal,  lxxi

—  Araif-eu-Nakah,  the  mountain  in  the  Desert,  cxliii

Asufar  probably  mistaken  by  Lord  Lindsay  for  Wady

Fukreh,  cxxx

el  Gharbi  or  Libanus,  xxxii

■  el  Gheretain,  hills  of,  their  situation,  exxxi

el  Wast  the  name  of  ancient  Anti-Lebanus,  clx

Essharki  or  Anti-Libanus,  xxxii

■  Essheikh,  the  Mount  Hermon  of  Scripture,  xxxii,  clxv

Gilbo,  on  Mount  Gilboa,  situation,  &c,  of,  xxxvii

Haouran,  mountain,  district  of,  lxxxiii,  description  of,

lxxxiv

Heish,  mountains  of,  xli,  exxxii

Jowaleen,  hills  of,  clx

Libuan  or  Libanus,  xxxii

Mousa,  a  name  of  Mount  Sinai,  xlviii

—  Osha,  mountain  of,  situation  and  description  of,  xli

Turbul,  petrifactions  at,  lxviii

Jebel  Yamen,  or  Right  Hand  Mountain,  cxxx

Jehoshaphat,    valley    of,    situation,    extent,    &c,    of,     exxi,

exxii
its  three  divisions,  and  the  various  Scriptural  names

supposed  to  apply  to  it,  cxlviii*
Jelaad  and  Jelaoud,  towns  of,  xli

mountain  of,  situation  of,  id.

Jeme  (a  kind  of  truffle),  eclxxxi

Jennin,  valley  of,  extent  and  description  of,  cxvii

Jerboa  supposed  to  be  the  coney  of  Scripture,  ccclxxv

Egyptian,  ccclxxii,  ccclxxiii

Jerebouh  fruit,  eclxv
Jeremiah,  valley  of,  exx
Jerusalem,  situation  of,  exxi

'  Itineraiie  de  Paris  a,'  by  Chateaubriand,  xvi

' '  Journey  from  Aleppo  to,'  by  Maundrell,  xv

—  '  Le  Pieux  Pelerin,  ou  Voyage  de,'  by  Surius,  xii

'  Relation,  &c,  d'un  Voyage,  &c,  a,'  by  Morison,

xiii

'  Visit  to  Alexandria,'  &c,  by  Dr.  Hogg,  xviii

Jeune,  or  the  plain,  its  situation,  extent,  &c,  c,  ci
Jews  in  Syria,  number  of,  cccl
Jezreel,  valley  of,  cxv
Jilban  or  chichling,  ccxv
Jimel-el-bahr,  or  sea-camel,  ccccxvi*

the  pelican,  ccccv

Jissr  Yakoub  or  Jacob's  Bridge,  exxxiii,  cxlviii*

John  the  Baptist,  wilderness  of,  exx

Jordan,  river,  its  name,  etymology  of,  clviii,  cciii*

■ ■ its  rise,  &c  ,  cliii

depth  and  breadth  of,  clxxiti

source  of,  the  question  discussed,  clii — clviii

considerations  as  to  its  former  exit,   before  its

waters  were  arrested  by  the  Asphaltic  Lake,  clxxxix,

exc
place  ou  the  banks  of,  of  the  baptism  of  Christ

uncertain,  clxix

pilgrimages  to  supposed  place,  clxx,  clxxi

the  little,  clviii,  clix

valley  of  the,  traces  of  combustible  materials  in,

Ixxxv

■valley  of  the,  situation  and  description  of,  cvii,
cviii,  cix
Judea,  appearance  of,  xxxix

the  least  fertile  part  of  Palestine,  cxix

general  description  of,  cxix,  exx

Proper,  description  of,  xl

July,  history  of  the  month  of,  eclxxxv — ccci

weather  in  the  month  of,  eclxxxv

Juncus  acutus,  ccxli*

bufonis,  id.

tenax,  id.

June,  history  of  the  month  of,  cclxxi — eclxxxv
Juniper  tree,  cci

brown-berried,  id.

Juuiperus  oxycedrus,  id.

■ Phcenicea,  id.*

Sabina,  cci

Kaath,  or  Pelican,  ccccv

Kadeseh,  or  El  Madaruh,  hill  of,  cxxx

Kafkafa,  mountain  of,  situation  and  description  of,  xli

Kaimak,  or  thick  goat's  cream,  cccxciv

Kali  fiuticosum,  cclxix*

Kamseen,  wind  of  Egypt,  cxlv

Kanah,  river,  exciii

Kasmia,  river,  supposed  to  be  the  ancient  Leontes,  exci

mistaken  for  the  ancient  Eleutlierus,  id.

Katta,  ccccvii

supposed  to  be  the  Selav,  ccccviii

is  the  Tetrao  Israelitarum.i'd.

Kawis  nidges,  or  common  roller,  cccciii
Kebsch,  or  wild  sheep,  cccxcvi
Kedron,  brook,  exciv

Kelab  Haouran,  or  Kelb  Mountain,  lxxxiv
Kemmaye,  or  Kerama, eclxxxi
Kermes,  ccxlix
Kestrel ,  ccccii

Ketzach,  supposed  to  be  the  chick-pea,  cccxviii
Khelasy,  eclxxxi
Khob,  or  wild  artichoke,  ccxxx
Khuld,  or  mole,  ccclv
'  Kids,  cccxcix
Kidney-bean,  small  green,  or  phaseolus  max,  ccxv'

vetch,  common,  ccxli

King's  Dale,  the,  cxlviii*
Kingfisher,  common,  cccciii

halcyon,  id.

Smyrna,  id.

Kiosk,  or  summer-house,  ccxcix

Kishon,  river,  rise  of  discussed,  exci,  exeii

Kishna,  or  small  vetch,  ccxv

Kite,  ccccii

Knapweed,  ccxli

Korten,  '  Reise  nach  dem  Gelobten  Lande,'  xvii

Koosbeh,  cccxx

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

CCCCXXXl

Laanah,  ccxv

Labouring  classes  of  Syria,  their  condition,  ccclii

Lacerta  stellio,  ccccxiii

turcica,  id.

■  scincus,  ccccxii

Lactuca  sativa,  ccxxxix,*  cccxx*

Ladies'  bed,  straw,  ccxl

Laish,  or  worn-out  lion,  ccclxviii

Lakes  and  rivers,  clii  — cciv

Lambricus  terrestris,  ccccxviii*

Lambs,  cccxcix

Lamium  album,  cclxviii*

Lampyris  noctiluca,  ccccxix*

Land  breezes  of  Palestine,  ccviii,  ccix

slips,  xxxiv,  lxxxvi

Lane,  Mr.,  his  description  of  the  Persian  wheel,  ccxcvii
Lapides  Judaici  found  on  Mount  Carmel,  lxvi
Lapwing,  ccccvi
Lark,  calandra,  ccccx

crested,  id.

sky,  id.

tit,  id.

wood,  id.

Larkspur,  ccxli,  ccxcii*
Laser  wort,  cclxx
Laserpitium  latifolium,  id.*

Lasso  or  noose,  catching  the  gazelle  with,  cccxcii

catching  wild  oxen  by,  cccc

Lathyrus  ambicus,  ccxv

amphicarpos,  id.

biflorus,  id.

or  chichling,  id.

clymenum,  id.

sativus,  id.

various  flowered,  id.

Latter  rains,  the,  ccxxxiv

Lava,  abounds  in  Gish,  Safet,  Tabereah,  and  Lubia,  lxxvii

Lavender,  ccxxx,  ccxli

Lawsonia  inermis,  cclxxxii*

Lead,  no  notice  of  it  within  Palestine,  lxxiii

said  to  exist  at  Shelf  near  Mount  Sinai,  id.

Leban,  valley  of,  its  situation,  cxviii
Lebanon,  mountains  of,  why  so  called,  lix

■ described,  xxxii — xxxiv

heighth,  xxxii

■ number  of  inhabitants,  cccli

great  valley  of,  or  El  Bekaah,  cvi,  cvii

Leben,  or  sour  butter-milk,  cccxciv

from  buffalo's  milk,  id.

Lebi,  or  old  lion,  ccclxvii

Lebia,  or  fierce  lioness,  ccclxvii,  ccclxviii

Ledja,  district  of,  situation  of,  lxxxiii

description  of,  lxxxiv

volcanic  appearances  through   the  district  of,  lxxxiv,

lxxxv
Leech,  ccccxviii

its  value  medicinallj  not  known  in  Syria,  id.

danger  of,  to  persons  drinking,  id.

Leeche,  a  kind  of  cod,ccccxvi

Leek,  common,  ccxxxii*

Lemon  tree,  ccxiii,  ccxxiii

Lentil,  common,  or  ervum  lens,  ccxv

Lentiles,  cccxvii

Leontes,  river,  cliii

— now  the  Kasmia,  cxci

Leontice  leontapetalon,  ccxl*

Leopard,  Syrian,  ccclxviii

known  by  the  names  of  tiger,  panther,  and  ounce,

ccclxviii
Lepidium  latifolium,  ccxli*

perfuliatum,  id.

sativum,  id.

Lepidotus,  cyprinus,  the  binny  of  the  Arabs,  ccccxvii*

Lepus  Syriacus,  ccclxxv

Letting  of  vineyards  at  a  rent,  ancient  and  modern  custom  of,

cccxxviii,  cccxxix
Lettuce,  ccxxxix

cultivated  for  its  oil,  cccxx

'  Levant,  Relation  dun  Voyage  fait  au,'  by  Thevenot,  xii
Travels,  &c,  to  parts  of  Barbary  and   the  East,'  by

Dr.  Shaw,  xvii
Voyages  and  Travels  in  the,'  by  Frederick  Hassel-

quist,.xx

Voyage  de,'  by  Des  Hayes,  xii

Level  of  the  water  of  the  Dead  Sea  accounted  for,  clxxix

'  Libano,  Missione  Apostolica,  &c,  del  Monte,'  xi

Libanus,  its  position,  xxxii

Lice,  ccccxxi

Liettani,  the  ancient  Leontes,  cvi

Lightning,  cccx

Lign-aloe,  ccxlv

Lilium  candidum,  ccxix,*  ccxli*

martagon,  ccxli*

Persicum  fiorens,  ccxv

Lily,  ccxv,  ccxix,  ccxli,  ccxxxiii
blue,  ccxv

VOL.  I.

Lily,  daffodil,  ccxl

Limax  agrestis  (snail),  ccccxviii  and  note

Lime  tree,  ccxiii

Linnaeus,  his  collection  of  the  papers  of  Hasselquist,  xx,  xxi

Linnet,  red,  ccccxi

Linseed,  ccxciii

Linum  hirsutum,  ccxxxi*

nodiflorum,  id.

orientale,  ccxl*

sativum,  id.

usitatissimum,  ccxxxi*

Lion,  formerly  an  inhabitant  of  Palestine,  ccclxvii
Lions,  taming  of,  ccclxviii

leaf,  ccxl

tail  grass,  cclxx

Liquorice,  cclxxxi
Lichen,  cclxix
Lithospermum,  arvense,  ccxl*

• dispermum,  id.

Lizard,  ccccxii

aquatic,  ccccxiii

starry,  id.

Turkish,  id.

Loaves  and  fishes,  miracle  of  the,  scene  of  its  occurrence,  cxiv*

Loche,  ccccxviii

Locust,  general  account  of,  ccccxix,  ccccxx

ealen  by  the  Bedouins,  ccccxx

bird,  ccccx,  ccccxx

Lod,  city,  or  Lydda  or  Diospolis,  its  situation,  cxciii

Lotophagi,  lotus  of  the,  ccxxxv

Lotus  Arabicus,  ccxli*

Loup,  ccccxvi

Love  apple,  cclxxxi

Lucan,  his  description  of  the  simoom,  cxlix*

Lupins,  cccxix

Lupinus  termis,  id*

Lycium  spinosum,  cclxviii*

Lychnis,  ccxl

Lycopsis  confertiflora,  ccxcii*

vesicaria,  ccxl*

Lycus,  or  Nahar  el  Kelb,  ci*

Lydda,  city,  or  Lod,  its  situation,  cxciii

Lyndsay,  Lord,  '  Letters  on  Egypt,'  &c,  xviii

hU  description  of  the  mountains  of  Seir,  xliii

of  the  defile  of  Wady  Sig,  xlv

of  Samaria,  cxvii

Lynx,  ccclxix

Maash  or  small  green  kidney  bean,  ccxv

Mackerel,  ccccxvi

Mad  apple,  cclxxxi

Madden,  Travels  in  Turkey,  Egypt,  &c,  xviii

Madder,  ccxxxi

'cultivated  for  dyeing,  cccxxii

Madox,  Excursions  in  the  Holy  Land,  &c,  xviii

Madrepores,  petrified,  lxix

Mad-wort,  ccxli

German,  id.

MagharatEsdum  (Sadum)  grotto  of,  cxxxi

Magpie,  ccccii

Maiden-hair,  cclxx

Maire  noire,  ccccxvi

Maize  or  Indian  corn,  ccxv,  cccxiv

Mala  granata,  cccxi

Malaye,  ccccxvi

Mallard,  cccciv

Mallow,  cclxviii
esculent,  cclxxxi

Jew's,  id.

Malte  Brun,  his  opinion  on  the   Syrian  chain  of  mountains,
xxxi

Malva  ruderum,  cclxviii*

vulgaris,  id.

Mammalia,  cccliv — cccci

Mamre,  valley  of,  its  situation,  extent,  &c,  cxxv

Mandrake,  ccxv,  cclxiv

root  of,  superstitions  and  impositions  concerning,

cclxv*
Mangles,  Irby  and,  Travels  in  Egypt,  &c,  xviii
Mann  Shemma,  cclxxviii
Manna,  cclxxvi

plant,  Persian,  ccxciii

bearing  tamarisk,  cclxxvi— cclxxvii

harvest,  cclxxviii

Mantis,  religious,  ccccxix  and  note
Manufactures  of  Syria,  ccclii
Manure,  use  of,  cccxiv

salt  used  as,  id.

- —  spare  blood  of  victims  used  as,  cccxlvi

March,  History  of  the  month  of,  ccxix — ccxxxiii

weather  in  month  of,  ccxix-  ccxxii

Mares  greatly  prized  by  the  Arabs,  ccclxxx

Mariti,  Abate,  '  Viaggio  dell'  per  Isola  di  Cyuro,'  &c,  xvi

Marjoram,  wild,  cclxx

Martin,  common,  ccccxii

— — —  purple,  id.

3  k

ccccxxxn

INDEX  TO  THE

Matricaria  or  feverfew,  cclxviii

Maumlrell,  journey  from  Aleppo  to  Jerusalem  by,  xv

his   description  of    the   Quarantania  Mountains,

xxxix

May,  history  of  the  month  of,  ccxlii— cclxxi

weather  in  the  montli  of,  ccxlii— cclxxi

Medicago  echinata,  ccxli*

polymorpha,  id.

radiata, id.

sativa,  id.

Medina,  Antonio,  his  Viaggio  di  Terra  Santa,  &c,  x
Mediterranean  fish,  ccccxv — ccccxvi
Melissa  hortensis,  ccxli*
Meloe  chicoiri,  ccccxix*

Syriacus,  id.

vesicatoiius,  id.

Melon,  ccxxxix,  cclxxx,  ccxciii.

Egyptian,  cclxxx  via

water,  id.

Memoires  du  Chevalier  d'Anieux.xii
Mentha  augustifolia,  ccxli*

sylvestri?,  id.

Mercurialis  annua,  cclxx*

Merom,  waters  of,  or  Bahr-el-Houle,clxi,  clxii

Merops  apiaster,  cccciii*

Mesht  fish ,  ccccxvii

Metals,  fabrication  of  by  the  Egyptians,  lxxii

Mica,  very  rare  in  the  granites  of  Sinai,  lxiv

Milfoil, lavender  cotton  leaved,  cclxx

Milk  vetch,  ccxli

Millet,  common,  or  panicum  miliaceum,  ccxv,  ccxciii,  cccxv

Mimosa  farnesiana,  ccli*

gummifera,  ccli

lebbek,  ccli*

nilotica,  ccli,  cclxix

Senegal,  ccli*

stellata,  id.

Mineralogy  and  geology  of  Palestine,  lviii — lxxvi

Mint,  ccxxxii,  ccxli,  cclxxxi

Mirage,  the  phenomenon  of  the,  cxlvii

explained,  cl*,  cli*

Miri  or  land-tax,  ccxxxvii

Missione  Apostolica,  &c,  by  Dandini,  xi

Moab,  plains  of,  situation,  extent,  and  description  of,  cix,  ex

land  of,  its  situation,  extent,  and  description,  exxxv,

exxxvi
Modaf,  ccxvi
Moeiad,  district  of,  situat  on  of,  xli

mountains  of,  situation  of,  id.

Mohammedans  in  Syria,  number  of,  cccl

Moiet  Hasbeya  or  river  of  Hasbeya,  cviii,  clvi,  clx

Moldavian  balm,  ccxli

Mole,  cccliv

Moloch,  rites  of,  where  celebrated,  exxii

Molltisca,  ccccxviii

Monatliche  Corresponded  Seetzen's  letters  in,  xvii

Monconys,  M.  de,  Journal  des  Voyages  de,  xii

Monro,  Rev.  Vere,  Summer's  ramble  in  Syria,  xviii

his  account  of  the  cave  of  Engeddi,  exxvii,  exxviii

his  description  of  the  valley  of  Sharon,  civ

Months,  history  of  the,  ccv— cccxlix

Moore,  Mr.G  and  Mr.  W.G.  Beek,  their  partial  survey  of  the

Dead  Sea,  clxxxvi
Murison,    '  Relation  Historiqne   d'un  Voyage,  &c,  au   Mont

Sinai  et  a  Jerusalem,'  xiii

his  description  of  the  Quarantania  Mountains,  xxxix

Moms  alba,  ccxxxvi

Moses, his  rock,  construction  of,  lxiii

Mosquito,  ccccxxii

Mont  du  Diable,  mountain  of  Temptation,  description  of,  &c,

xl*
Mountains  of  Lebanon,  their  position,  xxxii
Motacilla  ficedula,  ccccxi*

luscinia,  id.

ruberta,  id.

rubicula,  id.

— — — — -troglodytis,  id.
Moth,  almond,  ccccxxi

fig-tree,  id.

Mouse,  ccclxx
Mouse-ear,  ccxxxi
Mulberries,  eclxxii
Mulberry-tree,  cccxii
Mulberry,  white,  ccxxxvi
Mule,  ccelxxxv

supposed  to  be  known  in  the  time  of  Moses,  id.

noticed  in  the  time  of  David,  id.

Mullus  barbutus,  ccccxvi*
Mullet,  red,  ccccxvi
Mulsil,  ccccxvii
Murex,  ccccxviii

tmncnlus,  ccccxviii*

Mus  amphibius,  ccclxx*

avellanarius,  ccclxxi

quercinus,  id.

terrestris,  ccclxx*

Muscipata  atricapella,  ccccxi*
Musk  melon,  cclxxx
Musa  paradisaica,  eclxxviii
Mursena  anguilla,  ccccxviii*
Mustard,  cclxxxi

■ bastard  mithridate,  ccxxxi

buckler,  cclxviii

field  mithridate,  ccxxxi

hedge,  ccxli

wild,  id.

Mutton,  cccxcviii

potted,  id.

Myliobatis  bovina,  ccccxvi*

marginata,  id.

Myoxus  avellanarius,  ccclxxi
Myrike,  Reis  nach  Jerusalem,  &c,  xiv
Myrmeleon  formica  leo,  ccccxxi*
Myrtle  tree,  cclxviii

Nabac  el  Mouradj,  smelting  furnaces  at,  lxxi

Nablous  or  Neapolis,  formerly  Shechem  or  Sychar,  city  of,  its

situation,  xxxix,  cxviii
Nahar  el  Kelb,  or  Lycus,ci*
Nahr-Abi-Petros  river,  exciii

el-Asouf  river,  id.

Kardanus  the  ancient  rh  er  Belus,  exci

el-Kasab,  river,  supposed  to  lie  the  ancient  Kanah,  exciii

el- Rubin,  river,  exciii

Nakhoora,  cape  of,  view  from  described,  ciii

Naukerige  Beschryving  van  gantsch  Syrie,  &c.  by  Olfert  Dapper,

xiv
Narcissus,  ccxv,  ccxix

Tazetia,  ccxii*

Nasturtium,  ccxl

aquaticum  Sisymbrium,  cclxx*

Natron,  or  carbonate  of  soda,  found  on  the  eastern  border  of  the

Red  Sea  and  other  places,  lxx
'  Natural  History  of  the  Bible,'  by  Dr.  Thaddeus  Mason  Harris,

vii
Nau,  his '  Voyage  Nouveau  de  la  Terre  Sainte,'  xii

his  account  of  the  southern  portion  of  the  Dead  Sea,  clxxx

Navel-wort,  ccxxxi

Nazareth,  vale  of,  situation,  extent,  &c  ,  of,  cxiv

Neapolis,  or  Nablous,  city  of,  its  situation,  xxxix

Nebee  shrub,  ccxxxv

Nebo,  Mount,  from  which  Moses  is  said  to  have  viewed  the

Promised  Land,  xlii
Nectarine,  eclxxxvi
Nedder,  or  threshing-floor,  ccli  iii
Nedjeroun,  town  of,  its  volcanic  appearance,  lxxxv
Nejed,  or  Om  el  Bel,  the  mother  of  camels,  ccclxxxvi
Nepa  linearis,  ccccxxi*
Nerium,  eclxxix
Nettle,  Roman,  cclxviii
Newe  Reiss — heschreiuung  aus  Teutschlaud,  &c  ,  by  Solomon

Schweigger,  xiv
Night  dews,  cccxxiii
Nightingale,  ccccxi
Nightshade,  cclxix,  cclxx
Nile  clouds,  the,  ccci
Nilotic  tupinambis,  ccccxii
Nimr,  ccclxix

Nitre  found  on  the  S.E  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea,  lxx
Noman  plant,  eclxvii

November,  history  of  the  month  of,  cccxliv — cccxlvi
weather  during  the  month  of,  cccxliv

OAK-tree,  ccxiv,  ccxlvi,  cclxx
Oak  of  Baslian,  ccxlvii

broad-leaved  ccxlviii

dwurf,  ccxxiii

— —  evergreen,  ccxlvi,  ccxlviii

kermes,  ccxlLx

prickly,  ccxlvi,  ccxlviii

Oats,  wild,  cclxx

Obeytheran  plant,  eclxvii

Observations,  &c,  en  Grece,  Asie,  Judee,  &c.,  by  Peter  Belon,

xx
'  Observations  on  various  passages  of  Scripture,'  by  Harmer,  vi
October,  history  of  the  month  of,  cccxxii — cccxliv

weather  during  the  month  of,  cccxxii

Oeraboun,  mountain  of,  situation  and  description  of,  xli
Oil,  plants  cultivated  for,  cccxix — cccxxi

plants,  id.

of  olives,  ccciv

of  zacchoum,  ccxxiii

Olea  Europa,  cccii

Oleander  tree,  ccxxxv,  ccxliv

white-flowered,  eclxxix

Oleaster  tree,  ccxxxiv
Olive  tree,  cccii,  ccciii

grafting  of,  ccciv

wild,  cclxviii

Olives,  mount  of,  ccciv
Olives,  new,  eclxxii
oil  of,  ccciv

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

ccccxxxm

Oman  Camels,  ccclxxxvi

Om  el  Bel,  or  the  mother  of  camels,  id.

—  Keis,  hot  springs  at,  lxxvi

—  Shomar,  mount,  its  situation,  height,  &e.,  xlvii

description  of  a  view  from,  li

Onager,  or  wild  ass  of  the  Arabs,  ccclxxxiv
Onion,  common,  ccxxxii*

mountain,  eclxviii

Oniscus  asellus,  ccccxviii*
Ononis  antiquorum,  ccxli*

cherleri,  id.

foetida,  eclxx*

natrix,  ccxli*

pubescens,  id.

Ooraga  shrub,  ccxxviii

Opera  Agricoltionurn,  celvii*

Opthalmia  very  rare  in  the  deserts,  cxli

Orange  tree,  ccxii,  ccxix,  ccxxiii,  ccxlv

Orchis  collina,  ccxli*

Oriental  sweet  fern,  ccxxxi

Orientalische  Reise  in  die  Turkie,  by  Breuning,  xiv

Keisebeschreibung,  by  Troilo,  id.

■ Reisbeschreibung,  by  Otto  von  der  Groben,  id.

Origanum  vestitium,  ccxeii*

Oriole,  golden,  cccciii

Oriolus  galbula,  cccciii*

Oriza  sativa,  or  rice,  ccxv,  cccxvi

Ornd,  probably  the  same  as  the  wild  ass,  ccclxxxiii

Orinthopus  scorpioides,  ccxli*

Orontes,  river,  cliii

Ortolan,  ccccxi

Oryx,  ccclx,*  cccxciii

tamed  by  the  Egyptians,  cccxciv

O  char  plant,  ecliii
Osprey,  or  sea  eagle,  ccccii
Ostrich,  ccclx,*  ccccvii

its  breeding,  ccccvii

its  eggs,  id.

its  skin,  value  of,  id.

Otis  Arabs,  ccccvi*

tarda,  id.

Ovis  tragelaphus,  cccxcvi
Owl,  common  barn,  ccccii

great,  id.

little,  id.

Ox,  varieties  of  the,  cccc
—  wild,  ccclx,*  cccc
Oxen,  cccxcix
Ox-eye,  eclxviii,  eclxx
Oysters,  ccccxvi

Pails,  irrigation  with,  cexciv

Palea,  eclx

Palestine,  geographical  position  and  extent  of,  xxvii— xxx

coast  of,   from  Autaradus  to  southernmost  border,

c  — cvi

geology  and  mineralogy  of,  lviii,  lxxvi

importance  of  its  history,  xxviii — xxix

levels  in,  Mr.  Russegger's  account  of,  lvi*,  lvii*

travels  in,  by  Buckingham,  xviii

and  Turkey,  &c,  by  Madden,  id.

and  Syria,  by  Robinson,  id.

association,  their   publication  of  Seetzen's  Memoir,

xvii
Palm-tree,  ccxxiv

history  of  in  Palestine,  id.

Panias,  river,  clix

cave  of,  supposed  source  of  the  Jordan,  cliv,  clviii

Panicum  milaceum,  or  common  millet,  ccxv,  cccxvi
Papaver,  fiore  fiavesceute  parvo,  eclxx*

hybridum,  ccxl*

rhseas,  ccxl,  eclxviii,*  eclxx*

Para  or  wild  ass,  ccclxxxiii
Paran  mount,  of  Scripture,  liii
Parietaria  officina,  eclxviii*
Parsley,  coxxx
Partridge,  Greek,  ccccvii

red  legged  or  Barbary,  id.

hunting,  ccccix

Passeres,  ccccix— ccccxii

Paxton,  professor,  his  '  Illustrations  of  Scripture,'  vii

Rev.  J.  D.,  his  description  of  the  Dead  Sea,  clxxxiv,

clxxxv
Peach  tree,  ccxii,  ccxix,  eclxxxvi
Peacock,  ccccvii
Pea-field,  the,  exxiv
Pear-iree,  ccxxiii,  eclxxiii

prickly,  ccxxii

Peganum  harmala,  eclxxix

retusum,  id.

Pelican,  cccciv

Pelicanus  onocrotalus,  cccciv*

Pellitory,  eclxviii

Pentandria,  ccxl

Pepper-wort,  ccxli

Perca  puncata,  ccccxvi*

Perca  sinuosa,  ccccxvi*

Perch,  ccccxvi

Peregrinatio  in  ./Egyptum,  by  Baumgarten,  x

Peregrinatione  di  Terra  Santa,  by  Aquilante  Rochctta,  xi

Peres  supposed  to  be  the  sea  eagle,  ccccii

Periwinkle  the  less,  eclxvii

Persian  cat,  ccclxx

Petia,  rocks  of  the  valley  of,  description  of,  xlv

Petrified  trees,  lxix

Petrifactions,  lxvi — lxviii

Peity-chaps,  ccccxi

Phalaena  amygdali  fructus,  ccccxxi*

ficus,  id.

mori,  id.

Phoenicians,  noted  for  their  manufactures  in  copper,  lxxii
Phcenicopterus  ruber,  ccccv*
Phoenix,  ccxxiv

dactylifera,  ccxxv

Phiala,  lake,  cliv,  civ

Pholx,  pink,  ccxxxiii

Physalis  alkekengi,  eclxx*

'  Physic.i  Sacra,'  by  Scheucltzer,  vi

critical  remarks  on,  xxiv*

Pilgrimages  to  the  Jordan,  where  Christ  is  supposed  to  have

been  baptized,  clxx,  clxxi
Pimpenella  officinalis,  eclxx*
Pimpernel,  ccxl
Pink,  Nazarene,  ccxeii

Syrian,  id.

Pinus  cedrus,  eeli*
Pistacia  vera,  cccxxiii

terebinthus,  ccxxxviii

Pistachio  tree,  ccxlviii,  cccxxiii

nuts  of  Syria  the  best,  id.

tree  introduced  into  Italy,  id.

Pistim  sativum,  ccxxxix*

Plague,  almost  unknown  in  the  Deserts,  cxli

Plains,  deserts,  and  valleys,  xcix— cli

Plane  tree,  ccxlix

Plantago  cynops,  eclxx*

lagopus,  id.

major,  id.

setosa,  ccxciii

Plantain,  ccxxxi,  ccxlv,  eclxx

tree,  eclxxviii

Plants,  ccxv,  ccxix,  ccxxx,  ccxxxi,  ccxl,  ccxli,  eclxiv — eclxxi,

eclxxxii  —  eclxxxiv,     ccxci  —  ccxciii,    cccx,    cccxix —

cccxxii,  cccxliii,  cccxlvi,  cccxlvii
Platanus  oriental  is,  ccxlix*
Platulea  leucorodia,  ccccv*

Plostellum  paenicum,  or  Carthaginian  wain,  eclx
Plough,  its  use  originated  in  Egypt,  cccxxxviii

'  dia^n  by  men,  cccxxxvii

oxen,  cccxxxviii

horned,  cccxxxix

ring-handed,  id.

■  two  handed,  id

—  modern  Egyptian,  cccxl
-  Syrian,  cccxl i

Ploughing,  cccxxxvii — cccxli

Ploughshare,  cccxli

Plover,  green,  ccccvi

Plum,  ccxix,  eclxxxvi

of  Damascus,  cccii

Sebesen,  cccxii

tree,  Jericho,  ccxxiii

Pococke,  '  Description  of  the  East,'  xvii

Poison  winds,  simoom  or  samiel,  etlects  and  description  of,
cxliii,  cxliv

Polecat,  ecclv

Poley,  yellow,  ccxxx

Polyanthus  narcissus,  ccxvi

Pomegranate  tree,  cocxi

; fruit,  its  varieties,  cccxii

Poplar  tree,  ecl

Lombardy,  id.

Poppy,  ccxl,  eclxviii,  eclxx

scarlet,  ccxix

Population  of  Syria,  number  of,  cccl

Porcupine,  ccclx,*  ccclxxiv

(plant),  eclxviii

Porphyry,  common  in  parts  of  the  region  of  Sinai,  lxiii

Porpoise,  ccccxvi

Portulaca  oleracea,  ccxxxix*

Precious  stones,  no  information  concerning  such  found  in  Pales-
tine, lxxiv

Primitive  formation  of  the  mountains  of  Sinai,  line  of  the,  lxi

Pruning  vines,  cccxxvi

Pruuus  padus,  eclxix*

—  spinosa,  ccxlvi*

Psoralea  Palaestina,  ccxeii

Pudding-stone,  existence  of,  in  calcareous  regions,  lxi*

Pulse,  cccxlvii

Pumpion,  orange  shaped,  eclxxxi

Pumpkin,  or  pompion,  common,  eclxxxviii

Purple  field  cabbage,  cultivated  for  its  oil,  cccxx

3  k2

CCCCXXX1V

INDEX  TO  THE

Purslain,  ccxxxix

Pyrites  in  the  porphyry  of  Sinai,  lxiii

Quail,  ccccvii,  ccccix

Quarautania  mountains,  situation  and  description  of,  xxxix

Quercus,  ccxlvii

segilops,  ccxlviii

coccifera,  ccxlviii,*  ccxlix

cupula  crinata,  ccxlviii*

— foliis  dentato-aculeatis,  cclxx*

gland  e  recundita,  ccxlviii*

— —  ilex,  ccxlviii

aquifolia,  id.9

— — robur,  ccxlvii*

valonidi,  ccxlviii

Rabbah,  the  capital  of  the  Ammonites,  site  of,  now  Amman,

cxxxix
Racham,  believed  to  be  the  aquiline  vulture,  cccci
Rachel's  sepulchre,  cxxiv
Raddish,  wild,  ccxxxi

Radzivil,  Prince,  his  '  Hierosolyrr.itana  Peregrinatio,'  x
Ralali,  or  Raphia,  cv
Rail,  ccccvi

water,  id.

Raia  virga'a,  ccccxvi*
Rain,  cexliv
Rains,  first,  cccxliv
Raisins,  cccxxxvi

of  Damascus  cultivated  in  El  Bekaah,  cvii

Rakham,  or  vulture,  cccci
Rallus  aquaticus,  ccccvi*

crex,  id.

Rana  arborea,  ccccxii*

bufa,  id.

esculenta,  id.

Ranunculus,  ccxv,  cclxviii

Ras  el  Abaid,  or  White  Cape,  ciii

Ain,  cisterns  of,  attributed  to  Solomon,  cii

Rat,  watrr,  ccclxx

Ratiam,  or  broom,  ccxxviii,  ccxlvii

RauwolrT,  Leonhart,  '  Beschreibung  der  Raiss,'  &c  ,  xiii

translated  by

Nicholas  Staphorst,  in  Ray's  '  Colleclion,'  xx
Raven,  ccccii
Ray,  his  '  Collection  of  Curious  Voyages  and  Travels,'  xx

fish, ccccxvi

Red  Sea,  fossil  shells  on  the  borders  of  the,  lxix

fish,  ccccxvi,  ccccxvii

'  Reis  nach  Jerusalem  und  dem  Lande  Canaan,'  by  Myrike,  xiv
'  Reise  nach  dem  Gelobten  Lande,'  by  Korten,  xvii

ins  Heilige  Land,'  &c,  by  Jacob  Wormbser,  xiv

zum  Heilige  Grab,'  by  Daniel  Ecklin,  id.

ins  Heilige  Landt,'  &c,  by  Johann  Count  of  Solms,  xiii

'nach  Hierusalem,"  &c  ,  by  Hanns  Helilricli,  xiv

— ■  beschreibung,'  &c,  by  Johann  Tucher,  xiii

'  Reisen  durch  Europa,  Asia,  und  Afrika,'  by  Schulz,  xvii

'  Relation  du  Voyage  d'Aune  Cheron,  &c,  a  Jerusalem,'  viii*

Remauria,  cclxix

Rephaim,  valley  of,  situation,  extent,  &c.,of,  cxxiii,  cxxiv

Reptiles,  ccccxii— ccccxv

Reseda  vulgaris,  ccxl*

Rest-harrow,  ccxli

stinking

Rethem,  ccxlvii

shrub,  cclii

Revenue  of  the  Syrian  government,  ccclii

Reuick,  Edward,  a  painter,  his  journey  to  the  Holy   Land

with  Breydenbach ,  ix
Reynier,  '  De  l'Economie  Publique  et  Rural  des  Arabes  et  des

Jnifs,'  xxi*
'  Reyse  und  Bilgerfahrt  zum  Heilegen  Grab,'  by  Tschudis  von

Glarus,  xiv
'  Reysen  door  den  Levant,'  &c.,  by  Cornelius  van  Bruyn,  id.
Rbamuus,  ccxlvi,  cclxix

lotus,  ccxxxv

paliurus,  ccxxxvi

spina  Christi,  ccxxxvi,  cclxviii*

Rhinobatus  cemiculus,  ccccxvi*
Rhus  coriaria,  cclxix*

sumax,  cclxxi

Rice,  or  oriza  sativa,  ccxv
plant,  cccxvi

culture  of,  cccxvii

■  preparation  of  for  food  described,  id.

Richardson,  Dr.  '  Travels  along  the  Mediterranean,'  xviii
Riciuus  communis,  cccxx*

palma  Christi,  cclxviii*

Right  Hand  Mountain,  or  Jebel  Yamen,  cxxx

Ring  ousel,  ccccx

Robertson,  his  observation  on  the  early  use  of  gold,  silver,  and

copper,  lxxii
Robin-redbreast,  ccccxi
Robinson,  '  Travels  in  Palesline  and  Syria,'  xviii

Professor,  and  Rev.  Eli  Smith,  their  description  of

the  Dead  Sea,  ex,  cxi

cclxx

Roehetta,  Aquilante,  his  '  Peregrinatione  di  Terra  Santa,'  &c,

xi
Rocket,  ccxli

Roger,  Eugene,  his  work  '  La  Terre  Sainte,'  &c,  xi
Roller,  common,  cccciii
Roque,  La,  '  Voyage  de  Syrie,'  &c,  xiii
Rosa  alba,  eclxxxiii*

centitblia,  id.*

Damascena,  id.*

sempervirens,  ccxxxiv

Rose,  damask,  eclxxxiii

evergreen,  eclxxxiv

hundred  leaved,  eclxxxiii

of  Jericho,  eclxxxiv

of  Sharon,  ccxli

white  garden,  eclxxxiii

yellow,  eclxxxiv

gardens,  id.

Rosemary,  ccxxx

—  bush,  eclxxii

Rouget,  ccccxvi

Roziere,  M.  de, '  Description  de  l'Egypte  '  (mineralogy),  xxi

his  observations  on  the  rocks  of  Sinai,  lx

Rubia  tinctorum,  cccxxii*
Rubus  (bramble),  cclxx,  cclxxi

creticus,  ccxlvii

sanctus,  ccxlvi

Rue,  ccxxx,  ccxxxii,  eclxiv

Syrian,  eclxxix

Rus  oxycanthoides,  cclii*

Rush,  ccxli

Russegger,  M.,  his  journey  from  Hebron  to  Jerusalem,  lvi,*

lvii*
Russell,  Dr.

'  Natural  History  of  Aleppo,'  xxii
-  his  account  of  the  months  of   June,

August,  cclxxi

July,  and

■  of  the  hawks  of  Syria,  ccccii*

Dr.  Patrick,  his  account  of  the  earthquake  of  1759,

lxxxix — xci
Ruta  graveolens,  ccxxx
Rye  not  cul  tivated  in  Palestine,  ccxiv

Sackiyeh,  or  Persian  Wheel,  irrigation  by,  ccxcv

description  of,  by  Mr.  Lane,  ccxcvii

'  Sacra  Phytologia,'  by  John  Henry  Ursinus,  v

Safet,  the  city  of,  or  Bethulia,  xxxv

Saffron  cultivated  for  dyeing,  cccxxi

Safflower,  or  bastard  saffron,  cultivated  for  its  oil  and  flowers  in

dyeing,  id.
Sage,  ccxxx,  ccxl,  eclxiv,  cclxx
Saifia,  or  summer  crops,  ccxiv
Saiga,  by  some  supposed  to  be  the  Akko,  cccxcvi
St.  Catherine,  Mount,  one  of  the  summits  of  Mount  Horeb,

xlviii

ascent  of,  described,  1

view  from  its  summit,  1,  li

temperature  of  the  atmosphere  at,  id.

composition  of  its  summit,  lxii

St.  Elias,  his  rock,  cxxiii

St.  Hilaire,  Geoffroy,  '  Description  de  l'Egypte  '  (mammalia),

xxii

(reptiles),  id.

St.  John's  wort,  ccxciii

St.  Philip,  fountain  of,  exxvi

St.  Saba,  desert  and  monastery  of,  situation  and  description  of,

exxvii,  exciv
Salix  Babylonica,  cclxx*

Egyptiaca  vel  safsaf,  id.

Salsola  t'rnticosu,  cclxix

Salt,  prevalence  of,  by  the  Dead  Sea,  lxix,  lxx

used  as  manure,  cccxlv

Saltpetre,  plentiful  in  the  eastern  country  of  the  Haouran,  lxx

Burckhardt's  account  of,  lxxiv*

Salvia,  ccxl*

norminum,  cclxx*

pomifera,  id.

Syriaca,  id.

verbenaca,  id.

verticillatum,  id.

Samaria,  city  of,  its  former  situation,  id.,  cxvii

■ situation  of,  xxxvii,  xxxviii

description  of,  by  Lord  Lyndsay,  cxvii

Samiel,  simoom,  or  poison   wind,  effects  and  description  of,

cxliii,  cxliv
Samochonitis,  lake,  or  waters  of  Merom,  clxi,  clxii
Sand  storms,  cxliii — cxlvii

stone,  very  common  throughout  Palestine,  lxiv

piper,  grey,  ccccvi

thistle,  ccxxx

Sandys,  'Relation  of  a  Journey  to  the  Holy  Land,'  &c,  xv
Sanfoin,  or  St  Foine,  ccxli
Santolina  fragrantissima,  eclxvii*
Sargus  annularis,  ccccxvi*

raucus,  id.

vulgaris,  id.

common,  ccccxvi

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

ccccxxxv

Sargus,  hoarse,  ccccxvi

ringed,  id.

Satyrion,  ccxli

Savigiiy,   '  Description  de  l'Egypte '   (invertebrate    animals),
xxi,  xxii

(ornithology),    '  Systeme

des  Oiseaux  de  l'Egypte  et  de  la  Syrie,'  xxii

Saviue,  common,  ccl

Savory,  cclxxxi

Saw  fish,  ccccxvi

Saxum  purum  micaceum,  lx

Scabiosa  divaricata,  ccxciii

orientalis,  ccxl*

Scabious,  ccxl

Scammony,  or  Syrian  birdweed,  cclxx

Scarabaeus  ceratonia ,  ccccxix*

sacer,  id.

Scaup  duck,  cccciv

Scheuchzer,  his  '  Physica  Sacra,'  vi

critical  remarks  on,  xxiv*

Schulz,  '  Reisen  durch  Europa,'  &c  ,  xvii

Schweigger,  Solomon,  *  Newe  Reiss-beschreibung  aus  Teutch-
land,'  &c,  xiv

Sciaena  aquila,  ccccxvi

Scilla  Italica,  cclxvii*

Scincus,  ccccxii

Scolopax  arquata,  ccccvi*

gallinago,  id.

gallinula,  id.

rusticola,  id.

Scolopendra,  ccccxix

coleoptrata,  ccccxix*

morsitans,  id.

Scomber  quadripunctatus,  ccccxvi*

unicolor,  id.

Scrophulaiia  orientalis, ccxli*

Scorching  carrot,  ccxxxi

Scorpion,  ccccxv

water,  ccccxxi

Scorzonera,  cclxx*

Scoter,  or  black  diver,  cccciv

'  Scripture,  Illustrations  of,'  by  Professor  Paxton,  vii
Scull-cap,  ccxli
Scutellaria  orientalis,  ccxli*

Scythopolis,  or  Bethshan,  xxxvii
Sea  camel,  ccccxvi

Sebesten  plum,  cccxii

Secondary  formation  of  the  rocks  of  Sinai,  line  of  the,  lxi

Sedum  altum,  ccxcii*
Seerig,  or  oil  of  sesame,  cccxx

Seetzen,  some  account  of  the  countries  adjoining  the  lake  of
Tiberias,  xvii

his  letters  to  Baron  Zach  iu  the  '  Monatliche  Corre-

sponder,'  id.

his  journals,  where  deposited,  xvii*

Seir,  mountains  of,  situation  and  description  of,  xlii,  xliii

description  of,  by  Lord  Lyndsay,  xliii

Selgam,  or  coleseed,  cccxxi

Sellah,  ccxxviii

Sennacherib,  burial  place  of  his  host,  cxxiv

Sepia  loligo,  ccccxviii*

Sepphoris,  vale  of,  situation,  extent,  &c,  of,  cxiii

September,  history  of  the  month  of,  cccx — cccxxii

weather  during  the  month  of,  cccx

Serag-al-cashrob,  cclxvi

Serbal,  Mount,  its  situation,  height,  &c,  xlvii
supposed  to  be  the  place  where  the  law  was  de-
livered to  Moses,  lii,  liii
Seriola  speciosa,  ccccxvi
Serran,  id.

brazen,  id.

Serpent*,  ccccxiv
Serranus  aeneus,  ccccxvi*

melanurus,  id.

tauvina,  id.

Sesame,  cccxix

oil  of,  or  seerig,  cccxx

Sesamum,  ccxiv

orientale,  cccxix*

Severelle,  ccccxvi

Seyal  tree,  ccli

Sha-bash,  ccl  vii

Shachal,  or  lion  in  his  prime,  ccclxvii

Shachts,  or  lion  approaching  to  age,  id.

Shadoof,  raising  water  by  the,  ccxcv

Shadoofs,  raising  water  by  a  series  of,  id.

Shaeir,  or  common  lentil,  ccxv

Shallot,  ccxxxii*

Shaphan,  or  coney  of  Scripture,  ccclxxv

or  wabber,  ccclxxvi

Shaveh,  valley  of,  cxlviii*
Sharon,  rose  of,  ccxli

valley  of,  described,  civ

Shaw,  Dr.,  Travels,  &c,  to  parts  of  Barbary  and  the  Levant,

xvii
history  of  the  palm-tree  in  Palestine,  ccxxv

Shaw,  Dr.,  description  of  the  bitumen  of  the  Dead  Sea,  lxxx

theory  of  earthquakes  in  Barbary,  lxxxvii

Sheat  fish,  ccccxviii

Sheaves  of  corn ,  cclvi

Shechem,  or  Sychar,  city  of,  its  situation,  xxxix

town  of,  cxviii

Sheeb,  or  wolf  of  Arabia  and  Syria,  ccclxiv

Sheep,  varieties  of,  cccxcvi,  cccxcix

Bedouin,  cccxcvi

fat-tailed,  cccxcvii

and  goats,  management  of,  cccxcix

tending  of,  cccxcviii

folds,  cccxcix

shearing  of,  id.

flocks  of,  where  least  seen,  cccxcviii

Arabian,  die  suddenly  if  kept  to  be  fattened  in  Syria,  id.

fat  tail  of  used  in  sacrifice,  cccxcvii

"  Carrying  its  tail  on  a  cart,"  the  saying  accounted  for,

id.

Sheirat  el  Mandhour,  hot  springs  and  bath  near,  lxxvi

river,  or  Jarmuch,  cc

Sheldrake,  cccciv

Shells  found  in  great  numbers  in  the  valley  of  the  Arnon,  lxviii

Shepherd's  needle,  ccxxxi

dog,  ccclxiii

field,  cxxiv

Sherm,  volcanic  rocks  near,  the  only  ones  supposed  by  Burck-
hardt  to  be  in  Sinai,  lxxxii

Sherm  and  Nakb,  plain  between,  alluvial,  lxix

Shetawia,  or  winter  crops,  ccxiv

Shikakool,  or  Syrian  heart-wort,  cclxxxi

Shikal,  or  jackal,  ccclxv

Shikrak,  or  common  roller,  cccciii

Shittim  wood,  ccli

Shocks  of  wheat,  cclvi

Shoveller,  cccciv

Shual,  whether  that  is  the  same  as  jackal,  ccclxv

Shyb  plant,  cclxvii

Sibbechean  Sea,  or  waters  of  Merom,  clxi,  clxii

Sickle,  the,  cclv

Siddim,  destruction  of  the  vale  of,  lxxix,  xcv*

Sideritis  lanata,  ccxli*

monlana,  id.

romana,  id.

Sieve,  winnowing  by,  cclxi

Silk  and  silkworms,  particulars  concerning,  cccxii*

mode  of  arrangement  in  its  cultivation  between  the  proprie-
tor of  the  soil  and  the  cultivator,  cccviii

Silkworm,  ccccxxi

Sille  plant,  cclxvii

Siloam,  fountain  of,  or  upper  pool  of,  cxcv

pool  of,  cxcvi

Silnrus,  ccccxvii

•  cans,  ccccxviii*

•  glanis,  id.

■  Pelusius,  id.

Silver,  early  use  of,  lxxii

very  rare,  lxxiii

in  Egypt,  scarcer  than  gold,  id.

Simoom,  Samiel,  or  poison  wind,  description  and  effects  of,  cxliii,

cxliv

Denon's  description  of,  cxlix,*  cl*

Lucan's  description  of  in  Libya,  cxlix*

Sinai,  Mount,  a  summit  of  Mount  Horeb,  xlviii

inscriptions  on,  liii,  liv

summit  of  described,  xlix

mountains  of,  their  situation,  height,  &c,  xlvii

geological  characteristics  of,  lx,  Ixiv

levels  in,  M.  Russegger's  account  of,  lvi,*  lvii*

rocks  of,  observed  on  by  M.  de  Roziere,  lx

mechanical  connection  of  the,  lxi

lines  of  the  primitive  and  secondary  formation  of  its  rocks,

lxi

volcanic  appearances  very  few,  lxxxii

'  Relation,  &c  ,  d'un  Voyage,  &c,  au  Mont,'  by  Morison,

xiii
Sinaite  on  beds  of  melaphyre,  lxii

polished  by  quartz  sand  moved  by  the  wind,  lxiii

Sinapis,  ccliii

alba,  ccxli*

arvensis,  ccxli*,  ccliii

1 —  Halepensis,  ccxli*

orientalis,  ccliii,  cclxxxi*

Singing  of  birds,  little  allusion  to  iu  Scripture,  ccccxi

Siroc  wind,  ccxlii

Sirsaeir  teal,  cccciv

Skinkore,  or  aquatic  lizard,  ccccxiii

Sirocco,  or  hot  wind,  ccxxi,  ccxxii

Skinner,  Major,  '  Adventures  in  an  Overland  Journey  to  India,'

xviii
Slate  scarce  in  Palestine,  lxvi
Sledge,  threshing  by,  cclix
Sloe  tree,  ccxlvi

Smiill-pox  the  only  endemic  of  the  Desert,  cxli
Smith,  Rev.  Eli,  and  Professor  Robinson,  their  description  of

the  Dead  Sea,  ex,  cxi

CCCCXXXV1

INDEX  TO  THE

Smurmur,  or  locust-bird,  ccccxx
Snakes,  ccccxiv

Sindian,  or  Turkish  oak,  cccxiii
Snipe,  ccccvi

jack,  id.

Snow,  ccxliii

frequently  destroys  houses  in  January  and  February,  ccx,

ccxviii
Soap  of  Scripture,  what  it  is,  cclx\  ii
Soda,  carbonate  of,  found  in  several  places,  Ixx
Sodom,  Land  of,  mentioned  by  Josephus,  clxxvi,  clxxviii
and   Gomorrah  s  ipposed  to  be  destroyed  by  volcanic

operation,  lxxx
Solanum  fruticosum  quadrupedale,  &c,  cclxix*

furiosum,  cclxxxii

iucanum,  id.

lycopersicum,  cclxxxi

melongena,  cclxxxi*

sodomeum,  cclxxxii

Solms,  Johann,  Count  of,  Reise  ins  Heilige  Landt,  &c,  xiii
Solomon,  pools  of,  cxxiv,  cxcviii,cxcix,  cc
Soor,  the  modern  name  for  Tyre,  cii*
Sorek,  brook,  cxciv

'  vale  of,  situation  and  description  of,  cxxv,  cxxvi

valley  of,  famous  for  its  grapes,  cxxvi

wine  of,  supposed  to  be  the  wine  of  Askelon,  id.

Sorrel,  cclxxxi

Southernwood,  ccxli*

Souvenirs  pendant  un  Voyage  en  Orient,  by  Lamartine,  xvi

Sowing,  cccxiii

Spanish  jasmine  tree,  cclxix

vermilion,  cccxxi

Sparrow,  ccccxi

Spartium  arenosum,  ccxxviii

monospermum,  ccxlvii,  ccxxviii*

spinosum,  id

Sparus  aurata,  ccccxvii*

■  Galilaeus,  ccccxvii

Spider  of  Galilee,  ccccxviii

Spina  Christi,  cclxix

Spoonbill,  ccccv

Spurge,  ccxxxi,  cclxviii

Squill,  the  Italian,  cclxvii

Stade,  the,  measurement  of,  clxi,  cciii*

Stag,  cccxciii

Staphorst,  Nicholas,   Translation  of  Ratiwolffs  Collection  of

Curious  Voyages  and  Travels,  xx
Staphyliuus  maxillosus,  ccccxix
Starling,  ccecx

Stephens.  Incidents  of  Travel  in  Egypt,  &c,  xviii
Stevens,  his  description  of  Mount  Hor,  xliv

—  the  rocks  of  Petra,  xlv

Stone  of  Mo  -es,  lxxxi

Stones,  cimbustible,  of  the  Dead  Sea,  lxxxi

Stone  crop,  ccxcii*

Stork, ccccv

Storks,  white  and  black,  ccccvi

Strand,  '  Flora  Palaestina,'xxi

Straw  used  for  fodder,  cclxiii

Strawberry,  ccxlv

Strix  bubo,  ccccii*

flammea,  id.

passerina,  id.

Stubble  burning,  cclxii

Sturgeon, ccccxvi

Sturnus  vulgaris,  ccccx*

Subterranean  grain  stores,  cclxii

Succory,  cclxx

Sugar-cane,  ccxxxix,  cccxlvii

Sulphur,  abounds  by  the  Dead  Sea,  lxxix

Sumbel,  or  Oriental  hyacinth,  ccxix

Sunflower,  little,  ccxli*

Surius,  his  '  Le  Pieux  Pelerin,  ou  Voyage  de  Jerusalem,'  xii

Swallow-wort,  bell  flowered  gigantic,  ccliii*

gigantic,  cclxix

Swan,  cccciv
Sycamore,  cclxx

fig  tree,  cccviii,  cccix

Sychar,  orShechem,  city  of,  its  situation,  xxxix

town  of,  cxviii

Symphitum  orientale,  ccxl*

Syria,  coast  of,  sub;ect  to  earthquakes,  lxxxvi

Hollow,  or  Coele-Syria,  its  position,  xxxii

mountains  of,  xxvii  -lvii

—  Volney's  and  Malte  Brun's  opinions  of,

xxx,  xxxi

present  condition  of,  cccl — ccclii

•  population  of,  cccxxviii*

—  Armenians,  number  of,  in,  cccli
— —  Christians  in,  number  of,  cccl

—  Jews  in,  number  of,  id.

—  Mohammedans  in,  number  of,  id.

—  labouring  classes  of,  their  condition,  ccclii

—  population  of  the  towns  of,  cccl

—  consumption  of  animal  food  in,  cccxcviii*

—  agricultural  produce  of,  cccli

Syria,  manufactures  of,  ccclii

foreign  trade  of,  id.

exportations  of,  their  value,  id.

revenue  of,  id.

expenditure  of  the  government,  id.

tenure  of  lands  in,  id.

Report  on  the  Commercial  Statistics  of,  by  Dr.  Bowring,

cccvii

Summer's  Ramble  in,  by  Rev.  Vere  Monro,  xviii

—and  the  Holy  Land,  Travels  in,  by  Burckliardt,  id.

Syrie,  Voyage  de,  &c,  by  La  Roque,  xiii

Systemedes  Oi-eauxde  l'Egypte  et  de  la  Syrie,  by  Savigny,  xxii

Szaffa,  the  unexplored  regijn  of,  lxxxiii

—  district  of  described,  xcviii*

Tabahia,  sea  of,  or  lake  of  Tiberias,  clxiii

Tabernacles,  feast  of,  ccciv

Table  de  la  Multiplication,  la,  cxiv

Taboot,  the,  for  raising  water,  ccxcvii,  ccxcviii

Tabor,  Mount,  its  posiiion,  height,  &c,  xxxv,  xxxvi

description  of  the  view  from,  by  Rev.  C.  B.

Elliot,  xxxvi

Taenia,  ccccxviii

Tahhbahh,  hot  springs  at,  lxxvi

hot  baths  at,  described  by  Buckingham,  xcv*

Talli,  or  acacia  gummifera,  ccli*

Tamarisk  tree,  cclxix,  cclxxv

Tamarix  Gallica,  cclxxvi

manuifera,  id

Tamyras,  the  ancient  name  for  the  river  Damoor,  cii

Tapuach.ccxiii

Tayal,  or  Ibex,  cccxcv

Teal,  cccciv

Taylor,  Charles,  his  '  Fragments   appended  to   Calmet's  Dic-
tionary of  the  Bible,'  vi

Teer-el-Yakoob,  cuckoo  or  Jacob's  bird,  cccciii

Tel-el-Kadi,  springs  of  the  Jordan  at,  clvii

Shoba,  hill  of,  appears  to  have  been  the  crater  of  a  volcano,

lxxxv

Temperature  in  the  month  of  May  at  Jerusalem  and  Jaffa,  ccxlii

variations  in,  ccci,  cccx,  cccxi,  cccxxiii,  cccxliv,

cccxlvi

table  of  the,  in  various  parts  of  Palestine,  ccxxxiii

Temptation,  mountain  of,  description  of,  &c,  xl

Tench,  ccccxv

Tenthreda  fly,  ccxlix

Tenthredo  sodomitica,  ccccxxi

Tenure  of  lands  in  Syria,  ccclii

Terebinth,  vale  or  valley  of  Elah,  cxx

tree  of  Abraham,  cxxv

•the  Virgin  Mary,  cxxiii

turpentine  tree,  ccxxxvii,  cclxviii

Tereshiesh,  cclxxxvi

Terra  Sancta,  Itinerant)  da,  by  Pautaliam  d'Aveyro,  x

Peregrinatione  di,  by  Aquilante  Roehetta,  xi

Viaggio  di,  &c,  by  Antonio  Medina,  x

Terre  Saiute,  la,  by  Eugene  Roger,  xi

Nouveau  Voyage  de  la.  by  Nau.  xii

Voyage  de  la,  &c.,  by  Don!  dau,id.

Tetradynamia,  ccxl
Tetrao  al  chata,ccccvii*

coturnix,  id.

francoliuus,  id.

petrosus,  id.,  ccccix*

sexatilis,  id.,  id.

Teucrium  chamaepytis ,  ccxli*
Theo  Prosopon  Promontorium,  ci*
Thermometrical  observations  by  Dr.  Clarke,  cclxxxv
Thevenot,  '  Relation  d'uu  Voyage  fait  au  Levant,' xii
Thistle,  ccxlvii

Syrian,  id.

Thorn  tree,  ccxlvi

Threshing,  various  modes  of,  cclvii — cclx

Thrush,  fox  coloured,  ccccx

missel,  id.

long,  id.

Thyme,  ccxxx,  ccxli

Tiberias,  Lake,  its  ancient  names,  clxiii

situation,    extent,  description,   &c,

seq.

now  pronounced  Tabaria  or  Tabareah,  cix

fish  in,  ccccxvii

hot  springs  on  the  shore  of,  lxxv

temperature  of,  xcv*

hot  baths  of,  heat  of,  id.

'  Some  Account  of  the  Countries  adjoining  the  Lake  of,'

by  Seetzeu,  xvii,  xviii
Tierra  Santa,  El  Devoto  Peregrino,  &c  by  Ant.  del  Castillo,  x
Timber,  cutting  of,  in  Syria,  account  of,  cccvii*,  cccviii
Tin  is  not  found  in  the  Holy  Land,  lxxiii

the  use  of  it  known  very  early  to  the  Hebrews,  id.

■ — —  used  as  an  alloy  to  copper,  lxxii
Tiphrach,  or  fig-tree,  ccxxvii,  ccxxviii
Tirosh,  sometimes  translated  wine ,  or  new  or  sweet  wine,  its

meaning,  cccxxiv*
Toad,  ccccxii

clxii   tt

PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

ccccxxxvn

Toad  flax,  ccxxxi,  ecxli
Tobacco,  cclxviii,  ccxciii

Syrian,  consumption  of,  cccxliii

Tolath,  ccxlix

Tomato,  or  love  apple,  cclxxxi
Tordylium  Syriacum,  cclxxxi*
Tortoise,  fresh-water,  ccccxii

land,  id.

sea,  id.

Tortura,  village  of,  probably  the  Dor  of  Scripture,  the  Dora  of

Josephus,  civ-
Tower  in  the  vineyard,  what  it  means,  cccxxvi
'  Travels  among  the  Arab  Tribes,'  by  Buckingham,  xviii

' in  Egypt,  &c.,'  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  id.

' along  the  Mediterranean,'  by  Dr.  Richardson,  id.

' in  Palestiue,'  by  Buckingham,  id.

' in  Palestine  and  Syria,'  by  Robinson,  id.

' ~  in  Turkey,  Egypt,  &c,'  by  Madden,  id.

' in  the  Three  Great  Empires,'  by  the  Rev.C  B.  Elliot,

xix

' in  various  Countries,  &c  ,'  by  Clarke,  xviii

Treacle-mustard,  ccxxxi,  cclxviii

Treading  out  corn,  cclvii

Tree  clethra  shrub,  ccxxx\  i

Tree  of  the  righteous,  cclxxix

Trees,  mode  of  treatment  of,  cccxlv

and   shrubs,  ccxviii,  ccxix,    ccxxii — cexxviii,  ccxxxiv —

ccxxxviii,  ecxliv — ccliii,  cclxxii — cclxxx,  cclxxxvi,  ccci

— cccix,  cccxi,  cccxii,  cccxxiii,  cccxlv,  cccxlvii
Trefoil,  ccxli,  cclxviii,  cclxx

—  bird's-1'oot,  ccxli

—  moon,  id.

stinking-bean,  cclxx

Trefolium  Alexandricum,  cclxx*

augustifolium,  id.

globosum,  cclxviii,*  cclxx*

incarnatum,  cclxx*

procumbens,  id.

resuspinatum,  cclxviii,*  cclxx*

stellatum,  id.

tomentosum,  cclxviii,*  cclxx*

Tribulum,  cclx

Trygon  grabatus,  ccccxvi*

lymma,  id.

Tringa  squatarola,  ccccvi*

Trigonella  fcenum-grsecum,  cclxxxi,*  cccxix*

Tripoli,  town  of,  situation  of,  ci

Triticum,  straw  of,  or  of  wheat,  cclxiii

Troilo,  his  Orientalische  Reisebeschreihung,  xiv

Truffle,  cclxxxi

Tucher,  Johann,  Reisebeschreibung  zum  Heilige  Grabe,  xiii

Tufwacke,  or  black  stone,  lxv

Tulip,  ccxv,  ccxix,  ccxxx

small  red,  ccxxxiii

Tupinambis  arenarius,  ccccxii*

Nilotica,  id.

Turbot,  ccccxvi
Turdus  cantor,  ccccx*

merula,  id.

pilaris,  id.

roseus,  id.

rufus,  id.

■  torquatus,  id.

viscivorous,  id.

Turkey,  ccccvii

Turkish  corn,  cccxv

Turkman  watch  dog,  ccclxiii

Turpentine  or  Terebinth  tree,  ccxxxvii,  ccxxxviii

Turtle,  or  sea-tortoise,  ccccxii

Tyre,  city  of,  situation  of,  cii

William  of,  his  History,  viii

his  description  of  the  earthquake  of  1170,  lxxxviii

Tyrian  dye  furnished  by  the  murex,  ccecxviii
Tzeboa  supposed  to  mean  the  Hyaena,  ccclxvii
Tzeboim,  the  valley  of,  or  of  Hyaenas,  id.

XJpt'pA  Efops,  cccci\*

Ursinus,  John  Henry,  his  '  Arboretum  Biblicum,'  v

'  Historiae  Plantarum  Biblicae,'  id.*

■ — '  Sacra  Phytologia,'  v

'  Herbarius  Sacer,'  id.

'  Hortus  Aromaticus,'  id.

Ursus  Syriacus,  ccclv

Urtica  pilulifera,  cclxviii*

Uzziah,  king  of  Judah,  earthquake  in  his  reign,  lxxxvi

Valeriana  olitoria,  ccxl*
Valle,  Pietro  della,  Viaggi  di,  xi
Valleys,  plains,  and  deserts,  xcix — cli
Van,  the,  or  winnowing  shovel,  cclxi*
Vaianus  dracaenus,  ccccxii

scincus,  id.

Verbascum  pulverulentulum,  ccxl*
Verbena  tenuifolia,  ccxli*
Veronica,  ccxxxi
spiked,  cclxvii

Veronica  spicata,  cclxvii*

Vervain,  ccxli

Vesper  crabo,  ccccxxi*

vulgaris,  id.

Vespertilio  murinus,  cccliv

Vetch,  blue  chichling,  ccxv

hairy-flowered  yellow,  or  vicia  hybrida,  id.

small,  vicia  or  kishna,  id.

Viaggi  di  Pietro  della  Valle,  &c  ,  xi

Viaggio  dell*  Abate  Mariti  per  Isola  di  Cypro  per  la  Sorie  e  la
Palestina,  &c,  xvi

Vicia,  ccxli

angustifolia,  ccxli*

faba,  or  bean  ccxv,  ccxxxix*

fal>a  equina,  cccxix*

hybrida,  or  hairy-flowered  yellow  vetch,  ccxv

orientalis,  ccxli*

segetnm,  id.

or  small  vetch,  ccxv

sylvestris,  ccxli*

Vielle,  ccccxvi

Vinca  inor,  cclxvii*

Vine,  the,  ccxiv,  cexxviii,  ccliii,  cclxxx,  eclxxxvii,  cccx,  cccxiii,
cccxxiv — cccxxx,  cccxlvi,  cccxlvii

how  propagated,  cccxxvi

cultivation  of,  cccxxiv

various  modes  of,  cccxxv,  cccxxvi

in  various  countries  described,  cccxxix

expen-es  of  cultivation,  ccoxxviii

mode  of  arrangement  in  its  cultivation  between  the  pro-
prietor of  the  soil  and  the  cultivator,  cccxxviii*

Vine  arbours,  cccxxvii

Vinegar,  cccxxxv

Vino  d'oro,  cccxxxv

Vintage,  when  it  commences,  cccxiii

description  of,  cccxxx — cccxxxv

Violet,  ccxv,  cccxlvii

Viper,  ccccxv

grass,  cclxx

Viper's  bugloss,  ccxl

Viscous  campion,  cclxx

Vision,  valley  of,  cxlviii*

Vitry,  James de,  his '  Historia  Orientalis,  sive  Hierosolymitanae,'
viii

Volcanic  indications  and  earthquakes,  lxxvii — xcviii

Volcano,  appearance  of  a  crater  at  Tel  Shoba,  lxxxv

Volney,  '  Voyage  en  Syrie  et  en  Egypte,'  xvi

his  opinion  on  the  Syrian  chain  of  mountains,  xxx

his  description  of  Mount  Lehanon,  xxxiii,  xxxiv

■  of  the  hot  springs  at  Tiberias,  lxxv

his  account  of  the  earthquake  of  1759,  lxxxix

&c.

Vomer,  Alexandrinus,  ccccxvi

'  Voyage,  &c,  au  Mont  Sinai,  et  a  Jerusalem,  Relation
by  Morison,  xiii

' de  Hierusalem,'  by  Benard,  xii

' en  Syrie  et  en  Egypte,'  by  Volney,  xvi

' fait  au  Levant,  Relation  d'un,'  by  Thevenot,  xii

'  Voyages,  Journal  des,  de  M.  de  Monconys,'  xii
Vultur  percnopterus,  cccci*
Vulture,  aquiline,  cccci

Waad  el-Ajal,  or  Vale  of  Death,  ciii

Wabber,  or  Shaphan,  ccclxxvi

Wady  Amara,  the  hills  enclosing  the  valley  of,  composed  of

chalk  and  flint,  lxvii

Fukreh,  exxx

Gaza,  supposeil  to  be  the  brook  Bezor  of  Scripture,  exciv

Gharandel,  between  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  and  Petra,  xliii

Kurnib,  called  by  Lord  Lindsay  Kournou,  exxx

Modjeb,  or  river  Arnon,  ccii

Mokatteb,  or  the  Written  Valley,  inscriptions  at,  liv,  lv

Ruheibeh,  valley  of,  its  situation,  &c,  exxix

Sal,  mountains  which  enclose,  construction  of,  lxiii

Sezeban,  or  Steziban,  valley  of,  clx

Sig,  defile  of,  description  of,  xlv

Zoarah,  torrent  of,  exxxi

Wain,  Carthaginian,  cclx

threshing  by  the,  cclix

Wake-robin,  ccxxxi

Walch,  G.  F.,  his  prize  essay,  '  Calendarium  Palasstinae  CEcono-

micum,'  referred  to,  ccv
Walnut  tree,  ecl
Waran ,  or  lizard,  ccccxii

el-bahr,  id.

el-houd,  id.

Wasp,  ccccxxi

Watch-dog,  ccclxiii

Water  and  air  of  Palestine,  qualities  of,  ccvii,  ccviii

Water- raising,  by  the  shadoof,  &c  ,  ccxcv

Water  cress,  cclxviii,  cclxx,  cclxxxi

parsnip,  ccxxxi

rat,  ccclxx

wagtail,  white,  ccccxi

Wells  for  corn,  or  granaries,  eclxii

Wellstead,  lieutenant,  his  account  of  the  tamarisk  tree,  eclxxv,

eclxxvi

ccccxxxviii  INDEX  TO  PHYSICAL  HISTORY  OF  PALESTINE.

Wheat,  ccxiv,  ccxxxix,  ccxciii

of  Asia  Minor,  ccliv

bearded,  noticed  by  Captain  Mangles,  ccliv,  cclv

■ English,  ccliv

■  Hesbon,  id.

• ' — '  carrying,  cclvi

White  Cape,  the,  below  Tyre,  why  so  called,  lxv
•  or  Ras  el  Abaid,  ciii

•  clover,  ccxli

Whitlow  grass,  cclxviii

common,  ccxli

Wigeon,  cccciv

Wild  ass,  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  wild  mule,  ccclxxxiv

woad,  ccxxxi

Wilderness  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  cxx
Willow  tree,  cclxix

Egyptian,  or  weeping,  cclxx

herbs,  ccxli

Win  chat,  ccccxi
Wind-flowers,  ccxli
Wine-making,  process  of,  cccxxxiv

skins,  id.

of  Lebanon,  cccxxxv

quality  of  in  Syria,  cccxxxiv

press,  Egyptian,  cccxxxi,  cccxxxii

the  frequency  of  the  word  in  Scripture  explained,  cccxxiv

Winnowing,  cclx,  cclxi

Winter,  commencement  of,  cccxlvii

cherry,  cclxx

figs,  ccxiii

Wolf,  ccclxiv

Woodcock,  ccccvi

Woodpecker,  greater  spotted,  cccciii

Wood  pigeon,  ccccix

Worms,  ccccxviii

Wormbser,  Jacob,  Reise  ins  Heilige  Land,  &c,  xiv

Wormwood,  ccxv,  cclxx

Wren,  ccccxi

Wry-neck,  cccciii

Wurwar,  or  Bee-eater,  id.

XyLOBALSAMUM,  CCbtXV

Yaffa,  the  proper  Hebrew  name  of  Jaffa,  civ

Yellow  hammer,  ccccxi

Yellow  hoary  mullein,  ccxl

Yitzhar,  sometimes  translated  oil,  its  meaning,  cccxxiv*

Yunx  torquilla,  cccciii*

Zaaboub  tree,  cclii

Zaarour  tree,  id.

Zacchoum,  ccxxiii

Zea  maiz,  zea  mays,  maize  or  Indian  corn,  ccxv,  cccxiv

Zebeidy,  cclxxxi

Zebulon,  valley  of,  situation,  extent,  &c,  of,  cxiii

Zerka,  river,  the  modern  name  of  the  Jabbok,  cci

supposed  to  be  the  Crocodile  River  of  Pliny,  cxcii

Mayn.hot  springs  near  the,  lxxviii

-  Tree,  ccxxxv

Zella  Myagrum,  cclxvii*

Ziraleet,  cclvii

Zuallardo,  Giovanni,  his  Divotissimo  Viaggo  di  Gerusalemme,

&c,  xi
Zoology,  cccliii — ccccxxii

of  the  Bible,  by  Bochart,  iv

Zorombal,  ccccxvi

London  :  Printed  by  William  Clowes  and  Sons,  Stamford  Street.

■■an    J8>»»  »

>"<3>3p..,

2»  >  ;»>:J»>

>  »>»>>  :

3TJ» >»

-*3*De3i

9*    ~»^B6iii»

"2»

a» .»  :^a5S5»

<  -^  ;3

>■  in
"3»       J

:^<^3k)

lJK»:

S  »  J

■  •  •>-  s

J  3

■45. •>  *j»  >:

_»T5J

I3fc      j  ijS

>>   \

.3  JT:

^   ,

.

J>    t    Jh

» ^>

j»>2

>i  '

> ->4,

*>  j

>

WpL

*V  >-  '  3R3»»">

1>;

>  v. ...»  ^>ia»  •  ->  >>'_»-'j»^>    j

>T»v>     ^»>,»^

a  »

"»>»3-

■rorm

ran  -j  >  >  >»'_^»i  j  jk

»3  0'ir?':Oj>B.-!"i>iij

CfcS'  '.v'i     > ?"2»' >v>  i.

>        3»    3fc  —

^   3»

-  a    i>  >  _

,5fl>->    *

r     >>

•»    i»M.
»      »>»

.■>-TB».»j>ag»M»  -■-  ■> ,     _T

■•3E»>  •  -..3

iOK>j3?>'

,>      '>3bV-     'J»»3J    s»r

>  l~>im>'  ■  J»   >)>    j)  >  >
1     1  ■    ■>?>■    .;»     »» •■:>  >  J

>  >  >A»1*3>     „>    j»~>> ..

-,   >»•*>    >»     >  >      *■-

.     3       33)   »XJ     >  >  •)

3V     »  ^     >     ^3  >  ,        ■

>                  >   >jJ>  >     ,:3        1,

»>'3).3L*^>  >             >3

;t&:>sj»  m>

9e>'3>3

»  >    i>>3  :      >      >

>-»:>».  .        >        >      _,     ,

3   >*»>!>    -i       "^       -^

»  j

>y    3
f>»  "3    >  ;

»      *j»   *■'

saE»»  ».3>  ■>  >

-^lT-^:^

lHI*.i>^.3rtJ        1      j

*  ^sl^;

>J»     3»>     .)3',3

»>  =^\

TSET»ym

:»^>^

S»»"-Ji3       >      ~

3H@!L£L*

i>^;-»aaj)

^fe»

i>i3»  19  '  >X>i>J    ^>"S

3»»>'

»>  3J»     >S>.>3  ~'T3

».  "3»»  >-"

>'=3*'^3»'^     >-:>>»              "3

•"  >_ '   ^1

>5>U»>  J»),>;^»

-»    ju    ->^

EO»-i,M>SI)

>.-'^*  ,?'

»r*»-  Tsk&>rx» '

^^  3

V*J£^BB>S3*  -•

"•  «        >       Jtt.

l£mTX8»Jf*  ~>

HR*^.-i-3r

3T

rjw»  ,

a»9».3i»  >_a»3a».

>»

>»@>3l%&

i*

aemr»3'^m»

^SWtV^      y

1,-

w»a».'.-«S

JS»>T»'         '-

v>  •  jm  *

'(>-i»  >>

D»

„->.3Ji»

5C-4P

3bk>5  jG

V

>^a«!»_>  '

■ES^I

» *ss

«;  J    3

»  .:JM*

,    >   V  2

972

_■>?-.

*■*  ^r=?

III  III 'I  "

llllilllilhl

2    1378

>

j

P

!>>?»  3BP>'),')-i«

>"'■■>  DS"

™

15  x

>_>      •=

«■'-;- >-»^»»

>:>    >j

>>*►•*•  •■■*-«■*

Bk        ^\

^*»  ^f*

"^tgto

->m>'  >>jsa*

,»►

"»

■  *  J*

»  ~»

,  :~>   ^>>

"'J^""^'

fc>       >    iXV

'l^^     ^

»  >>  >»■

'— "^^fc*

-JC9       >V      'X>       >

>/3BJ

E&  ~3HE

»'■->->   :«->'  »

5*~~3B

lb  >"»'•'*>  ->

»'Ti

^    >  J».r   ?)   *

»3>~3

►jr>  ">  »  *>  i

rjfc     .        »  -_I

*~ -7^k

~^a^            i

>  xKmai

>»   >

'i^2Jg^  «  >>  j»

rk

>  >

>:>!!>,

3

£

.mm

-^  j  >      ^>  ,.,jQ

\?

mm

»■    39.    J

>  >>j    .»■  -

>»  g

^>>>
^»i

.      v      .     ■     >

^  >  .»>3>
'■€»  '•  5>  ■»,

»      T»  TE>  i  o  ton

1    )>^>

»

y   >    »

■   3
2  J>

')">    i»'»       )'  .(»»

*2-yyy.

>»  ^lJSV     \j

ia>-)»""B;      >.-.^7

»5>.

)  ">     >"  -TBS®

a?;-^

V

2>">   i  »

5  >L>.i

j

!G>

-JO

«€>>  -  >a

^
^

>^SP»3^»y

>  >  ■■>>  -\_

•fit's

m

:     >

I
-9)>     ^

Sfcji

3u*J3!

>3X»T»   >

>>  xsm

TEE).

>     »  3X-.

%16r

"»>:.    y>      >     ■   f
j»  >>  ^   >       •>

~»>  >;>  >i»         »  •  ■

