SOURCE: https://archive.org/download/sim_missionary-herald_1834-10_30_10/sim_missionary-herald_1834-10_30_10_djvu.txt



THE

MISSIONARY HERALD,

VOL Xxx.

OCTOBER, 1834. No. 10.
—— — —
Biography.

BRIEF MEMOIR OF THE EVANGELIST, LEANG AFA.

Tue following account of the Chinese convert, whose name has often been
mentioned in the pages of this work,'was composed. and forwarded by Mr.

Bridgman.

There is no very clear evidence that
the gospel of God, in its .purity, and be-
fore the present era, was ever published
to the Chinese; and, excepting a few
thousand who have been baptised into ))
the Romish faith, there are not probably, ||
among the three hundred and fifty mil-
lions of this empire, more than twenty |
souls who are ready to avouch the Lord ||
Jehovah to be their God and Jesus Christ
to be their Savior. Even the name of |
Jesus is an offence to this people; and
among every description of persons, from ||
the monarch to the beggar, there is an)
apathy in regard to spiritual things, 2)|
self-complacency towards themselves ||
and whatever is their own, a contempt of
strangers, and a hatred of foreign creeds, |
which render the Chinese proof against |
every thing but the force of divine truth. '
That can subdue them; and those who!
have felt its power know assuredly that ||
to Jesus every knee shall bow and every
tongue confess. This truth, attested by
many infallible witnesses, is made sure
by the blood of an eternal covenant.

he following brief notice of a Chinese
evangelist affurds a beautiful illustration
of the force of divine truth, and will
encourage disciples of Christ to come up
to the help of the Lord against the
mighty.

eane Kune-Fra, who is known to the
churches by the name of Ara or LEanc-
AFA, is now in the forty-seventh year of
his age. His native place is in the pro-
vince of Kwang-tung, about seventy
miles distant trom Canton, He was born

VOL. XXX.

The narrative is brought down to the first of March last.

of poor parents, and until he was eleven
years old, they were unable to provide
for him ay means of education. Most
boys in China, perhaps nine tenths, are
taught to read and write; yet a large
majority of them do not commence their
studies until they are seven, eight, or
nine years old; while not a few, like Afa,
spend the first ten years of their lives in
idleness and vain sports. At the of
eleven, Afa entered the village ockedi,
and continued there three years; duri

that time he studied the Szl-shoo (or
Jourbooks), the Skoo-king, the Yih-king,
the Le-ke, and the Shing-yu-kau. These
text books, which contain the rudiments
of the Chinese ethics, science, and polit-
ical economy, he committed thoroughly
to memory, so that he could repeat word
for word. This task many lads accom-
plish; and then their education is com-
pleted, unless they are destined to a
| literary course, with a view to become
| officers of state. But such was not the
| case with Afa; and though he desired to
|read many books, he the poverty of his
| parents prevented him from pursuing his
| studies, and compelled him to leave the
‘cottage of his father and mother and
seek employment abroad for a livelihood.
He now came to Canton for the first
time. Here, after having tried the busi-
ness of pencil-maker, he finally e d
in cutting or engraving blocks for print-
ing Chinese books. In this employment
he continued four years with a master
who took much pains to instruct him in
the art. Ile then changed his place of

45

ow

residence; and after a few months, left
Canton for a neighboring village. While
there, and in the 22d year of his age, he
was called home to mourn the death of
his mother. But he soon returned again
to his work, which he continued to pur-
sue, sometimes in Canton and sometimes
in neighboring villages. Neither the |
death of his mother, nor any other occur- |
rence hitherto, had caused him to think |
seriously of his condition, cither in this!
life or the life to come. He lived, as all |
his countrymen are now living, with
scarcely a solitary exception, in a state
of most awful carelessness and stupidity.

In the kind providence of God he was}
at length to be brought into contact with
one who cared for his soul, and who,|
whenever there was opportunity, was|
faithful to warn and admonish him; and |

Memoir of the Evangelist, Leang Afa.

Ocr.

|for him to leave Canton. Accordingly,
in company with Le, who was to go with
Milne as teacher of the Chinese lan-
guage, he started for Malacca; but the ship
in which they were to embark had al-
ready sailed; they tarried therefore about
two months with Milne in the house
of Dr. Morrison. During that time Dr.
Milne took frequent opportunities to con-
verse with him, and importuned him to
read the holy Scriptures and to worship
the living God. “I was surprised,” says
he, “and thought it exceedingly strange
that he should wish me to do this; and I
was much displeased; there was no other
way, however, but to comply with his
wishes.”

About the middle of April, 1815, he
embarked with Dr. Milne for Malacca.
After a voyage of thirty-five days they all

after he was converted, to instruct, en-|| reached Malacca in safety. As soon as
courage, and strengthen him. Dr. Milne | Afa went on shore he was surrounded
arrived in China July 4, 1813; the next||by many of his countrymen; but they
ear, after having visited Java, he and || were all from the province of Fuh-keen,
. Morrison resolved on commencing a,| whose dialect he was unable to under-
mission at Malacca. The publication of ||stand. Seeing himself in such a condi-
books was a principal consideration || tion, he felt that he was a worthless be-
which lead to this undertaking, and was |ing; “I had a mouth,” said he, “but I
to form one of its chief objects—an ob- '| could not speak; I had ears, but I could
ject of great importance, which has been, || not hear; my grief was extreme.”
and must continually be, kept constantly 1 During the first twelve months which
in view. Thus, while he knew it not,||he spent at Malacca, he lived in the
the way was prepared to bring Afa to a||house of Dr. Milne. His feelings at the
knowledge of the truth, and train him for) close of that time he has described in
future usefulness. He had for several | the following words. “Having opportu-
ears been engaged in printing, and had || nity of being alone, I reflected on the
me a good proof-reader. Such a) words and actions of the past year, and
man was wanted for the new mission.||was thoroughly convinced that I was a
When Dr. Milne sought for a printer, Afa || sinner, but knew not how to obtain the
was recommended to his attention; and || pardon of my transgressions. I thought
having exhibited satisfactory proof of his || thus in my heart; “Now I have come to
skill and workmanship, was engaged to|| this foreign country, and do not under-
proceed to Malacca. || stand the language of its inhabitants; [
It was at this time that he first began | have now no useless friends with whom
to think of his condition as a moral and I may associate, I need not fear that
accountable being. While sitting alone,'| others will lead me away to evil and
waiting for the time of embarking, he | wicked practices; now, I may repent and
thus thought with himself—“I am now || put away my wicked heart, and become
twenty-seven years old; from the age of ||a good man. Accordingly, on the first
nineteen, when I had learned my trade, |and fifteenth of every moon, at four

: to the present time, I have had no fixed | o’clock in the morning, I burned incense,

‘* residence, have associated only with | and knelt down at the door of my room

worthless friends and companions, and | and recited long prayers to the goddess
all the money which I have earned has) of mercy; then again I knelt down and
been wasted by intemperance and gam-| prayed to Boodha and to the other gods
bling. I have not done the least thing || and goddesses, that they would prctect
that is good, and how can I be esteemed |me and give me peace and great pros-
a human being? Now that I am about) perity. But though externally, I thus
to go to Malacca, why not renounce my || worshipped gods of every description,
worthless friends; and when I shall have still evil and wicked thoughts were con-
arrived at that place, cease to follow my | tinually cherished in my feat, and false
former wicked practices and become a/ and deceitful words were not removed
good man?” While his mind was occu- || from my lips. Dr. Milne, in the mean
pied with these thoughts, the time came'' time, was constant in maintaining family

= ie eS 6S Or oe

aay eS aS SS SS BS F FG

Sel ee ee)

Ba iwe@ owe ww TF OP ee ee eee SS OP Oe el Ne Ne Oe

oS = be WY Ff

i

1834.

prayer, with the reading of the Scriptures,
every night and morning, and also pub-
lic worship every Sabbath day: but though
I read the words of the Bible, and heard
him explain their meaning, yet I did not
understand the sense of the one, or com-
prehend the reasoning of the other.
Though I yielded in some measure to
the wishes of Dr. Milne, yet I disliked
exceedingly to read the Bible and wor-
ship God; and as I saw that he used no
gilt paper, incense, candles, or images, I
could not comprehend what kind of deity
he worshipped, and therefore I did not
wish to join with him.”

After dwelling a year under the same
roof with Dr. Milne, he removed to
another house that had been provided
for him; yet he did not get free, as he
wished to do, from the solicitation and
admonition of his employer and instruc-
tor; “for,” to use his own words, “Dr.
Milne still insisted upon it that all the
members of his household should assem-
ble morning and evening to read the
Bible and worship God; and though I
daily heard him speak of the death of
Jesus, and the atonement which he had
made for the sins of the world, his words
only reached my ear, they did not touch
my heart; my thoughts were occupied
with other things. Sometimes I would
meditate on the doctrines of the Bible,
but I could not understand them; again
I would listen carefully to Dr. Milne’s
expositions of Christianity, but I was
unable clearly to comprehend the sub-
ject; my heart rose in opposition against
the new religion, and | wished ito hear
nothing more about it.” The enmity of
his heart at this time was very great, and
induced him, when among his compan-
ions, to rail at both Dr. Milne and the
doctrines which he inculcated.

While he was in this unhappy and
troubled state of mind, a priest of Bood-
ha, from one of the western provinces of
China, came to Malacca, and took up his
residence in a temple near where Afa
lived, and began immediately to call on
the inhabitants of the place to contribute
of their money to repair and furnish the
temple. “He frequently came to my
house,” says Afa, “and sat down and
conversed about the regulations and
customs of the Boodhists. I asked him
what advantage will it be to a man to
embrace his religion? He replied, ‘The
doctrines and the practice of the Bood-
hists are supremely important! If an in-
dividual abandons the world, joins the
sect, and serves Boodha, he will not only
obtain the forgiveness of his own sins, but
those of his whole family will be blotted

|

Memoir of the Evangelist, Leang Afa, 355

out! In what way, I inquire, can the
pardon of his sins be obtained? He re-
plied, ‘We daily, morning and evening,
repeat the sacred books, and grandfather
Boodha is pleased and looks down from
the western heavens and forgives the
sins of the man and his family; and if he
will contribute money to the support of it
and its inmates, the priests will recite
prayers for him, and after death he will
return again into this world to be born of
rich and honorable parents and will not
sink into the miseries of hell!’ When
I heard the priest affirm that in this
way all sins could be forgiven, I joyfully
believed his words, and desired to learn
the doctrines of the sect. I inquired of
the priest, therefore, if it would be meri-
torious in me to burn incense and recite
prayers to Boodha? ‘It would be in the
highest degree meritorious,’ he replied,
‘thus to know and trust the god.’

The priest then gave him a book and
directed him to peruse it in retirement,
assuring him, that if he read a single .
he would reduce a little the sins of his
former state (of being in this worid); but
that if he would recite one thousand mil-
lion pages, or an equivalent in repetition,
then all the sins of his former state
would be cancelled, all suffering in the
mg state fe prevented; and in his
uture state, after being born again into
this world, he oud a away into the
western heavens to enjoy supreme de-
light for ages. Upon this representation
he took the book and followed assiduous-
ly the advice of the priest. Having per-
sisted in this course for several tens of
evenings, and while sitting alone one
night he thus meditated: “From my
nineteenth to the present, the twenty-
eighth year of my age, all my thoughts,
words, and actions have been evil; and
now I am sitting here alone reciting
prayers to Boodha, and am not attempt-
ing one good or one meritorious action;
how then can I obtain pardon of my
sins?” He now began seriously to fear
the consequences of his former evil prac-
tices; he doubted the utility of his pre-
sent course; he desisted from the recita-
tion of his sacred books; and desired no
longer to sit with the priest and converse
about the doctrine of Boodha.

He now for the first time was ——
to listen to the preaching of the gospel.
Whenever he had opportunity he seized
his Bible and read it with interest, and
noticed particularly those passages which
were levelled most directly against his
own evil and wicked practices, lying,
deception, and against the worshipping
of idols and false gods. Thus he began

to understand the meaning of the holy ;;
Scriptures, and to see and feel the ex-||
tent and force of their requirements. ||
The death and sufferings of Jesus deeply |
affected his mind. ‘The Bible, which he |
now knew was true, carried conviction ||
to his heart, and he began to understand ||
something of the way in which sins could
be forgiven. He found delight in hal-
lowing the Sabbath day, and in joining
in the worship of the most high God, and
in reading and studying his holy word.)
When he found difficult passages, which
he could not understand, he used to go
with them to Dr. Milne, who, not less in
accordance with the prompting of his
own heart, than with the new desires of |
Afa, discoursed fully to him concerning |
the character of the living and true God
——the Father, the Son, and the Holy)
Ghost,—the immortality of the soul, and
the doctrine of eternal rewards and pun- |
ishment. As his knowledge increased, |
he becarie more and more thoroughly |
convinced of being a sinner, and sought ||
more and more earnestly to know the ||
way of salvation and redemption by Jesus ||
Christ. He saw now, and felt, that there ||
was no hope for him, except in and||
through the merits of the Savior, in|
whom he desired to put all his confi- ||
dence, and to receive, as a sign of tiis|
faith, the seal of baptism.
This forms a most important point in ||
his history: he was now called on to)
come out from the world, to abandon ||
entirely and forever his former favorite |,
“evil and wicked practices and worthless ||
friends,” and in the most solemn manner |
to renounce the religion and faith of his)
ancestors and the gods of his country, |
and to avouch the Lord Jehovah, one ||
God, to be his only Savior. He counted |
well the cost, and came deliberately to)
the determination to take up the cross |
and follow Christ. “At twelve o’clock
this day,” Sabbath, November 3d, 1816, |
says Dr. Milne, “I baptised, in the name ||
of the adorable Trinity, Leang-Kung-ta. |
The service was performed privately, in)
a room of the mission-house. Care has |
been taken, by private conversation, in- ||
struction, and prayer, to prepare him for||

Memoir of the Evangelist, Leang Afa.

Ocr.

composed and given to him to read and
meditate upon. At baptism, the follow-
ing questions were proposed to him, to
which he answered as below. Ist. Have
you truly turned from idols, to worship
and serve the living and true God, the
creator of heaven and earth, and all
things? “This is my heart’s desire.”
2d. Do you know and feel that you are
a sinful creature, totally unable to save
yourself? “I know it.” 3d. Do you
really, from your heart, believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, the Savior of
the world, and do you trust in him alone
for salvation? “This is my heart’s de-
sire.” 4th. Do you expect any worldly
advantage, profit, or gains whatever, by
your becoming a Christian? “None; [
receive baptism because it is my duty.”
5th. Do you resolve from this day till the
day of your death, to live in obedience
to all the commandments and ordinances
of God, and in justice and righteousness
of life before tuen? “This is my determi-
nation, but I fear ny strength is not
equal to it.” “On my part,” continued Dr.
Milne, “the ordinance was dispensed with
mingled affections of joy, hope, and fear.
May he be made faithful unto death; and
as he is the first fruits of this branch of
the mission, may an abundant harvest
follow to the joy of the church and the
honor of Christ.”

After continuing in Malacca four years,
Afa returned to China to visit his family
and friends; and when he saw them
wholly given to idolatry, his heart was
moved to pity. He earnestly desired
their conversion and their salvation; and
with a view to effect this purpose, he pre-
pared a little tract, in which he embodied
a few of the clearest and most important
portions of Scripture respecting idolatry, _
the need of repentance and faith in
Christ, ete.; and having submitted the
manuscript to Dr. Morrison, he engraved
the blocks and printed two hundred copies,
intending to circulate them among his
acquaintances. But unexpectedly the
police-men, having been informed of
what he was doing, seized him and his
books and blocks, and carried them all
away to the public courts; the books and

this sacred ordinance. This liad been) blocks they destroyed, and Afa they shut
continued for a considerable time; and || up in prison. In that situation he began
finding him still steadfast in his wish to) to review his past conduct and the course
become a Christian, I baptised him. The || he was attempting to pursue, in order to
change produced in his sentiments and || promulgate the doctrine of Christ among
conduct is, I hope, the effect of Christian | his countrymen. Though he was con-
truth, and of that alone; yet who of mor- || scious of having done right in preparing
tals can know the heart? Several search- || his “little book,” yet at the same time he
ing questions were proposed to him in| was thoroughly convinced that it was on
private; and an exercise suited to the || account of his sins that he was called to
case of a heathen candidate for baptism, |! suffer persecution, and he viewed his im-

Ve Wis

mae VeeegrRewTwns vy wer" u-”””-~ ”""”

1834. Memoir of the Evangelist, Leang Afa. 357

prisonment as a just chastisement inflict-
ed by his heavenly Father, to whom he
earnestly prayed for the pardon of his sins.

He had been only a few days in
prison, when Dr. Morrison heard of it,
and immediately interceded with influ-
ential native merchants that they would
endeavor to arrange with the officers of
—- and procure his release.

his, however, was not done, until, by the
order of the magistrate, he had received
thirty blows with the large bamboo.
This instrument of punishment is five
and a half feet long, about two inches
broad, and one inch and a quarter thick;
and so severely applied in the case of
Afa, as to cause the blood to flow down
from both of his legs. After they had
thus beaten him and received a consider-
able sum of money, about seventy dol-
lars, they set him at liberty.

The effect of this imprisonment and
beating, which took place in Canton,
was to make him more humble and more
devoted to the cause of Christ. Soon
after he was released from prison, he
went to visit his family in the country,
where he spent forty days. He then re-
turned to Malacca, continued there for a
year, and then came again to China to
visit his family. He was especially in-
terested in the spiritual welfare of his
wife, and was er anxious for
her conversion; he read to her the Scrip-
tures; prayed with and for her; and at
length, by his instrumentality, she was
brought to believe in Jesus, and was
baptised by her husband. “From that
time,” says Afa, “we have been of one
heart and one mind in worshipping and
serving the one only a and true God,
the ruler and governor of the universe,
and in endeavoring to turn those around
us from the service of dumb idols.”

He became anxious also for the con-
version of his countrymen, and desired to
make them acquainted with that gospel
which he had found so precious to his
own soul. To prepare himself in some
measure to effect that object, he went

ain, with the consent of his wife, to

alacca, where he was received and
cherished as a brother by that man of
God who had brought him into the fold
of Christ. He resolved now to apply
himself with new assiduity to his work,
and especially to the study of the Bible
under the direction of Dr. Milne. But
alas, before one year had ed away,
he was bereaved of that endeared friend
and brother. Dr. Milne died in 1822.

Having no one at Malacca on whom he

could depend, Afa returned once more
to his family, all the members of which
VOL. XXX.

he found in health: their number had
been increased by the birth of a son; the
heart of the father was greatly rejoiced
at this happy event, and “he bowed down
and gave God thanks for his great favor.”
When the lad was about twe years old
he carried him to the house of Dr. Mor-
rison, where in the ordinance of Chris-
tian baptism, he consecrated him to the
Lord, with the hope that “he might grow
up and become a virtuous man, pad
ly acquainted with the holy Scriptures,
and able to preach the gospel to his
countrymen. “Leang Tsin-tih, for that
is the name of the lad, is now twelve
years old; he reads the Scriptures both
in his own and in the English language,
and has made some proficiency in
study of Hebrew. The father’s interest
in the boy has always been very great;
and it is his earnest and daily prayer,
and he intercedes with others that they
would pray for him also, that the child
may live and become a preacher of
righteousness, and turn the hearts of
many unto the Lord.

Still farther to qualify himself to
preach the gospel, Afa continued his
studies with Dr. Morrison for about two
or three years, who then, having suffi-
cient evidence of his qualifications for
an evangelist, “laid hands on me and
ordained me to go and publish to men
every where the true gospel.” From that
to the present time, about ten years, he
has continued steadfast in the faith and
the labors of the gospel; and has em-
ployed his whole time in making and cir-
culating Christian books, and in pro-
claiming the word in other ways as he
has found opportunity. His aged father
still lives, but loves rot the truth. He has
a little daughter, six years of age, who
has been given to the Lord in Tastee.
His friend, Le, who went with him to
Malacca and continued there till Dr.
Milne’s death, lives to this day without
hope and without God in the world.
Among his kindred and friends, for a long
time, none but his wife believed; but re-
cently more than ten souls have professed
their faith in Jesus; and there are others,
who inquire what they shall do to be
saved. His labors, his faith, and his zeal
increase as he goes forward with his
work. During the last five months he has
distributed in the city of Canton and ad-
jacent villages more than 15,000 tracts,
most of them py by portions of
Scripture. And now, “like holy Paul, it is
his heart’s desire and prayer to God, that
the seed may take root, spring up, and

bring forth much fruit unto everlasting
life.’
46

358 Ceylon:—Journal of Gabriel Tissera. Oct.

Ceylon.

EXTRACTS FROM THE JOURNAL OF GA-
BRIEL TISSERA, A NATIVE PREACHER,

Tue writer of the following journal! was one
of the first fruits of the Amcrican mission in
Ceylon, and became early connected with the
station at Batticotta as a native teacher, and
was one of the first two who were licensed to
preach the gospel, about twelve years ago.
Since that time he has been zealously engaged
in efforts for the instruction and religious im-
provement of his benighted countrymen; ex-
cept during an interval of a year or two, when
his labors were suspended on account of im-
paired health. He is familiarly acquainted
with the English language, in which he writes
his journal.—In the first paragraphs he gives
a minute account of two of the most valuable
kinds of trees found in Ceylon; together with
their various uses, and the practices connected
with them.

The Palmyra Tree.

January 15, 1832.—As I have men-
tioned the palmyra tree, it may not be
unacceptable to make some remarks
about this and about the cocoa-nut tree,
neither of which I believe is in the
United States. The palmyra tree is of
various heights, from ten to eighteen
yards; and, though rarely, palmyras
twenty yards long a | be met with. It
has no branches. The leaves, flower,
and fruit come out on the top. The
leaves are long and divided into man
single leaves, each of which has a ri
running along the middle. The stems
of these leaves are nearly two yards
long, and indented with sharp notches.
The bottom of the tree is between a half a

ard and a yard in diameter. The tree is
black. The leaves are of a light green,
and, when cut and dried, turn into a
whitish color. These leaves serve to
write on, and are much more durable
than r. heb em is done with an
iron stilam, with which every letter is

ved. The quickest writer on ola
(for so these leaves are called) writes
nearly with as much rapidity as the
quickest writer on paper. The leaf is
not laid on a table, but held between the
thumb and the fingers of the left hand,

American Board of Commisstoners for foreign Missions.

The timber is very useful for rafters and
laths; it is not sawn, but split and hewn.
The fruit is between five and seven
inches in diameter, not quite round, but
rather spheroidical or oblate. It is of a
shining black, and of a very pleasant
smell. When ripe, it is sweet and nour-
ishing. It is ready for eating after being
baked or roasted in the fire. It is cover-
ed with a thin, fibrous, black peel, and is
full of fibres and a yellow thick sub-
stance or juice. There are generally
three stones, though, in some, there are
two, and in others there is only one.
The stones are large, nearly of an oval
shape, being nearly one third of the size
of the fruit. When the fruit is young,
these stones are full of a sweet jelly,
which is much loved by the natives.
These stones are put in a heap, and
earth is thrown over them, where, in the
course of about six months, they shoot
out a root, which, if left to grow, will
produce a tree, but which is dug out and
used as an esculent. It is neither boiled
or roasted. It is very commonly dried,
and beaten into flour; and a porridge and
another kind of food, called b e na-
tives pilloo, are made of it. The leaves
also serve to cover the roofs of houses
with; mats and baskets are also made of
them, which are handsome and very use-
ful. Among many other purposes, they
serve as buckets to draw water with.
Toddy is drawn from the flower, in which
case, there will be no fruit from that
flower, which is shaved twice every day
that toddy might ooze out. This is a
wholesome and pleasant drink when
fresh and drank in a moderate quantity;
but, when it has fermented, and is drank
excessively, it is of an intoxicating na-
ture. The immature and young fruits,
when cut into pieces, are food for cattle.
The pith of the palmyra is very sweet,
and eaten by the people;—it is also
pickled. Molasses is made of the toddy.
When the molasses is poured into little
baskets and hardened, these lumps are
called by Europeans in India jagree.
Men of the two low castes, called
Nalavas and Pallas, are those who climb
tp a palmyra or cocoa-nut tree to cut
fruit and leaves, or to draw toddy. The
Chandas are the caste which do this
business on the Coromandel and Malabar
coasts. In this district, also, some indi-
viduals of this coast climb these trees.
In the south of the island, it is the Cinga-

oe

se ae re

eee

1884. Ceylon:—Journal of Gabriel Tissera. 359

lese Chandas that climb cocoa-nut trees
in order to draw toddy.—They put a
string or withe around their feet, in the
form of a circle, which facilitates their
climbing. Those who climb palmyra
trees in this district, have a piece of
leather hung over their breast, to keep it
from being rubbed against the sharp
places on the side of the trees. It isa
shame for a man of high cast to climb a
palmyra tree; so they never do it, or
very seldom, and that in the neighboring
isles, or in remote parts of the district.
The high castes are generally ignorant
of the art of climbing this tree.

A very useful food is made of the pal-
myra fruit. It is called poojah. It is
the fruit mixed with water, and squeezed
in a basket, and the liquid part spread on
a large mat; which process is repeated
for about twenty days, when the thick
liquor thus obtained becomes a stratum
of a thick hard gruel, the thickness of
which is about a half an inch. It is
sweet and nourishing, and of a reddish
hue. It is then cut into pieces about
nine inches by six, doubled, and kept for
use. An ola bag containing two hun-
dred of these pieces is sold for nearly a
dollar. In times of scarcity, it is sold
for five rix dollars, equal to one Spanish
dollar sixty-six cents and two thirds.

The stems of the leaves are used for
various purposes. There is a peel on
these stems, which is stripped off and
used for strings. Much fuel is obtained
from the palmyra. Two hundred palmy-
ras will support a family consisting of a
man, wife, and children, all the year
round, both by the productions of these
trees, and the sale of the productions.
When the abovesaid esculent root comes
out of the stones, these stones or seeds
are burnt, and the charcoal thus obtained
is better than any other, and is the only
charcoal used by blacksmiths in Jaffna.
There is a sweet substance within these
stones, which is taken away and eaten
before they are burned.—There are male
and femaie palmyra trees, as they are
called. The above account chiefly re-
lates to the female palmyra. The male
tree has flowers, but no fruit. The toddy
and molasses of male palmyras are rather
preferred. The timber of the male, gen-
erally, is not so good as that of the fe-
male tree. A female palmyra is sold
from thirty-three and a half cents to one
dollar, whereas a male palmyra tree is
generally sold from one and a half to

become old, and are taken down from
the roofs, they are buried in the rice

fields, as one of the best manures.
Green leaves are also good for this pur-
pose.

I have now mentioned almost all the
uses of the palmyra’ tree. Palm

oves, interspersed with rice fields,
orm the principal scenery of Jaffna.
The fields are green with rice nearly
half the year. In Jaffna there is but one
harvest of rice in a year. After the har-
vest, the fields appear like a parched
desert, except detached spots watered
and cultivated by the husbandman, and
planted not with rice, but with other
—— The time for the growth of

dy, (the word used by Europeans in

India for rice with tie husks,) is the
rainy seasons, which generally commence
at the end of August, and last to the be-
— of January, when the country,
eing flat, is generally overflowed. But
in the rainy seasons there are intervals
of fair weather and sunny days. It is
the time of year when grass and all trees
grow ye sgperene and the thirst of the
ground is quenched.

Cocoa-nut Tree.

Having ee an account of the pal-
myra tree, I wish to give some account
of the cocoa-nut tree. The cocoa-nut
tree is rather similar to the pa'myra.
The timber when strong is used for
rafters, levers to draw water from wells,
etc., but it is not so durable as the pal-
myra timber. The leaves are much lon-
ger than those of the palmyra. These
leaves are braided and used to cover
houses with. They are not used to
write upon, not being so tough, thick,
and strong, as the palmyra leaves. The
stem of the leaves islonger. The braid-
ed leaves of the cocoa-nut are also used
to cover hedges; so is the palmyra leaf
also; but this cannot and needs not be
braided. When dry, the leaves of the
cocoa-nut tree are tied into what are
called chools or torches, which burn
without any oil. The integuments of
the flowers, when dry, are chiefly used
for this purpose. The cocoa-nut is gen-
erally of a green color, commonly larger
than a palmyra fruit. It is covered with
a fibrous and thick husk, and has a shell
containing the kernel and water. The
water is very cool, sweet, and refreshing;
and the kernel, when young, is eaten,
being like thick milk, but much ‘more

‘savory and nourishing. When the co-
three cents. When the palmyra leaves |

|coa-nut is ripe, the kernel is scraped
with a certain tool, and its milk is
squeezed out to be used in “curry,” a

kind of food of the natives. This milk is |
eaten by the natives with their rice. In
some ripe cocoa-nuts, a white spongy |
substance grows, which is the germ of a!
future tree. ty ep is ———
ingly sweet and delicate, and is greatly |
at by the people. Excellent oil Z|
made of the kernel of the cocoa-nut. |
This is the best for lamps, and is also |
used to fry various eatables. frrack, a
spiritous liquor, is distilled from the |
toddy of the cocoa-nut tree. An im-|
mense quantity of arrack is exported |
from this island, especially from the |
southern parts; and a vast deal is con-|
sumed on the island. Though much of)
this is used immoderately, and, morally |
aking, this is not a great good, yet |
ere is a medical and proper use at |
can be made of it; and it is a great arti-|
cle of commerce. Cargoes of cocoa-nuts |
are often carried and sold by native |
coasting vessels. Molasses, called ja-|
gree, is "made of the toddy, which is
sweeter than the palmyra jagree. The
flowers of the cocoa-nut are of a yellow- |
ish white, and very handsome. They,
consist of something like whips tied to- |
gether. Wedding houses in the south)
of the island are adorned with young)
cocoa-nut leaves and its flowers. ‘There
is a species of cocoa-nut trees, the fruit,
leaves, and flowers of which, are of a!
beautiful red. The fruits and flowers’
are particularly beautiful. Cocoa-nuts
are used in heathen ceremonies, whereas
palmyra fruits are never. The cocoa-nut
shells serve for cups and bottles, and are
a valuable fuel. There is a rind about
the top of the cocoa-nut tree, that is|
woven like coarse canvass, Thisis used
for filtering and for fuel. Perhaps more
fuel is obtained from the cocoa-nut than |
from the palmyra tree. Also vinegar is!
made with toddy of the .cocoa-nut tree.
I believe no spirit can be distilled from
the palmyra toddy, nor can any oil be
obtained from it. In these two articles
and its water, the cocoa-nut excels the
palmyra. A valuable string is made
with the fibres of the cocoa-nut husks,
The pith of this tree is sweeter than that
of the palmyra, and is used for the same
purpose as the latter. The kernel of the
cocoa-nut, and consequently the milk or
juice squeezed out of it, are perfectly
white. The top part of the young cocoa-
nut is also a-very delicious food. In
Jaffna there are not so many cocoa-nut
trees as there are palmyras; but they are
chiefly cultivated in the south of the
island, There are other palm trees, as
the kittool, in the south part of the

Ceylon:—Journal of Gabriel Tissera.

Ocr.

island, the arika-nut, or butternut tree,
the plantain, the date tree, and the v
remarkable talipot tree, the last of whic
is peculiar to the south and interior of
the island. And there is the cinnamon
tree, besides innumerable other species.
The cinnamon is also uliar to the
south and the interior. But the limits of
the journal preclude an account of any
of these.

Native Superstitions respecting Diseases.

Feb. 14. There is much noise to-night
in a temple near. When a person is
sick, his relations send for the pariars,
people of one of the low castes, almost
the lowest caste, whose business it is to
beat drums. When they are called in
case of sickness, the pariars beat their
drums in a place where several roads
meet, or in an open place, thereby in-
tending to appease the wrath of the de-
mons or devils which inflicted the dis-
ease, as the heathens think. The rela-
tions of the sick person provide fruits,
boiled rice, money, etc., which they move
round and round his head. They then
carry away these fruits, etc., and place
them on the spot where the pariars beat
the drums, whence they are taken away
by the pariars themselves. It is thought,
that the fruits, etc., thus moved around
the head of the sick person and carried
away, will remove the influence of any
evil spirit on him, and consequently heal
the disease. In all the festivals of the
heathen, which are celebrated in their
temple, drums are beaten, trumpets
blown, and several other kinds of music
used. This noise reminds me that we
are among a heathen people.

March 4. Sabbath. This afternoon,
visited the people in a neighboring vil-
lage, and distributed a few tracts. A
woman was sick with a consumption,
with which she had been afflicted about
four years. She was nigh unto death,
when I saw her. I spoke to her a few
words of exhortation, with regard to her
preparation for death. She died the
next day. There came a man, called a
god. He cavilled much, speaking to
this effect, “You have nothing more than
we; you have not seen God; you are not
ina good way; but you are intolerant,
speak with much earnestness, and affirm
that our system is false.” He spoke
muc!, in this strain. What I could sa
as an answer, did not seem to have muc
influence on him. I then read a tract,
the life of the well known Krishnu, a
convert of the Baptist mission at Cal-

1834.

cutta, translated into Tamul. A brahmin
who stood near endeavored much by
loud talk to interrupt me. But I —
ued to read to the tambyran, (whic
means god), as he is called, to the brah-
min, and to the others who stood near,
and made a few remarks on what had
been read.

April 6. Sabbath. Visited a near vil-
lage, spoke to a few persons who had
assembled there, and distributed a few
tracts. The brahmin who keeps a school
cavilled at what I said. They laid much
stress on a miracle, which is said to have
lately taken place. One present said,
that he had seen the man the day before,
and that the tongue, out of which a large
had been cut, was wn almost
ike any other man’s, and that the man,
being cured of the disease which he had
had in the stomach, was growing stouter
than ever. The people believed that the
disease was cured by the interposition of
the god Skandaswamy, on account of the
patient cutting off his tongue. This dis-
ease referred to is generally considered
incurable. If they wish to have some
such disease cured, they travel to tem-
ples in famous and distant places, and
sometimes there cut off their tongues,
which they expect to grow again, as well
as the disease to be cured, by the power
of the god worshipped in that temple.
Sometime after this, I met a man who
had cut off the forepart of his tongue at
the Nellore temple, and among other
questions, I asked the man, “What good
was it to have cut a part of a member of
his body?” A mendicant who accom-
panied him, answered, “It was done in
order to express the worshipper’s love and
zeal to his god.” They frequently rest
the truth of their system on these mira-
cles.

May 24. Attended the formation of
the Native Missionary Socicty at Oodoo-
ville. It is composed of the native con-
verts in the mission. Some of the mis-
sionaries also render some assistance by
their subscriptions. Its funds will be
rather small. The object is to establish
and support some native assistant mis-
sionaries in populous villages which are
destitute of the gospel ministry. But by
the operation of this society, only one
or two such villages can be supplied,
while there are a vast many such in the
district.

. 10.. Lately there have been two
Roman Catholic festivals, at two places,
one called Kylaly, and the other Poo-
thoomadam, each a good number of miles
distant from the town, though they are

Ceylcn:—Journal of Gabriel Tissera.

in the district of Jaffna. The latter is an
island surrounded by the roaring sea.
The Catholics _— considerable money
in order to travel to the place where the
believe diseases are miraculously heal
and other miracles performed. They,
like the heathens, make vows, saying,
that if the saint would cure them of suc
and such diseases, or relieve them of
such a calamity, or confer on them such
a temporal favor, they would make such
offerings, which vows they punctually
observe, if the prayer were —_= as
they believe it generally is. In making
these vows, they put a thread around the
pedestal of the image, which thread they
untie when they pay their vows. They
wash the feet of the image, and drink the
weter, as a cure for disease. They
measure the crucifix with a thread, and
tie the thread around the arm, as a pre-
servation against being attacked or being
frightened by devils. Some females,
according to the particular vow they
have made, wipe the feet of the image,
and sweep the inner part of the church
with the long hairof their head. This is
done rather in se of the account

iven in the gospel, of a woman’s wipi
at Savior’s fect with her hair. The
Roman Catholics do many other super-
stitious things, which it will be too tedious
to enumerate.

19. In the afternoon visited some
houses in a village called West and East
Batticotta. Last night seven or eight
persons, among whom were some brah-
mins, who officiated before the ; idol,
being drawn in the car with it, were
dangerously wounded by the explosion
of the fire-works in the Nellore temple,
where this is the time of the yearly fes-
tival. They expected some wonders that
night, having some notice of it given by
the god, as they pretended; and this
melancholy event is the only remarkable
thing that took place, instead of any su-
pernatural occurrence. One man walked
on spikes which were fastened upright
on wooden sandals or shoes, so as to
hurt the feet greatly. But whether the
man’s feet were injured, I do not know.
Hundreds, males and females, roll after
the car, especially on the last day. One
man pierced his cheek with a spike, and
let the spike so remain. This is called
by them shackling the mouth. It is to
remain so till the vow be performed.
Two have cut off their tongues this year.
I was told that one of them was going to
cut off his head, which he was prevented
from doing. These men were abl
afflicted with different diseases, which,

that the god might miraculously cure,
they hurt themselves in this manner, be-
ing actuated by enthusiam. They also
expect that the mutilated member would
row to its former shape by a miracle.
he man who cut off his tongue last
= is not cured of his disease, nor can
e speak well. Philip, a native preacher
under the Church missionaries, at Nel-
lore, pointed to this man, who stood near
him on the last day of the festival, when
Philip went to distribute tracts amon
the crowds at the temple. He pointed
to the man, and asked the hearers, what
had the man received from his fran-
tic zeal, the sa? cffects of which still re-
mained? The man stood speechless and
ashamed, as did the others. The brah-
mins of the temple endeavored rather to
dissuade the people from attempting any
such violence on themselves, as it turns
out to the disrepute of their temple. But
the people in the country, many of whom
know the above facts only by hearsay,
lay much stress on these miracles, as
they believe them to be. For they, with-
out giving themselves trouble to inquire
into the matter, take it for granted, that
every one who had thus wounded him-
self, was healed of his disease, and cured
of the wound; and that the mutilated
member was restored. They swallow
by mouthfuls, as the saying is. So that
when we go to preach, they allege these
pretended miracles, as proofs of their
religion. They shew that they are quite
willing to be deceived.

Conversation with a Brahin—Cholera.

31. The brahmin mentioned under
the last date came near the chapel, and
entered into conversation with me on re-
ligious subjects. He asked, as cavillers

ways do, “Where is hell?” I told him,
that it was a question with which we had
nothing to do. We know what hell is,
and what we ought to do to escape it.
He also asked, “Where is heaven?” And
he repeated in substance what is said in
the Revelation of St. John, respecting
heaven; as “The first foundation was
jasper; the second, sapphire;” etc. “And
the twelve gates were twelve pearls,”
etc. He understood this language liter-
ally, and thought that the Christians were
so ignorant a set of people, as to fancy
that heaven consisted of palpable and
gross substance. I intimated to him,
that they were figurative expressions,
and that, if he would read the Scriptures
with prayer and attention, he might know
their true meaning. He said that he,

Ceylon:—Journal of Gabriel Tissera.

Oct.

with some other brahmins, had read the
Old and New Testaments through, with
a view to know what was contained in
them, but not with prayer or faith. This
brahmin supported the astronomer, the
most learned brahmin of Batticotta, about
a year or more, that the latter might read
the Scriptures through; for they have
written several controversies with us, the
Christians, in which they have quoted
from the Christian Scriptures. They
have sent those treatises to the mission-
aries, who have answered one of them.
The rest they have not yet answered.
To return to the conversation with the
brahmin—He replies that it was not
mentioned in the Revelation of St. John,
that these expressions were figurative.
I answered, “No, and yet from the anal-
ogy of Scripture we know that they are
to be so understood.”

Nov. 11. Sabbath. Went out this
afternoon to speak to the people and dis-
tribute tracts, but I was detained by con-
versation with the pandavam, who, with
another man, called The Wise, are lately
returned from the Coromandel coast,
after a voyage and journey of pilgrimage.
The cholera prevails, and makes great
havoc here among the people. Several
of our neighbors and acquaintance have
died. Many families are almost extir-
pated in the district. But the people do
not lay it to heart; — do not look upon
it as a visitation from God; but attribute
it to the anger of a goddess. Some who
are taken with the cholera, are buried
probably before they are dead; for in
several instances, the patient shewed
- of life, after they had been suppos-
ed to be dead, and accordingly made
ready to be buried. They are so afraid,
that they do not give time to know
whether the patient is really dead, but
remove hin hastily. And in ordinary
cases, too, it is their custom to burn the
dead almost immediately. They burn in
common cases; but those who die of an
epidemic, they do not burn, but bury,
because they think that the goddess will
be displeased with the victims of her
wrath being honored with a burning.
When an epidemic prevails, the people
offer more sacrifices to the goddess, and
are more diligent in her service. In
such seasons, the pariars, the low caste
people who beat drums, make a noise
with their drums in the temple. I have
called it noise, but it is the regular and I[
may say musical playing on their drums.
We speak to the heathen; but they are
not turned from the error of their ways.
I mean the great body of them.

7 eae eS ae wer ll Dll

bl

«; We WO OW WwW = hw we SB eve we ee eS

appa?

1834. Ceylon:—Journal of Gabriel Tissera. 363

Fabulous Character of the Native My-
thology.

16. Finished translating my portion
of that part of an Essay on Natural Phi-
losophy, which had been appointed by
the king’s commissioners to be translated
into Tamul.

17. While conversing with a brahmin
I observed that he worshipped a hawk
which happened to fly near us. They
worship it, because in their mythology it
is the conveyance of Vishnoo. They
worship it with one hand. I mean they
raise only one hand in worshipping it.
I do not remember whether it is the
right hand or the left. The brahinin re-
peated the sanscrit which he pronounced
in worshipping the hawk. Being inter-

reted into English, it purports as fol-
ows, to wit: “I adore thee, O thou of red
color, and also of a white that resembles
the youthful moon! Thou king of birds,
and the conveyance of Vishnoo!” In
Tamul, also, one name of the hawk is,
“The king of birds.” Its wings are redish,
and the head is of a beautiful white. Its
hovering in a circular form, as it com-
monly does, is considered by the heathen
a good omen, At Colombo, the fisher-
men catch the hawks, which visit the
fishing boats to plunder the fish, and
carry them through the street, when the
sect of heathens called the Vishnooites
or Vishnooas, the worshippers of Vish-
noo, pay the fishermen, and have the
hawks released.

19. There is a singing class in the
seminary. I teach them sacred music,
being myself taught by Mr. Meigs. He
also sometimes teaches them. They
learn by rules, They make pretty good
singing in meetings. Several of the
singers have left us, they having left the
Seminary—after the usual course of
studies, and being appointed in various
employments, generally at a distance.
A few of the singers remain and are
making further progress; and others wish
to join the class.

Sabbath. In the aftera@, con-
ducted divine service in the - in
lieu of Mr. Meigs, who was anwell.

Kasy Kandum.

26. Most of this year my general
work on week-days has been the trans-
lating of a heathen book, entitled Kas
Kan or the history of Benares. It
is a part of the Scunda Poorana. That
is, its teaor 1 succinctly given in the
siid P.crua; but this Kasy Kandum is

more copious than the contained in
the Scanda Poorana, is in different verses,
and is considered a separate book. In
Bengal this book is read in Sanscrit, and
is probably interpreted to the people in
Bengalee. It is one of those books, the
— and hearing of which are con-
sidered meritorious, and which conse-
quently the people assemble every year
to hear. In Jaffna, this book is, of course,
in Tamul poetry. The people keep a
fast, during the season of which they
hear it read and interpreted, and they
avoid all animal food in their meals dur-
ing that season; for according to the
heathen system, it is sin to kill an ani-
mal; and there are many heathens in this
district who abstain from animal food all
their lives. They do not eat even an
egg. By reading this book, the heathens
expect great reward in the next state of
existence. They bathe before going to
hear the reading of Kasy Kandum, Scan-
da Poorana, or any other sacred book.
Kasy Kandum is divided into many
chapters, and contains on the whole
2,509 verses, of which I have translated
190 verses. I have to translate the rest.
I translate it into English. The number
of chapters or sections I have gone
through, is six. The first section is occu-
pied with praises to the gods. In the
second, the story opens with Narada, an
ascetic’s seeing a mountain named
Vindhya. At the sight of the ascetic,
the mountain assumed human shape,
went towards him, made him obeisance,
and after the ascetic told the mountain
that the golden mountain Meru had des-
pised this mountain, and spoken lightly
of it; when after the departure of the
ascetic, this mountain Vindhya, was so
exasperated, that it grew up to the
heavens, stopped the usual course of the
sun, and prevented him from _passi
Mount Meru to the right hand, as he ake
ways does when he sets. This change
in the course of the sun, rendered light
and darkness quite unequal, as to
length of their duration, and threw the
affairs of the universe into total disorder,
or completely put a stop to them. Con-
sequently the gods and others, bein,
greatly perplexed and troubled, penssted
to Brahma,.that he might reduce the
mountain, and relieve them. The gods
resorting to the world of Brahma is the
summary of the title of the third section.
Bralina instructs the gods in many
things, and he especially exalts the
cow—says, that it is an act of great merit
to worship her. He told them, moreover,
that he knew their object in coming te

him, but that they should apply to me
tia, an ascetic of great eminence, and the
father of Tamul philology, medicine, and
many other branches; and that the latter
would comply with their request, and
that nothing was too hard for Agastia.
The fourth section treats of the gods
arriving in the abode of Agastie. Much
is said of the excellence of Benares,
where Agastia dwelt, and that it was
better to be born even a fly in Benares,
than to be born princes in other places;
as those who were born in Benares,
never died, or they went to heaven if
they died. The Shiva himself is
said to have highly loved to reside in
Benares. The mf were rejoiced to
see Agastia; and they discovered the
footsteps of his virtaous wife, named
Oolopamoottrei, in the court of Agastia’s
abode, and worshipped these footsteps.
The excellence of this abode is painted
with various images, such as, that even
the storks or herons of that place do not
feed on the fish of the brook, as if they
knew the Vedas which prohibit killing
or eating animals; that the tiger does not
feed on flesh, as if he knew that it was
prohibited by the Vedas; that the tiger’s
whelps and the tender young one of the
kine play together, etc.

The heathen’s consider the luminaries
of heaven as intelligent beings; and in
their mythology various actions or events
are attributed to some of these lumina-
ries. Thus the planet Jupiter is the in-
structor of the gods, and he accompanied
them to Agastia in this their journey.
The word devas, or gods, in this account,
means the spiritual beings who inhabit
the upper world, and it does not include
Shiva, Vishnoo, or Brahma. The upper
world, or the region of those devas, is not
heaven, though it is far superior to the
earth: for heaven is still nobler than the
world of these inferior gods. Jupiter was
the speaker on this occasion; and he be-
gan to praise the virtues of Agastia’s
wife, in doing which he gave a treatise
on the fidelity of wives. So the fifth
section begins with the virtues of wives.
Here much is said on the merit of the
widow’s burning herself in the funeral
pile of her deceased husband; that it will
confer heavenly bliss on the soul of the
husband, as well as on that of the dying
widow. The gods made obeisance to
Agastia, who requested them to sit down,
and inquired the reason of their leaving
the upper world and coming to his cot-
tage; when their instructor Jupiter brief-
ly stated their calamity—that the moun-
tain Vindhya grew up high, etc. Agas-

Ceylon:—Journal of Gabriel ‘Tissera.

x Ocr.

tia told the gods that he would reduce
the mountain, and desired them to go
to their residence. ig! sixth section is
Agastia’s repairing indhya. A
Saute to his seite, and ienente the
necessity of leaving so excellent a place
as Benares, living where is a means of
etting to heaven. At last he makes up
is mind, and, after taking leave of the
deities of the place, inanimate as well as
animate, proceeds to the mountain Vind-
hya. On seeing him, the mountain was
afraid, grew small, and, going forward to
meet him, prostrated itself at his feet;
and he ordered it to remain in that low
posture, until he returned from his visit
to mount Podya to the south. This
mount Podya is in India near cape Co-
morin. Agastia has not returned to
Vindhya even to this day: he is to return
hereafter. Some say mount Vindhya is
at present under ground. When Agas-
tia passed by and went on his journey,
the mountain Vindhya rejoiced that he
had not pronounced a curse on it, as a
curse from him would have immediately
taken effect. Agastia, with his wife,
travels to the south, and enters the tem-
ple of Lukshmee, the goddess of riches,
and praises and worships her. The god-
dess replied, that, she was pleased with
his praises, that whoever should repeat
these praises, would obtain great plea-
sure and riches, and that even the book
in which these praises were written,
would be the cause of felicity to the
family which lives in the house wherein
that book is. The goddess said, moreo-
ver, that she knew the grief of Agastia—
his separation from nares was the
cause of his sorrow-—that it was so excel-
lent and meritorious a place, that it
would grieve any person whatever to be
separated from it, and yet that he would
return to that place in the twenty-ninth
age of the world. This age is not yet
come. An age of the world is about a
million years. Lukshmee advised Agas-
tia to proceed to the temple of Shandab-
wamy, the son of Shiva, who would in-
struct him in all the sciences, and also
inform him of the nature and history of
Benares. Agastia then, with his wife,
travels in quest of the said temple of
Skandaswamy.
This is a short account of what I have

ligious notions of the
last quarter of the year;
two hours in the school
this translation. .

to

of
.

'aoeowuoeOO1 a@20O

Seve it aevssu.e GV @

»~
~~

~~ “SS

wliethtet Ft ew eee ert wet tlt UC ae ltl

eo

werw it Ww Ww

184. Constantineple:—Letter from Mr. Goodell. 36

Offering to prevent or cure the Cholera.

Dec. 10. The epidemic cholera pre-
vails much in this village and in the vil-
lages near. A boy died of it in my
neighborhood, and two more are now
taken with it. The heathens generall
do not administer any medicine, althoug
the missionaries have it ready for them;
and, in most cases, they die, and that
rather suddenly. They are very much
afraid of the disease, and make an offer-
ing to the idol of their jewels, cattle, etc.
Each family, though poor, contributes a
palmyra tree to be sold, and the amount
of the sale to be spent for the temple.
They are thus nr temples; and
some leading men, or brahmins, take ad-
vantage of this season of distress, and
prevail on the people to give away those
things or money. They observe many
idolatrous rites, and in the temples and
in their houses offer various kinds of
worship to their dess, named Mool-
loo-mawry. She is supposed to be the
cause of epidemics. When one is taken
with the cholera, and either dies of it, or

ts well again, they make an ae of

ivers kinds of food to the goddess. This
they call a refreshment to her, or literally
“cooling the goddess.” In the town of
Jaffna, they plant plantain trees in front
of their houses, in times of epidemic, and
place cocoa-nuts near them, ready open-
ed for eating. This they intend as a re-

freshment to the goddess, when she
passes the streets with her retinue. The |
native doctors think that they should not |
interfere with the goddess, and so they |
leave the patient to perish.

18. This night the great sacrifice and |
ceremony are performed in the temple of,
the goddess Pattra-Kalee. About thirty |
sheep and fifty fowls are sacrificed. The,
noise of drums and other music and the |
crowds of people are great. The cere-
mony iasts ail “— In the morning, |
the victims are sold, and a part of the,
food which had been offered is carried to |
the salt river, or to the sea shore, where |
one or two sheep and a few fowls are
sacrificed, and the carcasses, with the |
said food, are put into a boat and carried
into the sea, when they are thrown away;
or, as some say, these things are carried
to the other side of the shallow sea of
Jaffna, and placed on the opposite shore.
Things that are thus thrown away are
carried away by the low caste people,
who feast on them; whereas the people
of the high caste are afraid to touch these
things, except those persons who actually
carry them on their shoulders to the sea-

VOL. XXX.

shore. A great part of the food offered
is eaten by the people at the temple,
The people are afraid to be out when
the things offered are carried to the sea-
shore, for they fear that the devils or
demi-gods, or the army or soldiers of the
goddess, as they call them, are scattered
about, at such a time. Two Mohamme-
dans are said to have this year met these
offerings, etc., in the way, as they were
carried to the sea-shore, and to have im-
mediately died of the cholera. This was
at the sacrifice in the temple of the o
dess Mootoomakry, otherwise called Ma-
hamakry, or the great Makry, whose fes-
tival followed that of Pattra Kahlee.

Constantinople,

LETTER FROM MR. GOODELL, DATED
res. 1, 1834.

Monthly Concert of Prayer in January.

TE scenes described below occurred on the
day recommended by various ecclesiastical
bodies in our country, and extensively observ-
ed, as.a time of special fasting and prayer for
the spread of the gospel.

This year was ushered in by some
manifest tokens of the divine presence
among us. Our weekly service in Tur-
kish, which you know is attended stated-
ly by half a dozen Armenians, and a few

reeks, had all along been increasing in
solemnity and interest. Kyrios Pani-
yotes, of the latter nation, appeared to be
growing in grace; and Sennacherim and
Hohannes of the former, to be getting
more and more within the influence of
truth and of the Holy Spirit. We felt
prepared to go a step farther; and the
first monthly concert season in this year
1834, we observed in Turkish as well as
in English. This is probably the first
time the monthly conce:t for prayer was
ever observed in that language. Kyrios
Paniyotes made one of the prayers; and
from one of our Greek tracts printed at
Malta, he gave in Turkish an interesting
account of Obookiah, and of the com-
mencement of the mission at the Sand-
wich Islands. Every ear seemed to be
open; every eye to be moistened; every
voice that uttered a syllable was in a
tender and subdued tone. One of the
Armenians then gave an extract from a
sermon, which was preached by their pa-
triarch in Constantinople, a day or two
previous, and which had given them much

47

satisfaction. The following is the sub-
stance of the extract.

“Those Christians who love the gos-
pel, have caused it to be translated and
printed in every language; and all, even
the heathen nations, are now beginning
to read it. Let us, therefore, see to it
that we conform ourselves to its pre-
cepts; lest those who have but just re-
ceived it should point at us, and reproach
us with neglecting the duties it enjoins;
and we shall thus give occasion to them
to blaspheme.”

This was truly monthly concert intel-
ligence, and was as cheering as it was
unexpected.

After the Turkish, we had our usual
English services on these occasions.
Our little company represented six na-
tions, and sixchurches. One was a Bap-
tist brother, the master of an English
vessel now in this port, and a man of in-
telligence and serious piety. The day

vious, he united with us in celebrat-
ing the Lord’s supper. This man has
fastened, in the most conspicuous place
in his cabin, a tablet, on which is in-
scribed in broad characters, in English
and Latin, “Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, except a man be born in, he
cannot see the kingdom of God. John
iii. 3.” He has a religious service on
board his vessel every evening in the
week, and we have preached en board
every Sabbath afternoon since he has
been in port. This brother conelud-
ed our monthly concert meeting with
prayer.

nacherim’s heart was now full, and
he could no longer restrain his feelings;
but with a most animated countenance
and earnest manner, and with tears now
and then gushing from his eyes, he gave
an interesting account of his and Ho-
hannes’ experience, and of the way in
which Providence had led them and
brought them to a knowleage of the
truth. At my request, he has since com-
mitted this account to writing.

During the remainder of the month,
we had frequent and precious intercourse
with these young brethren. Sometimes
their hearts were filled with darkness
and sorrow, and they came to us, and
with the docility of little children, in-
quired concerning pardon and salvation
through atoning blood. At one of our
meetings it devolved upon Sennacherim,
while in this state of mind, to read the
following verse—“And she said, Truth
Lord; yet the dogs eat of the crumbs
which fall from their master’s table.” It
seemed to express the very feelings of

Constantinople:— Letter sron: Mr. Goodell.

Ocr.

his own heart; and it was with difficulty
he could finish the sentence from the
tender emotions which were awakened
by it in his bosom and which were strug-
gling for utterance. Both he and his
companion appear now to be filled with
light, and love, and comfort, and zeal.
They lay hoi. of the divine promises and
plead them in a manner quite unusual;
and like Peter, they seem ready to go to
prison and to death: though, like him,
and like most young converts, the
doubtless have much less genuine fai
than they think they have. A few storms,
such as we have in these countries, will
give it a trial. In the mean time we
commend them to the prayers of the
faithful, and “to the Lord, on whom they
believe.”

Both these Armenians are Varjabeds
Bing geen or teachers; and they have
een for several months employed by us
—Sennacherim in teaching a Lancaste-
rian school among his countrymen in
Pera, and Hohannes in translating the
Psalms into vulgar Armenian. The
live together in the same house we too
for the school, and with a select class in
the school they daily read and expound
the Scriptures. They do the same sev-
eral times a week with a select society
of young men in Constantinople. And
Peshtimaljan, the head teacher of the
school at the patriarchal church, has
commenced the same practice every
evening with a class of his own students.
Hohannes, Sennacherim, and Paniyotes,
also, as well as our own children, learn
by heart a verse a day, reciting it at
our weekly meetings. Oh this blessed
Bible! There is nothing in the world
like it! “The entrance of it giveth light;
it giveth understanding unto the simple.”
It answereth the question, “Where-
withal shall a young man cleanse his
way?” It shows unto man his sins; and
it shows unto him a Savio?. It teaches
him, that religion is not mere form and
ceremony, but is something spiritual
and transforming; and that God is a
spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit
and in truth.

In fine, let all the churches know,
that there are among the Armenians as
fine a generation of young men, as I
have ever set my eyes upon; a genera-
tion who bid fair to be altogether more
enlightened and better instructed, than
their fathers. And shall not untiring ef-
fort be made, and unceasing prayers be
offered, that they may — know and love
the truth, and be sanctified by it? and thus
be a generation to God’s praise and glory?

Sandwich Eslands.

EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS SHOWING THE
STATE OF MISSIONARY LABOR AT VA-
RIOUS STATIONS.

In the last three numbers of this work ex-
tracts have been given from documents relat-
ing to the general state and progress of the
mission at the Sandwich Islands. The fol-
lowing extracts exhibit more especially the
state of things at the stations where the writers
respectively reside.

Kaawaloa.

At Kaawaloa we cannot, as at most
stations, concentrate our labors, owing
to the scattered state of the people.
Kailua is, I believe, reckoned to be about
half way between the south and north
point of the island. Our station lies only
fifteen miles south of Kailua and em-
braces the whole range from that to the
south point of the island. Some twenty
miles, also, on the other side being in-
cluded in the point. Always keep in
mind that the people here, at least within
the limits of this station, live on or con-
tiguous to the shore. They are scattered
along the coast in small villages, contain-
ing from one hundred to a thousand
souls. Perhaps, however, there are not
three villages, within twenty miles of us,
containing a thousand souls each.

Church.—The church here consists
of about eighty members; some adorn
their profession, and most of them live as
Christians externally. For some we fear;
while in some we think we have reason
to place much confidence as being hum-
ble followers of the Savior. Fourteen of
the above number were received during
the fall of 1832; since which time none
have been adinitted, though several have
stood propounded for more than twelve
months. Having nothing else here but
time protracted to develope their Chris-
tian character, we must use that as our
only resort for satisfactory evidence that
they are sincere. Were circumstances
different—were they persecuted for turn-
ing Christians, or were there any thing
else to properly unfold soon their Chris-
tian character, we should not probably
require them to wait so long. At our
last communion, the first day of this
month, one suspended member was re-
stored, who appeared truly penitent for
his crime. Two have been suspended the
past season. One for indulging in the

Sandwich Islands:—View of Various Stations.

use of nteckeating O08 which we
make a matter of discipline here, just as
much as you would beastly drunkenness.
if any one member of the church is
known to taste intoxicating liquor, every
one, foreigners and natives, look on him
as violating his profession. The other
for irregular conduct, though no particu-
lar crime was then prove ainst him.
Still his character was far from being
fair and we are obliged here to be ex-
tremely cautious, both in admitting and
disciplining those already admitted, or
our rome would soon become little
else than a collection of Laodiceans and
Corinthians.

Remarking on the state of the schools and
some of the difficulties to be encountered in
carrying them forward, Mr. Ferbes proceeds—

Schools—We are nearly at our wits
end; for almost every expedient for keep-
ing up an interest has been employ-
ed. ‘he great thing that is wanting is
com teachers; and we fear that it
will be many years before Hawaii will
be able to furnish herse!f with teachers.
We are ivvking to the high school on
Maui with some hope and not a little
anxiety. Suppose you had not a soul in
= og peg who could teach any

ing but mere letters: su nts
and children were all ihe ‘inant all
alike dilatory and stupid: suppose you
had no one but some of themselves to
conduct your school, until you should
gather some fifty from among those who
are most advanced, that is, those who
could read a whole sentence without
stopping to spell out the words—could
perhaps form letters with a pen, (I can-
not call them writers,) and should send
them thus prepared to some high-school
in the interior where the principal must
give all his instructions, viva voce, for
want of books and apparatus; where no
school-fellow would be more advanced
than another, and of course that stimu-
lant is wanting which exists in your
academies;—How would you feel as to
the prospects of supplying Massachu-

setts with efficient school teachers? You
would be placed precisely as we are at
these islands. hat can one or two

missionaries do towards instructing ten
or twelve thousand souls, even admitti

them to be anxious for instruction, whi

is not the case with these people now.—
But discouraging as all these things are,
we feel that it is no time for despond-
ency; no time to hang down the hands in
despair; but to persevere, believ.ug tiac

he who has countenanced already the
efforts of this mission will make truth
and intelligence to triumph by gospel
means.

[Mr. Forbes.

Waimea, on Hawaii.

This station was at first selected and occu-
pied as a resort for invalids, being in the
mountainous region of Hawaii, exposed to the
northeast trade winds, and consequently hav-
ing a much cooler atmosphere than most of
the other stations. But little missionary labor
has been bestowed on that part of the island.
The letter is dated October 26, 1834.

Meetings.—As the novelty of meetings
at this place is wearing away, the num-
ber that attend them may gradually di-
minish; which may not be a very dis-
couraging circumstance. A good effect
may be produced on a large congrega-
tion during service, but when this is
closed, the effect seems to be drowned
in a moment by the noise of the multi-
tude. The exercises of the Sabbath are
as follows: A church prayer-meeting in
the morning; after which the shell blows
and the people assemble for the regular
morning worship. When this is closed,
the Sabbath school immediately follows,
at which the seven verses for the week
are recited to the different native teach-
ers. One of us is present, and questions
are asked and remarks made on the
verses. In the afternoon are two meet-
ings; at one of which a sermon is preach-
ed, and at the other is an explanation of
some portions of Scripture mingled with
exhortation. In all our preaching we
have aimed to exhibit Jesus Christ, and
to urge men to an immediate compliance
with the terms of salvation. hether
any have complied is known in heaven,
but not to us at present. Yet we trust
that to some the gospel has proved a
savor of life unto life. None have given
as yet sufficient evidence of piety to be
admitted to the church, and none stand
as candidates for admission.

Pastoral visits.—Scattered as our peo-
ple are over a very extensive territory,
we find that preaching in the public as-
sembly will not bring the multitude
within the influence of the gospel. Many
will not hear its joyful sound, nor by its
power be raised from their dark condi-
tion. Hence we have devoted some
time to epee | among the scattered

pulation, and have gone from house to
ease and from district to district exhort-

Sandwich Islands:—View of Various Stations.

Oct.

ing the people to repentance towards
God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
Among those capable of reading we
have distributed tracts, which have al-
ways been readily received; and we have
generally found a disposition to listen to
our instructions. In all these visits we
have found some light; we have also
found enough to convince us that we are
surrounded with heathenish darkness and
degradation.

rogress in labor.—After seeing many
proofs of instability in the character of
this people, we would speak with caution
as to any effect of our labors among
them. We may, however, safely say,
there has been an increase of knowledge
among many of the people. This has
been especially preceptible insome mem-
bers of the church. We trust, something
also has been done to banish the notion
to which we have found the people ex-
ceedingly prone, that forsaking outward
sins and attending, for a certain length
of time to a round of duties and ceremo-
nies would fit men for the church and for
heaven.

All we have done as yet we would
hardly consider as the beginning of what
there is to be done. We have found
ourselves but young in the mission
field; have been obliged to devote muc
time to the acquisition of the language,
especially to make ourselves understood
by the unthinking mass of the people;
and we have found it no small task to
accustom ourselves to express the ideas
of our pure and holy religion in a lan-

age which was formed more for sensi-

le objects—a language full of vileness,
and which has but “— 4" consecrat-
ed to holy purposes, e hope, in time,
we may not only be better acquainted
with the language, but also with the pe-
culiar character of the people; and if the
Lord teach us, that we shall also be bet-
ter able to direct the truths of the gospel
so as to bear on their consciences and
hearts.

Prevailing ignorance of the a
To whatever at of our Mia us look, or
whatever view we take of the people, we
see a vast work to be done. Our field
has been heretofore so remote from any
station, that it is probably as benighted
as any part of the islands. The brethren
at Kailua formerly visited it, to examine
schools and preach the gospel. Many of
the people have resided some time at
Kailua for the sake of instruction. Such
we often find somewhat enlightened.
But the great body of the people are in
darkness and wedded to their lusts.

awe wT www Ft eT FF Ue _

lt a ns

eS wee «CUM

1834. Sandwich Islands:—View of Various Stations. 369

Such a complication of darkness and
stupidity broods over them, and so —_
degrading customs and habits prevail,
confirming and strengthening each other,
that we should at times say that pure
gospel light could never prevail here, did
we not remember, that God has given
these ends of the earth to Christ for his
inheritance. Could the churches at home
see what we every day witness of the
blindness and degradation of heathenism,
even in these islands; could they see
how pollution cleaves to the people, they
would not think it an easy matter to con-
vert the world—a work to be accomplish-
ed by small contributions and feeble
prayers, without any suffering or self-
denial on their part. They would see
that it requires the whole energies of all
the churches, the resources of body, soul,
and substance of every individual, devot-
ed with as much earnestness as apostles
of _ consecrated their powers to the
work.

Church.—Of 15,000 people who inhabit
this part of Hawaii, only nineteen are
members of the church. Some of these
give very decided evidence of piety and
are a great encouragement to us in our
work. Others do not appear so well.
One has lately been suspended for irreg-
ular conduct which we ascribe in part to
ignorance. None of them have that
knowledge which is generally found
among professors of religion in a Chris-
tian land; and this, together with their
poverty, has prevented their being train-
ed to those habits of doing good, which
it seems desirable should be found in
every Christian. ‘They have often very
erroneous views of the proper means of
doing good, owing to their ignorance of
the word of God and the state of society
in which they have always lived, some-
times seeming to think, the voice of the
chief is the most effectual means of turn-
ing men to God. They have not been
accustomed to see any thing effected ex-
cept by the —— of a chief. We
consider that no small part of our work
consists in raising the standard of piety
and religious knowledge in the church,
that it may become indeed a light in the
land. We greatly need efficient native
helpers, scattered over our field, who
may exert a constant influence on the
people, and in giving stability to good
institutions, and in doing away many vile
and degrading habits and practices which
are prevalent. Even a few of such, in
this uncultivated field, would stand in the
way ofa mighty flood of evil.

Schools.—We have already stated the
low condition of our schools. This to
us, who are on the ground and know
their history, is nothing wonderful and
affords no und for ee sey pe
They were first introduced into this part
of the island by a few teachers sent b
the brethren from their schools at Kai-
lua. These appointed others, as soon as
they were able to read, and stationed
them in vacant places; so that, in time,
the whole land was supplied, though
most of the school districts were so large,
that not all, if disposed, could avail them-
selves of instruction. Some of these
teachers, as might well be expected in
times of little light and restraint, soon
fell into sin; the head-men appointed
others in their places, and some teachers
perhaps appointed themselves. Their
want of character has been perhaps the
greatest reason, why their schools have
not been more permanent and efficient;
for we find the people pay little regard
to those whose private lives they know
to be bad; not because they do not love
vice themselves, but because schools are
associated with the word of God, and all
wicked teachers they consider as acting
the part of hypocrites. That teachers
raised up as these have been, must be
miserably deficient is obvious. We
have found their stock of knowledge to
be small; but their greatest deficiency
has uniformly been in not knowing how
to communicate their knowledge to
others. The vigilance of the brethren
at such a distance as Kailua could not
keep out all evils from schools having
teachers who needed line upon line con-
tinually. That in schools laboring under
so many disadvantages, so many persons
should have learned to read the word of
God, is surely matter of astonishment.
We have visited the greatest part of the
schools in our field, endeavoring to point
out there, as well as in our teachers’
school, the right methods of instruction.
Most of the teachers have increased
their stock of knowledge some, and know
better how to direct others. But we do
not expect to see many efficient schools,
till the qualifications of teachers rise far
higher; nor perhaps till there is a gen-
eral outpouring of the Spirit from on
high, not only to raise up suitable teach-
ers, but to turn the thoughts of the peo-
ple to the concerns of their soul. Read-
ing the word of God is the greatest mo-
tive they can have at present for learn-
ing the art, nor can we expect much
zeal in a work so contrary to all their
indolent habits, until they have gener-

370

oy a higher regard for the sacred
volume.

The attention which has been given to
schools by the children and the great
facility with which some of them have
learned to read has been to us matter of
joy. But so far as they have been under
our own instruction, the influence of re-

ligious knowledge imparted to them has |,

seemed to be much lessened, if not en-
tirely counteracted, by their mingling
constantly with the society of their
parents and friends. This people are
raised above what they once were; yet
not so high but that every subject, how-
ever low or vulgar, or improper for con-
versation in Christian lands, is here com-
mon matter of discourse among men,
women, and children, who from their
earliest days, are familiarized with vul-
garity and vice in all their forms.
Morals.—The marriages at this sta-
tion, for the year ending first of June
last, were 174. There | ew been fre-
quent violations of the laws of chastity;
but as the rulers of this region are most
of them members of the church, and all
apparently on the side of morality, of-
fenders, when known, have always been
sentenced promptly to some kind of
work. The people pretty universally
— a regard to morality and religion;
ut their hearts and secret practices too

often show that they hanker after the ||

“old kingdom,” as they call it, meaning
the former days of darkness.

It is comparatively easy to produce
external reformation, among this simple
hearted people, especially if chiefs lead
the way; but to turn their hearts to God,
to enlighten their minds, and raise them
to the rank of a truly Christian people,
must be a work of faith and prayer and
patience and time. Formerly the “Kapu”
or restricted meetings, together with the
influence of high chiefs, led many to at-
tend on the ordinances of the gospel, but
these meetings have been abolished at
most of the stations, as tending to evil;
and the influence of chiefs, in favor of
the gospel, is much less felt, since Kaa-
humanu’s death, than before. Perhaps
it is well, that it is; for this people are
exceedingly slow to learn that Christ’s
kingdom is not of this world; and even
missionaries, like Israel of old, may be
tempted to go down to Egypt themselves.
The gospel in our field, we believe, now
stands more on its own proper footing
than formerly; that is on the hold it has of
the hearts and consciences of the people.

At our stations as well as on our occa-
sional tours, the attention we have found

Sandwich Islands:—View of Various Stations.

Ocr.

uniformly to the word has been such as
greatly to encourage us, and make us
wish to proclaim it statedly to all the

ople within our bounds. We would
e glad immediately to take possession
of Hamakua, where are nearly 5,000
people, and of Kohala, where are above
8,000. But we deem Waimea too im-
portant to be abandoned. We greatly
need a third missionary. The people are
scattered over a wide extent of country;
there are no large and compact settle-
ments; the northeast trade-winds sweep
over this part of the island, bringing fre-
;quent and long continued storms; the
poverty of the people is perhaps greater
| even than falls to the lot of most of the
islanders, being almost universally desti-
tute of any foreign clothing; and the
great mass are amazing stupid in regard
to their souls. These are all obstacles
of little moment, if we have only an

abundant effusion of the Holy Spirit.
[ Messrs. Baldwin and Lyons.

Kailua.

Tuis station is also on the island of Hawaii.
The communication from which these extracts
are taken is dated 20th of September, 1833.
The writers express their views fully respect-
ing the present degraded state of the people
| around them, and the great changes to be
effected, before the islanders can be elevated
to the level of a truly Christian and civilized
people. They are by no means, however, to
be understood as saying that nothing has been
accomplished hitherto by their preaching and
schools: but to exhibit results of this kind is
not their object here.

There is at present no special attention
to religion among our people; and if we
except a few individuals who appear as
serious inquirers, a most lamentable
apathy exists in the minds of a great
majority of those who sit under our
preaching. It is not that there has been
| any relaxation of labor on our part, or
,that the standard of gospel truth has
| been lowered. The plain, pointed truths
\of Scripture have been affectionately
held up to the view of this people, and
all that was peculiar to their present
| situation pointed out, and arguments and
exhortations deduced from them to en-
| force immediate repentance and faith in
the Savior of sinners; but from Sabbath
| to Sabbath we have witnessed with pain
a gradual diminution of numbers in our
congregations, until at present it consists
of a little more than one half of its for-

SE SE (OOS WS lel

1834. Sandwich Islands:—View of Various Stations. 371

mer size. lt does not appear that they
have taken offence at our pointed preach-
ing, but that numbers have literally be-
come weary of gospel restraints, and are
longing for the return of former t’=es,
when they enjoyed perfect freedom in
licentiousness. They have heard what is
doing by some of their rulers at Oahu,
hey have seen many who once were pro-
fessedly seeking the kingdom of heaven
now totally indifferent to their eternal
interests; and were we to judge from
several flagrant violations of the laws,
their minds appear to have been made
up to return again to their former
courses, whenever it can be done with
impunity. By the prompt execution of
the laws upon the offenders, all such
transgressions have been put down; but
the leaven of discord and revelry appears
to be secretly working, and is only want-
ing the support of those in authority to
break forth. Since the death of the late
—=— regent, the current of popular
eeling has been fast ebbing towards
their former customs; and to all human
observation a large portion of the nation
is ready to throw off all regard to divine
authority which once appeared to be so
rapidly taking root. The most intelligent
and influential part of the people are
happily exceptions to the above remark.
Amidst all our trials and fears, arising
from the fickleness of this people, we
have great cause for encouragement in
the belief, that there are many that stand
firm in the midst of temptations, and
when opposition is assuming a more de-
cided and organized form, are deliberate-
Rf and decidedly resolved to persevere in

e way of virtue and good order. Hith-
erto it has been a popular thing to pro-
fess Christianity, and church-member-
ship has been considered a steppin
stone to distinction, because the chiefs
have usually taken church members into
their favor and confidence. This proba-
bly will not be so much the case hereaf-
ter, and it will have this good effect,
it will take away one strong temptation
to hypocrisy. An established religion is
certainly as much to be deprecated here
as in other countries; and while we de-
sire only the continuance and protection
of government as essential to success,
we yet should be the last to propose the
establishment of religion as an engine of
state.

In the first place, the people are, as
yet, but a few removes from a state of
nature. Asa nation, they are nearly as

r, naked, and indolent as ever. They
ave not brought one of the arts of civil-

ized life to any tolerable perfection, al-
though there are instances of considera-
ble native ingenuity in some kinds of
work. But, with a few exceptions, they
are absolutely dependent upon foreign
aid for every thing that is decent or com-
fortable in civilized life.

2d. The lower classes are a mass of
corruption. Words cannot express the
depths of vice and degradation to which
they have been sunk from time immemo-
rial. Their very blood is corrupted and
the — of life tainted with disease,
by which a premature old age and un-
timely death ensues. Their intercourse
with licentious foreigners has greatly
aggravated their pitiable condition.

3d, Their numbers perceptibly di-
minish. For many years previous to the
promulgation of Christian laws and the
introduction of Christian marriage, in-
fanticide, licentiousness and disease
were mowing down their thousands as
with a scythe. Christianity has for a
few years past considerably arrested the
progress of vice and misery and rescued
many from ruin and death; but it could
not entirely prevent it, owing to the con-
tinued operations of previous causes be-
yond its reach. Such were the invete-
racy of previous habits, the almost child-
less state of families, with other things
not necessary to mention. But although
the blessings attendant upon Christian
marriage have already become manifest,
in the increased number of children in
our streets and villages, still the number
of women who have no children to those
who have, is probably in the ratio of
three to one at least. Governor Adams,
in a conversation with one of our mem-
bers a few days since, expressed his
surprise at finding the number of people
on his lands so diminished during the
two and a half years of his absence at
Oahu. He said in English, “By and by
no people here.” The reply was made,
“But perhaps they are only removed to
another place.” “No,” he said, “they are
puu t ka make,” (all dead).

4th. The old system of despotic gov-
ernment, which still exists, is unfriendl
to improvement. Not only all the land
of this island but all the property that is
valuable belongs to the king and chiefs.
Every thing is monopolized. Even a half
of the produce which the farmers raise
to sell to ships is taken to pay the gov-
ernment for the privilege of trading.
The people do not appear to complain
much, because they are less oppressed
than formerly. The system of taxation,
too, is arbitrary, and there are no princi-

372

ples which recognize the rights of the
common people. Until the government
shall show a disposition to encourage the
acquisition of property by the common
people, there can be little hope that civ-
lization will make rapid progress.

The opinion, too, that this is a Christian
nation needs qualifications. It is not
enough that schools have been multiplied
and churches planted, or that we have
the favor of the chiefs, or that we have
met with encouraging success in our en-
terprise, to entitle a once degraded hea-
then people to the character of a Chris-
tian nation. Besides all these, there
must be a moral sense pervading the
community, which shall instinctively dis-
cern between what is virtuous and what
is base. There must be an ability as
well as willingness to support the gospel
among themselves; and there must be
also men of their own nation raised up
and consecrated to the work of the min-
istry—men qualified to carry on the work
effectually under God, without a foreign
impetus, before they can be called a
Christian nation in the full sense of the
word. In all these respects, however,
they are wanting, and will be so, per-
haps, for more than a generation to come.
At present, the missionaries are the life
and soul of every thing that is doing for
learning or religion. There are no na-
tive energies enlisted which do not re-
ceive their direct impulse from us; and
should we relax, the whole work would

This is so emphatically true, that
even our Sabbath schools, when commit-
ted to the superintendence of natives for
afew Sabbaths only, lose all their in-
terest, and dwindle away so as to require
renewed effort on our part to induce the
scholars to return.

We have felt it necessary to be thus
explicit, because we apprehend that a
too favorable opinion of what has been
accomplished here is generally prevalent
among the churches. How far our own
reports of the state and progress of things
have contributed to such an opinion,
must be for others to judge. We have
endeavored to confine our statements to
the truth, though perhaps we have suffer-
ed our own hopes to be raised too high
in times of wna a success, without
making sufficient allowance for reverses.
If w views on the subject have been
received, it is proper to correct them, as
they may in the end produce a reaction

udicial to ultimate success. We
= never despaired of the ultimate
success of our enterprise, however we

Sandwich Islands:—View of Various Stations.

may be diseppointed of its being near. |}

Oct.

But whether «2 shall be permitted to
| behold the day when this nation shall
become an enlightened and Christian
people, we should not be anxious to

ow. Both present and past appear-
ances, however, indicate the day to be
' distant. ‘
| A few years ago appearances were
}most encouraging. There was a general
' attention throughout the island to relig-
‘ious instruction; and the heathen on
every side of us were flocking to church
and crowding our houses to inquire and
listen. We then hoped that the time of
Christ’s triumph was near at hand. Of
those who then were aroused to inquiry
into the way of salvation, a goodly num-
ber continue still to be pressing into the
kingdom; but a great majority of them
have gone back to their old habits, and
their goodness has ed away like the
morning cloud. hat we most need
among us is a —_ of fervent prayer,
supplicating and besieging the throne of
| grace for a blessing to be poured out
/upon us. This is no doubt the reason
| why we witness no revivals among us,
| and why sinners are not inquiring more
earnestly for the way of life. Pesbens, too,
| the churches are not praying for us with
|their former earnestness, under the im-
| pression that we have already obtained
the victory. If this be the case, we de-
sire to expostulate with them in the lan-

age of entreaty, not to forget us at

e throne of grace when re ggenee: |
for mercy upon the heathen worl
We repeat it, the victory is not yet
won. Satan still triumphs over the
hearts of the thousands of Hawaii and
will not let go his hold till drawn from
them by the Spirit of the Almighty.
We have yet a great conflict to fight
with the powers of darkness, and the
contest is but just begun. It is no
ye to build up the kingdom of
Christ in a pagan land. Reasons un-
foreseen often retard the labors of many
a weary year, and despoil our hopes of
the expected fruit, at the very time we
had thought to reap an abundant har-
vest. The prayers of the churches are
of more avail than their bounty in the
conversion of the heathen. It is their
prayers which brings the blessing upon
their bounty. Let them both be offered
together and separate them not; for like
faith and works, when united they will
avail much in that day when every man’s
faithfulness shall be tried according to
his deeds, whether they be good or
whether they be evil.

(Messrs. Thurston and Bishop,

|

1834.
Milo.

A letter from this station, dated, March 28,

1834, gives the following account of an inter-

esting state of religious feeling, followed by

additions to the church, which had been wit-
nessed there.

Renewel Attention to the Gospel.—
In our letter of October Ist, 1433, we
stated the reverse of things at this sta-
tion; a reverse which made the prospect
dark indeed, if we looked at things seen;
but which we had, even then, some faint
hope might prove like the darkness be-
fore the dawn of day. Appearances re-
mained the same till the 19th of Novem-
ber, when we examined our station
schools, and appointed a protracted
meeting to commence the 13th of De-
cember. Our examination was followed
by a vacation of a little more than two
weeks. This enabled us to devote more
time to visiting from house to house,
than we had previously been able to
command for that purpose. The mem-
bers in the church and the teachers in
the Sabbath school were also directed to
visit the people, and endeavor to per-
suade them to attend meeting and join
the Sabbath school. By these means |
our congregation was somewhat enlarg- |
ed, and the number of scholars in the |
Sabbath school almost doubled. Still, at
the commencement of the protracted
meeting, the church, with few excep-
tions, were asleep; and seemed, though
they had been frequently instructed on
the subject, to have no conception that it
was possible for sinners to be converted
without a previous process of seeking,
which was to be protracted for months,
if not for years. Among the impenitent
none were known to be particularly in-
quiring. Death reigned through the con-

egation. We saw nothing to inspire

ope, but the promises of an omnipotent
God, and the almost absolute certainty
that Satan would triumph, if the Holy
Spirit should not descend. After two or
three days it was found that a few ofthe
most forward scholars in our station
school were under deep conviction; and
before the close of the meeting three or |
four of them gave pleasing evidence that |
they were created anew in Christ. The
meeting was continued eight days. The
number who attended was from 700 to
1,000, or about the same as our usual |
congregation on the Sabbath. Two,
weeks from the close of this meeting, |
things seemed to be ata stand. Most of
the church were still asleep. We then|

VOL. XXX.

Sandwich Islands:—View of Various Stations.

373
held a three days meeting exclusively
for the church-members and candidates,

except the meeting at sunrise, which was
open for all. The order of exercise was
the same at this, as at the former meet-
ing. The presence of the Holy Spirit
was manifest. From that time the church,
as a body, has appeared better than we
had ever expected to see it. Some in-
dividuals from among the impenitent
gave evidence of a change of heart.

Admissions to the Church—On the
first Sabbath of the present month six-
teen persons were admitted to the church.
For nine of them we had entertained
hope for a considerable time. The re-
maining seven give the same kind of
evidence of a recent work of the Spirit
on their hearts, as is expected m
young converts in the United States.
We hope a few others have been brought
to Christ during the last few months,
though we fear their number is small.
The few who have seemed to give the
most decisive evidence of a change of
heart, have appeared to have much
clearer views of the sinfulness of their
own hearts, and of their indebtedness to
the grace of God alone for salvation,
than any of us had before witnessed in
natives of these islands.

While we would say The Lord hath
done great things, and let his name be
praised, we wish to record what he has
done, as merely an earnest of what might
have been accomplished, had we been
prepared for it; and also as showing what
must be done by the churches in our own
country, before revivals, affecting the
great mass of this people, can be expect-
ed. We know of no individual who gives
any evidence of having been converted
during the last few months, who had not,
for a considerable time, been a member
of the Sabbath school; and no one gives
satisfactory evidence who is not, also, a
member pr Bees one of the schools taught
by ourselves during the week.

Schools.—The same reasons which led
us to suspend the native schools of Hilo
and Puna last August, have hitherto pre-
vented our making efforts immediately
to revive them. We have no hesitation
in saying the old system of native schools
has effected nearly all that can be ac-
complished by it in our field. And we
see no way in which any system of
schools can be carried into extensive
operation, or in which the gospel can be
brought to exert its influence on the
great mass of this unthinking people, for
a long time to come, without the resi-
dence of a mission family at each of the

48

374

more important places along the whole
extent of our sea-coast. The station
schools mentioned in our last have all
been continued. The present number in

Marquesas Islands:—Removal of the Missionaries.

Oct.

mation, and learned that the London Mission-
ary Society had already taken some steps
towards commencing a mission on the south-
ern group of the Marquesas, and that a mis-

f is sixty-one. .
= school for —— is poy — shol i} sion could be conducted there more conven-
e school for females are eighty schol- ||’ :
ars. Mr. Goodrich’s school has also | iently by that society than by the Board,
been continued. All the scholars in || wrote to the missionaries at the Sandwich
these schools belong to the Sabbath || Islands to proceed no further relative to the
school.- We have this year had no | contemplated mission, unless decisive steps

school for children till within a few
weeks, because we have been unable to
find time and strength for it. We have
now a school of about seventy children.
Preaching —During the months of Oc-
tober and November we preached fre-
quently at our out churches on the Sab-

bath; also during the week at two small ||

villages, about four miles distant from
our residence. Since that time we have

thought it our duty to spend most of our |

strength nearer home. Mr. Goodrich
has once made the tour of Puna. This
is nearly all we have done during the
lust four months, at a distance of more
than four miles from our residence. The
ge has been regularly preached at

is place since the date of our last.
During the last three and a half months
we have daily held a public meeting,
commencing fifteen minutes before sun-
rise, for exhortation and prayer; and
have found the people more ready to at-
tend regularly at this, than at any other
hour of the day. We have also held
meetings frequently in the afternoon.
There are now more than 300 scholars
in the Sabbath school. The attention

iven to

evidently less feeling in the congrega-
tion, than there was two months ago.
We request your prayers that the word
of the Lord may have free course with
us, even as it has had with you.

[Messrs. Goodrich, Lyman, and Dibble.

FAarquesas Eslands.

NeaRLy four years ago, the Prudential Com-
mittee of the Board, in consequence of infor-

mation received relative to the population of |

the northern group of the Marquesas, some-
times called the Washington Islands, gave
provisional instructions to the missionaries at
the Sandwich Islands to send some of their
own number to that group. Messrs. Whitney,
Tinker, and Alexander accordingly visited
these islands; and in consequence of their re-
port it was decided to commence a mission.
The Committee having obtained further infor-

reaching is encouraging; |
ough we have to lament that there 1s |

i should have been taken previously to the re-
Such steps had,
|| however, been taken, and Messrs. Alexander,

‘| ceipt of that communication.

|| Armstrong, and Parker, and their wives, ar-
|| rived at Nuuhiva, one of the group, on the
|| 10th of August, 1833. [See pp. 85—91].

|| The following letter, dated at Honolulu,
|| May 13th, 1834, gives briefly the reason
|| for the

'| Return of the Missionaries to the Sand-
| wich Islands.

| We have just this hour arrived here
with our families in good health; and as
|}a vessel is expected to sail tomorrow
‘morning for the coast of South America,
‘by which letters may be forwarded to
you, we must avail ourselves of the op-
portunity to write you a short letter,
though it is now late at night. We
have much to say to you in reference to
the Marquesas mission, and our reasons
‘for abandoning it; but can only mention
the general facts at present. More full
statements will be transmitted to you as
soon as an opportunity is afforded.

Very soon after our arrival at Nuuhiva,
doubts began to arise in our minds
| whether we had acted wisely, in leaving

the wide and promising fields for mis-
_Sionary labor in the Sandwich Islands, to
establish a mission there under existing
circumstances. These doubts arose prin-
'Cipally irom the smallness of the popula-
tion around us, which was every where
apparent, go in what direction we would.
i But they did not result in any definite
resolutions until we had opportunities to
explore the Washington group to our
satisfaction, and ascertain the number,
character, and situation of the people to
|a considerable degree: after which, and
after much prayer and trembling hesita-
tion, we came to the unanimous conclu-
sion that it was on the whole for the best
to break up that mission at once, and re-
, turn to these islands. This resolution
| was adopted on the first day of April;
and the following is a brief abstract of
|the reasoning which influenced our
' minds in its oletion.

ee. a

1834. Marquesas Islands:—Removal of the Missionaries. 375

Such were the number, character, and
situation of the inhabitants of these is-
lands, that we knew of no place where we
could recommend a missionary station to
be taken, except the one we occupied at
Massachusetts Bay, or Taiohae. The
windward group, or the Marquesas pro-
per, we did not and could not visit; but
the information we received through the
master of a whale-ship, who had recently
anchored at the island of Dominica, was
by no means of an encouraging kind.
One item was, that captain Dean, of the
English whale-ship Elizabeth, landed on
the beach of one of the harbors of that
island, about a week before the arrival
of said captain, and was instantly mur-
dered by the natives. From all the in-
formation we could collect, we judged
that the inhabitants of that group are not
very numerous, but extremely savage,
fierce, cruel, and lawless. But this is

|| We decided, as we thought you would,
had you been on the spot, in the nega-
tive; because, 1. Of the smallness of
the population in the vicinity of that sta-
tion. We took the census of the valley
and found it to contain about one thou-
sand souls. This, had we remained at
that station, would have been the extent
of the population under our immediate
instruction and influence; and the pros-
pect of benefiting the adjacent tribes did
not appear to be very bright, as you will
perceive when we come to state particu-
jlars. 2. The probability that we should
| be obliged to abandon it at some future
time. Of this you will be able to judge
when you are made acquainted with our
history dur.ng eight months residence at
Nuuhiva. It arose principally from en-
|tire want of civil government, and con-
|| sequent perfect lawlessness of the peo-
ple, the existing wars, the defenceless

not the greatest difficulty in the way of||state of our families; and also from the

establishing a mission among them.
They are divided into small tribes or
clans, which are so separated from each
other by mountains and precipices, as to
render access to them difficult; and these
tribes are at war with each other contin-
ually. Considering then the state and
location of the people of the windward
group of islands, we could not advise you,
while other fields are open before you
already white unto the harvest, to at-
tempt the establishment of a mission
there.

In regard to the three islands of the

|| consideration that you might find it diffi-
|| cult to send us suitable helpers, in case
| they were called for, if the limited na-
'|ture and other discouragements of that
field were fully made known. 3. The
/expense of sustaining a single station
there would be proportionably very great,
should it be necessary, as it seems prob-
able, to send supplies from the Sandwich
‘Islands. This is at once quite evident.
| But should this not be necessary, the
expense would be great, as you will see
when particulars are mentioned. 4 In
|| looking at the history of that mission, it

Washington group, we are able to speak || did not appear to have originated in or to
more from observation; but at present || have been urged forward on correct in-
we cannot go into detail. Suffice it to || formation. On the contrary, it originated
say; that after visiting all the principal in superficial and incorrect information,
settlements, we could find no point where || and was urged forward against many
a missionary could have direct and easy || heavy obstacles thrown providentially in
access to 1,000 people, except at Mas-| its way. We are satisfied that had the
sachusetts Bay. The inhabitants are } Board been correctly informed, they
divided and sub-divided into small set-|| would not, in the present state of the
tlements, which are much scattered, and || world and of their funds, have thought of
separated from each other by high ridges || undertaking that mission. And 5. Be-

and mountains, difficult and often dan-
gerous to pass: and moreover the tribes |
are incessantly at war with each other,
so that a missionary living in one tribe
may not venture to visit another, at least |
until the whole system of idolatry is over- |

cause, a wide and open, yet a needy
| field, lay within a few weeks sail of us,
without many of the above mentioned
‘objections, difficulties, and dangers.
Though the Marquesians are more igno-
rant and vicious than the Hawaiians,

thrown in which the wars originate.||they are not more certainly destitute of
Among several of the largest tribes we || the preached word (the great instrument
are not prepared to say that it would be | of salvation) and other means of grace,
safe or prudent for a missionary to at-|| nor more certainly exposed to the wrath
tempt to reside. '\of God, than vastly greater numbers of
Seeing then this was the case, the || the latter, who are both more easy of ac-
whole subject of sustaining that mission || cess and more ready to be instructed, as
or not, resolved itself into the single | well as more harmless than the former.
question, Is it expedient tc sustain one'| This is a brief outline of the reasons
station only on that group of islands?!' which influenced dur minds in conclud-

876

ing to leave the Marquesas and return to
the Sandwich Islands. You will scarce-
ly be able to appreciate them duly with-
out a statement of more particulars, as
they are already drawn up, though not
in a form proper to forward; but it will,
we suppose, be a satisfaction to you to
know even this. In our weakness, and
in the deceitfulness of our hearts, we
may have done wrong. But if we are
not greatly deceived, we have in this re-
moval been aiming to promote the best
interest of the cause to which we have
consecrated our lives.

We sailed from Nuuhiva on board the
Benjamin Rush, of Warren, R. I., capt.
I. Coffin, on the 16th of April. During
our voyage of four weeks, capt. Coffin,
as we
shown us every kindness in their power
—even gave us the entire use of the
cabin. Not being able to take our ef-
fects on board, except a few necessaries,
capt. W. D. Green, of the English whale
ship Royal Sovereign, consented to take
most of them to Huahine, from which
they may be forwarded to us by whale
ships bound to the coast of Japan.

aia

Patagonia.

EXTRACTS FROM THE JOURNALS OF
MESSRS. ARMS AND COAN,

THe embarkation of Messrs. William Arms
and Titus Coan, destined the
southern portion oi South America, with a
view to enable the Committee to decide on
the expediency of establishing a mission to
the native tribes in that quarter, was mention-
ed at page 459 of the last volume. The plan
of the mission, and the expectation, till near
the time of their embarking, was that they
should proceed to the western coast of Pata-
gonia, and land near the 47th or 48th degree
of south latitude, and thence visit the coast,
the adjacent islands, and, if practicable, pene-
trate into the interior among the Araucanian
bands, near the southern provinces of Chili.
Respecting the field presented in that vicinity
for missionary labor, the Committee had re-
But as
no opportunity was found for conveying them
directly to the western coast, passage was ob-

to explore

ceived very favorable information.

tained for them in a vessel bound to Gregory’s
Bay, near the eastern entrance of the Straits
of Magellan. It was hoped that from this
point they would be able either to cross the
Andes near the straits, and then move up

Patagonia:—Journals of Messrs. Arms and Coan.

as his officers and crew, have}

Ocr.

the western coast; or else penetrate the coun-
try on the eastern side of the mountains, till
they should reach the latitude mentioned
above, and then cross them, and thus reach
the point of their destination. But both these
courses were found to be beset with insupera-
ble obstacles. On the north they found an
extensive desert, through which none of the
Indians would consent to conduct them. On
the west the Andes, covered with perpetual
snow, presented a very formidable barrier;
while, from all the information they could ob-
tain, the western coast, for many hundred
miles, was almost destitute of inhabitants,
rendering travelling by land nearly impracti-
cable. No conveyance by water could be
obtained. They were, therefore, compelled,
after collecting what information they could
respecting the few small bands of natives
which roam over the country east of the moun-
tains and near the Straits of Magellan, to
return, without reaching that portion of the
country which it was especially intended they
Much information has, how-
ever, been obtained by them relative to the
southern extremity of the continent, together
with the manners and character of the inhabi-
tants, and the methods by which they and the
more northern tribes must be approached,

should explore.

which may be of great benefit in devising
future measures for sending them the gospel.

Messrs. Arms and Coan embarked at New-
York, August 16th, 1833, in the schooner
Mary Jane, capt. Clift; landed at Gregory’s
Bay, November 14th; re-embarked at that
place, on board the Antarctic, capt. Nash,
January 25th, 1834; arrived at the Falkland
Islands on the 28th; and commenced the
homeward voyage, March 9th, in the schooner
Talma, capt. Allyn, and arrived at New Lon-
don, Ct. May 14th.

In addition to the acknowledgments which
have before been made, of the kindness of
Silas E. Burrows, Esq., owner, and capt.
Clift, master of the schooner Mary Jane, in
which Messrs. Arms and Coan received a
gratuitous passage to Gregory’s Bay, both the
missionaries and the Committee would ex-
press their obligations to Mr. Penny, owner,
and capt. M. M. Melward, master of the
schooner Sappho of Liverpool, Eng., for very
seasonable supplies furnished by them when
touching at Gregory’s Bay; to capt. J. S.
Nash, of the schooner Antarctic, of Westerly,
R. I., for a gratuitous passage from Gregory’s

1834.

Bay to the Falkland Islands, and a month’s |
residence on board his vessel; to capt. Pen-
dieton, of the ship Hamilton, and capt. Davi-
son, of the schooner Hancock, of Stonington,
Ct., for politely accommodating them on board
their vessels, without charge, while detained |
at the islands; and to capt. G. L. Allyn, of |
the schooner Talma, of Groton, Ct., for a,
gratuitous passage from the Falkland Islands |
to New London, Ct. Messrs. Arms and Coan |
were thus enabled to accomplish the whole
tour, from the time of their embarkation at
New York, till their return to their native land

without expense to the Board.

Extracts from their separate journals will |
be given ia this and subsequent numbers of |
this work. |

Patagonia:—Journals of Messrs. Arms and Coan.

377

eight miles from the shore. Saw only
one guanaco in our walk, and on our ap-
| proach he bounded across the plains to
| the distant hills with the fleetness of a
deer. Passed some small basins of
' water, in which there were a few upland
‘geese. Now and then a small bird
cheered us with a passing note, while
the wheeling curlew poured out his shrill
and solitary strains “on the distant air,”
and the young rook came screaming in
our ears with all the impudence of the
ape. As we passed along we often set
fire to the dry grass to raise a smoke.
Horse tracks were every where seen, but
no Indians appeared. At length the de-
clining sun, and our weary limbs admon-
ished us to return. We arrived at the
shore at night, after a walk of about

| twenty miles.

Introduction to the Indians. |

November 14, 1833. Arose this morn-
ing and found our bark quietly at anchor
under the shores of Patagonia. It isnow
the openiae of a southern summer, yet
the highhilis on the north and south are
capped with snow. At an early hour we
went on shore with capt. Clift and some
of the sailors, in order to search for the
natives, none of whom had yet made
their appearance. We landed upon a
fine aa beach, and, ascending a steep
bank about a hundred feet, obtained a
view of an extended landscape, terminat-
ed in the rear by Table mountain of
moderate elevation. On the bank we
found a few low thorn bushes just put-
ting forth small yellow blossoms. With
these we made a smoke in order to raise

the Indians; a smoke being a well known |

signal among them, and, when discover-
ed, always leading them to the spot
whence it arises. After waiting some
time without seeing any of the natives,
we returned on board the vessel. At
one, P. M., we went on shore again, in
company with the captain, intending to
travel back into the country in search of
the Indians, Taking an Indian trail, we
pursued ot. way over a rolling surface,
alternately ing hills of gradual as-
cent and descending into intervening
lains, some of which appeared to have
been submerged during some part of the
winter. The soil appeared to be allu-
vial. The hills were sandy and sterile;
and the intervals, consisting of a rich
black mould, were covered with thick
and tall ‘grass. Found several plains

On returning from this excursion I
could not help reflecting upon the affect-
ing contrast between this and my belov-
ed country. Here are no ficlds emiling
under the hand of the husbandman; no
gardens and orchards dressed in vernal
beauty; no harbors adorned with the
waving flags of commerce; no cities
lifting their turrets to the clouds; no
peaceful villages sprinkling the hills and
plains; and no glittering church spires
pointing the weary pilgrim to a “better
country.” Art and science have never
shed their genial influence over this be-
nighted land, nor has the light of salva-
tion yet dawned upon it. Generation
_after generation have gone down to the
shades of death without one ray to cheer
the dark valley, or a “morning star” to
give promise of an everlasting Gay.

(Mr. Coan.
| 15. The captain and myself went out
this morning with a view of penetrating
the country still further, and if ible
to find the camp of the natives. Finding a
path that had been considerably travel-
led, we followed it until we came to the
foot and western extremity of Table
mountain, when we saw a smoke rolling
over the opposite side; and soon after a
/man showed himself on the top. We
| passed on a few rods and observed a man
on horseback with several dogs followin
, him, shaping his course for the vesse
' Considering our object accomplished, we
| returned; and by the time we had reach-
‘ed the shore three others had arrived.
| 'Fhey all wore mantles made of the skins
\of the young guanaco; and two of them
had check trowsers and morocco boots,

where thé natives had formerly encamp- |; Their arms and breasts were naked, ex-
ed, at one of which we saw two huge || cept what was covered by their mantles
joints of a whale’s spine, some six or! loosely thrown over their shoulders and

bound round the waist with their bolas. |
They wore nothing upon their heads ‘at
a narrow fillet about an inch wide, with |
which they tie their hair, which being |
nicely parted over the centre of the |
head is suffered to hang loose about the |
shoulders. The bolas is an apparatus |
used for taking their game, and consists
of three balls inclosed in hide and attach-
ed to leather thongs about a yard and|
a half long, which are fastened together. |
It is used by taking one of the balls in|
the hand and whirling the others round; |
and when sufficient momentum is gained, |
it is thrown forward and winds itself
around the legs of the animal so closely
that it is easily taken.

{Mr. Arms.

At four o’clock, P. M., four natives
appeared on the shore opposite our ves-
fy They were mounted on horseback
and attended by a retinue of more than
twenty n a little time my com-

ion and the captain returned when a)

t was sent to ~~ them on board |

together with three In

ians who accom-
ied them, leaving one to keep their
Lassen. Being desirous of seeing the |
head quarters of the Indians before we |
landed our baggage, we proposed to the |
man who appeared to be the head |
of the party, to conduct us to their camp, |
where we would spend the night and re- |
turn to the vessel in the morning. Un-
derstanding him to assent to our pro-
are we went on shore, where he se-
ected each of us a horse, and he mount- |
ing a third led us rapidly over hills and
plains towards a mountain behind which |
we supposed the tribe to be encamped.
At iength he halted. We urged hit to|
which he did; and we soon met
a party of Indians with bows and arrows.
Our guide now inclined to return to the |
Seeds bet by repeating our requests to |
lead us to the camp we again succeeded |
in pressing him forward. As we ad-
vanced we were frequently met by small |
parties of the natives on their way to the |
vessel. At length the sun set and no|
Indian camp and no — — ap- |
pearing in sight, our guide could be per-_
ame to = no further and we were |
obliged to return. The young man now
led us with a more cheerful countenance
and a more rapid movement than before,
but it was not until ten o’clock at night,
that we arrived on the shore opposite our
vessel. Here we found about twent
savages encamped in the open air, wit
their horses uate around, and a multi- |
tude of dogs mingling with them. Not
e ing our return till morning, our)

Patagonia:—Journals of Messrs. Arms and Coan.

Oct.

tired; and as she was anchored at some
distance from the shore, our hailing was
not heard and we were obliged to cast in
our lot with the Indians. Weary and
hungry we set down in their circle
around a little fire of faggots, which, by
its faint glimmering, just served to ren-
der the dark visaged savages visible.
An aged man roasted a piece of meat, a
portion of which he brought to us. After
partaking of their hospitality, our youn
guide spread some skins upon the groun
for our bed and we lay down to repose
under the lofty curtain stretched over us
by the hand of our heavenly Father.
Each of us was kindly covered with a
thin blanket, and thus, amidst horses and
dogs, and savages, we slept calmly and
peacefully until the morning.

16. Returned on board early this
morning and made arrangements for
holding an interview with the young
man previously mentioned and his father
in relation to our mission among them.
When they came on board capt. Clift
very — introduced us to them as men
who loved them, and who had come a
great way to visit and do them good.
He told them that he wished to leave us
with them for a season, and requested
that they would furnis& us with provi-
sions and treat us with kindness; all
which they agreed to do, with much
readiness. We inquired about their
people and about one Maria, who we had
been told was the queen of their tribe.
They informed us that Maria and most
of the Indians were at a considerable
distance on a northern excursion, and
that they would return in one moon. We
sometimes found it difficult to make our-
selves understood, as we had no other
medium of communication than natural
signs and a smattering of the Spanish
language. When the necessary arrange-
ments were made, we took our baggage
on shore and pitched our little cloth tent
among the natives, expecting to return
no more on board the vessel, as she was
to leave the first favorable wind. Capt.
C. went on shore and rendered us all the
assistance in his power, generously offer-
ing us any thing from his vessel which
we needed for our comfort. We found
the Indians miserably poor, having little
to eat, and ready to beg our last morsel
of food unless it was concealed from
their sight. Their horses and dogs also
were so hunger bitten, that many of them
were mere shadows.

17. Sabbath. Remained in our tent
most of the day. From morning till
night we were thronged with the curious

friends on board the Mary Jane had re-'! natives, who crowded into every vacant

TIS wae a

VS wees "Ss 6

—o oC

— SS VS

— Fae OO CUM

1834. Patagonia:—Jowrnals of Messrs. Arms and Coan. 370

corner of our habitation, watching all
our motions and examining all our ef-
fects, and even the clothes on our per-
sons. Poor men! They gaze upon us
as superior beings, and while we shed
the tear of commiseration over their de-
gradation and wretchedness, we have no
medium by which to communicate to
their understandings or their hearts a
knowledge of that God who has made us
“to differ."—The Indians spent the day
in chatting, singing, laughing, smoking,
sleeping, and eating. Indolence and fil-
thiness are two very prominent charac-
teristics of these savages, and appear in
bold relief on the first interview. Our
old friend brought us a piece of roasted
guanaco, although he has but a pittance
for himself and family. He seems to
look upon us as his children and divides

his morsel with us.
[ Mr. Coan.

18. Both the males and females paint
their faces either the whole or in part,
commonly with black or dark brown,
which gives them a savage appearance.
Almost never washing, even their hands,
the color of their skin appears almost
black, though when they are washed they
are only swarthy, or perhaps a light olive.
Their hair is as black as a raven, long
and rather coarse, though much less so
than that of the United States’ Indians.
Their cheek bones are high and broad,
which gives them the appearance of
having large faces of an angular figure.
Their bodies are well formed, with
straight limbs, round and plump—feet
large, and their height from four and a
half to six feet.

[ Mr. Arms.

Whenever these natives espy a vessel
approaching their coast they always re-
pair immediately to the shore, and will
remain there, even though pinched with
hunger and exposed to the weather
withovt shelter by day or night, until it
disappears. The first inquiry among
them is fer rum and tobacco—two poi-
sons which have been administered to
them by our seamen; and so great is
their eagerness for these strange stimu-

lants, that I believe they would lie upon
the beach exposed to wind and storm,
until they were on the point of starva- |
tion, with the bare hope of obtaining a
dram or a plug of tobacco. They are
also fond of bread, molasses‘, and other |
articles of food; and are often anxious to
obtain muskets, ammunition, and knives,
though they have but little knowledge of
the use of the first. It is truly dis-
tressing to learn that our own country-

men have also plunged into the most
loathsome debaucheries with this unhap-
py people, and rendered almost invete-
rate those polluting vices which carry
death in their train, and spread a fearful
blight over all that is lovely. Even here,
in this obscure corner of the earth, almost
unknown to the naturalist, the merchant,
the philanthropist, or the Christian, the
missionary of the cross has been preced-
ed by the apostles of Satan; and that
disease which may well be compared to
a “dart stricken through the liver,” and
which “eats like a canker;” which is as a
fire shut up in the bones, burning “to the
lowest hell,” is reciprocally communicat-
ed. To the honor of the vessel which
brought us out be it said, that the im-
proper conduct here alluded to has not
been allowed by the captain; and as he
is a firm advocate of temperance, and
commands his vessel under that banner,
no ardent spirits have been given to the
natives.

19. Arose early, and went out to look
for the schooner, which was riding at
anchor in the bay when we retired; but
it was gone, the wind having favored
during the night. The waters slept or
rolled as before; the mountains wore
their fleecy crowns; the hills reared their
naked brows, and the plains rested in
loneliness; but wherever the eye turned
no traces of civilization were seen, its
last vestige had floated away like a
vision of the night, and nothing remained
to relieve the sight from those dreary
features which make this land as a
waste, howling wilderness.

(Mr. Coan.

It affords them great amusement to
see us write, and they.seem to think that
it is some wonderful thing. They usual-
ly appear pleasant to one another and
often divide the presents they receive
with their fellows. They seem to regard
private property, each one having his
own, and t _ their tent is common,
there seems to be no interferenee. One
horse is usually tied near the tent, so that
when water or other horses are wanted,
they are not obliged to go on foot.

(Mr. Arms.

20. The rain having ceased, the horses
were all brought up at an early hour this
morning, and capt. Louie, the young
Indian before mentioned, invited us to
prepare fora removal. Accordingly we
struck our tent and put our baggage in
readiness for the henen In ‘antler
these animals I was astonished at the
burdens they were made*to carry. After
some skins, etc., had been put upon one

of the horses, our chest lashed to a heavy
trunk to balance it, was put upon him,
and upon those a bag, as heavy as a
common travelling trunk, was placed,
and above all this a woman was mounted
to guide the horse. The horses gear is
very simple. The men use a rude sad-
dle constructed with pieces of wood, and
somewhat resembling our saddle-tree;
and the women a sort of pillion of skins,
and like the men, ride astride, but without
stirrups. The bridle is made of skin,
with wooden bit, and usually without a
head-stall. In packing the horses the
women did the labor, while the men lay
or set upon the ground as idle specta-
tors. For want ofa sufficient number of
horses, some of them carried double
riders. When every thing was in readi-
ness we mounted our horses, and taking
a sturdy Indian behind me, moved on-
ward in company with our young friend,
capt. Louie, who led the van and direct-
ed the movements of the party. Our
progress, I should judge, was about four
miles an hour. The day was cold, and
the wind strong and piercing. - After
riding eight or ten miles, the Indians
halted under a bunch of thorn-bushes,
kindled a little fire to warm or smoke
themselves, and then proceeded onward,
stopping occasionally when they found a
bunch of bushes as before. Saw many
guanacoes standing as sentinels upon the
surrounding hills, or grazing on the ex-
tended plains; but as we approached
them they would skim the plains “like a
hind let loose,” and soon disappeared.
avé advanced the young captain sud-

y halted, gazed a moment towards

~ th on the left, and then plunging his
- spurs into his horse’s side, darted like an

‘ @frow across the plain, with hair and
mantle streaming in the wind—dogs and
Indians following him. The rest of the
party moved on steadily with the bag-
gage. Inquiring the cause of this strange
movement, one of the savages pointed in
the direction the young man had gone,
and said, “Guanac, guanac,” giving us
to understand that he was pursuing a
guanaco. In a few minutes he rejoined
our party, having taken the animal he
pursued. The guanaco is a species of
the lama, somewhat larger than the deer,
with long legs and neck, and cloven feet.
Its color is a pale red or sorrel, and white.
The head and ears resemble those of
horses. It is clothed with wool, like the
sheep, though this is interspersed with
long hair. It neighs like a colt, and at a
little distance wight easily be taken for

Patagonia:—Journals of Messrs. Arms and Coan.

‘brought to us for our supper.

that animal. Its slower movements ap-
pear laborious and ungraceful; but when

Ocr.

pursued by the hunter, it moves with
great celerity, and appears hardly to
touch the ground. The flesh is very
palatable, and after a cold and hungry
ride of some twenty miles, a piece of it,
which the captain roasted and brought
us, was really grateful.

We reached the camp at four P. M.,
after a ride of twenty-five or thirty miles,
which we performed in about seven
hours. Here we found a company of the
savages inhabiting ten tents of skin. On
our arrival the natives gathered around
us, men, women, and children; first
standing and gazing upon us at a re-
spectful distance, till encouraged by our
attentions they gradually approached
nearer, apparently welcoming us with
mingled surprise and joy. Our baggage,
even to the smallest article, was brought
safely; and capt. Louie, who had taken
special charge of it on the way, now
stowed it carefully in his tent, and re-
mained by it until our own tent was
erected and prepared for its reception.
As soon as the bustle was a little over
our old Indian mother boiled a piece of
the guanaco which had been taken on
the way, a liberal share of which was
Young
Louie came and sat down by us, and be-
gan to inquire the American name of
many things around, and in return told
us what they were called in the Patago-
nia tongue.. He and all his father’s
house appear very attentive and friendly
to us, and we have already reason to be
thankful that the good providence of
God has put us under the care of this
family, as they are evidently the most
intelligent, hospitable, and prepossessing
of any of the natives we have yet seen.
As the sun set, the crying of the little
ones in the tents, the barking of dogs,
and the noisy mirth of numerous children,
engaged in merry gambols about the
camp, revived the associations of child-
hood and brought domestic scenes of my
native land vividly to recollection.

[ Mr. Coan.

21. We found ten tents in the camp,
but it would perhaps be impossible to tell
how many souls there are in them,
though from a little calculation I should
judge about fifty. The tents are made
of the skins of the old guanaco, sewed
together, and so spread over poles that
are stuck in the ground for that purpese,
as to cover the top and the sides, ex-
cept the front, which is always to be
eastward and entirely open. On this
side they build their fires.

The provisions that we brought from
the vessel being about exhausted, we ap-

_ .

1834. Wesleyan Missionary Society:— Polynesia. 381
plied to the natives for some, but had) should undoubtedly have been

only to ask the question and we were
plentifully.supplied, though we had nei-

ther bread nor any substitute for it. We |!

Proceedings of

FOREIGN.

WESLEYAN MISSION IN THE FRIENDLY
ISLANDS. ~

General View of the Islands.

Wrat are usually called the Friendly Islands
include, not only the Tonga group with Eua,
but also the Hapae or Haabai group, Haa-
fuluhao or the Vavou group, and Niua or the
Kebel’s Islands—about two hundred islands
in the whole; many of which are very smal!
and without inhabitants, but others are thickly
peopled. Till very lately, the inhabitants
were living in the grossest idolatry; but the
Sun of righteousness has arisen with healing
under his wings, and many of the benighted
natives of these islands have seen a great
light. They now give glory unto the Lord,
and declare his praise in the islands.

The people who inhabit the above-mention-
ed islands all speak the same language; and,
except those who have embraced Christianity,
wership the same gods, or gods of the same
name and nature, for they are all vanity and
lies. The other groups have acknowledged
Tonga as the head; and have generally
brought yearly offerings, as a token of their
submission.

Tonga—is the largest of the islands, and
contains. more inhabitants than any other
island in these seas: it is thought to contain
about ten thousand. These are under differ-
ent chiefs; of whom Tubou, or Josiah (our
chief,) is acknowledged the head. Tubou
was baptised in 1829, and has held fast his
profession. So mild is his government, that
one is reminded of the state of the Israelites,
when there was ‘no king, and every man did
that which was right in his own eyes. It is
thought that if Tubou had used his influence
among his chiefs and people, hundreds, who
at this time worship dumb idols, would have
been worshippers of the true Ged. However,
the Lord is carrying on his work: his name is
made known in every part of the land; and
some are leaving the enemy’s cause almost
every week, and joining us at this place: this
they prefer to continuing in their own villages
to serve the devil. Many of the chiefs who
occupy important districts at Tonga are op-
posed to religion, and will not allow the wor-
ship of God to be carried on in their territo-
ries; so that those of their people who wish to
serve God have to escape to our place as a
refuge, or they would be expelled by their
chiefs. However, I hope the day is not dis-
tant, when we shall gain a glorious entrance

VOL. XXX,

Af

the trouble of even asking, had we waited
a little longer. (Mr. Arms.
[To be continued.]

other Societies.

into every part of this populous island: for al-
though a few of the chiefs persecute us, yet it
is very mildly; and we are on good terms
with some of the head chiefs, who have heard
with patience our statements of the vanity and
sinfulness of idolatry, and the importance and
blessedness of true religion.

. The districts of Tonga are, 1. Nukualofa,
which is the residence of Tubou: 2. Hihifo, a
populous district under a chief called Ata:
3. Bea, a strongly fortified village, governed
by a chief named Taufa, or Fae: 4. Mua,
another principal district at the east end of
Tonga, ruled by Balu and Fatu: 5. Vaini, a
populous village ruled by Maafu, a blind
chief: 6. Houma, very populous, between
Hihifo and Bea.

Connected with Tonga is Eua, a very fine
high island, about twelve miles from Tonga,
and will be a fine station for a missionary: we
hope, ere long, to be invited to give instruc-
tion to its inhabitants. Some of the worship-
pers of God are on the island now; who will
be a seed, I hope, which shall spring up
bear fruit to God. :

Hapae or Haabai Islands. ‘These are
numerous, but generally small: eighteen of
them are inhabited: they lie to the north of
Tonga, at the distance of eight. or ten hours’
sail, or about fifty or sixty miles. The
island called Nomuka is one of the nearest to
Tonga.

The present king of the Habai group is the
son ef the late Tubontoa. He is y relat-
ed to the present Tubou at Tonga, and does
credit to his Christian profession: he has a.
very strong hatred of idolatry and his former
superstitions. The Lord has used him fortis
glory. May he use him more and more, and “
then crown him with eternal life!

Haano is one of the most northerly islands
of this group; and is about one hour's sail,
with a fair wind, from Lifuka.

Vavau or Haufuluhao Islands.—This group
lies to the north of the Haabais, and is about
50 or 60 miles from Haano, that is, a day’s
sail with a fair wind.

Niua, or Kebel’s Islands.—These are two
in number. They are not very near to each
other, and Jie between Vavou and the Samoa
group, called the Navigator’s Islands. The
istand which is frequented by the Tonga peo-
ple is not large; and, from the best accounts
which I can get, has not more than from three
to four hundred inhabitants.

Change wrought by the Gospel.

Several statements authegige the hope that
the great work of God alrgady accomplished
is only the commencement of a more si

49

and_extensive triumph of the gospel in these
interesting islands. Even in this early stage
of our operations, from eight to ten thousand
ons have renounced idolatry, and embrac-
ed Christiariity, in the last six years,at these
islands.. What Christian heart does not bourd
with grateful exultation? The Lord hath done
it things for us, whereof we are glad. To
im;be-the praise ascribed, both for the work
itself, and for the grace given to our society
and its missionaries, by the employment of
their humble instrumentality in the achieve-
ment of results so beneficial and delightful.
There are from six to eight thousand per-
sons at this island (viz. Tonga) who are yet
living in the grossest idolatry. The Tonga
people have many gods, such as birds, fishes,
reptiles, horses, canoes, clubs, whales’ teeth,
mats, plants, spirits of departed chiefs, infer-
nal spirits, ete. To these they apply in their
distress, and offer pigs, yams, cloth, canoes,
and property of various kinds. They pray,
ery, and cut themselves, cut off the fingers of
their children and friends, and soietimes
strangle their friends, to appease their gods!
Let then the friends of missionaries help!
There remains much ground to be possessed.
Send us more missionaries—hold us up by
your faithful prayers!—and God will bless us.

Notices of the Navigators’ and Feejee Islands.

The appellation of “Friendly Islands” is

often taken in so wide an extent as to com-
hend under it these two groups of islands;

and, in fact, all the groups between the So-
eiety Islands on the east, and the Autralasian
{islands in the same latitude on the west.

The Tonga people go frequently from Niua
to the Samoa group, or Navigators’ Islands,
in two days of fine weather. The principal
isiands are five in number, and the inhabitants
mre very numerous: they appear very mild in
their manners, and open to receive instruction;
but are living in the grossest idolatry.

The Feejee Islands lie to the west of Tonga,
and are about a day and a night’s sail from it.
They are numerous: five are said to be large:
Ambowa is the principal island, the king of
which has great influence over all the other
islands. The Tonga people frequently visit
this group, in order to obtain canoes. The
island to which the Tonga people generally
go, is named Lakemba, the chief of which is
related to them; and many of the people on
this island speak the Tonga Janguage. The
Feejeeans are very numerous, and are a noble
race of men. They are brave and hardy, but
much addicted to war; so much so. that they
always have war instruments about them, by
night and by day. In several of the islands,
if not in all, they are quite naked until they are
17 or 18 years of age; and, after that period,
wear only a very thin and narrow piece of na-
tive cloth. They are a very ingenious people,
and very quick at learning any thing: some of
them hav. been received into the church of
Christ ai Tonga and at Lifuka, and some have
been taken to the, church triumphant; but the
inhabitants of this gtoup are, at present, deep-

Church Missionary Society:—Egypt.

Ocz,

ly sunk in wretchedness and idolatry. When
a Feejee chief dies, his wives are strangled,
that they may accompany him to the other
world: they have many other bloody and cruel
superstitions, by which their wretched lives
are brought to a termination. Our way is, I
trust, opening among them: and that, ere long,
the gospel trumpet will be sounded in all the
islands of the whole group. I am happy to
learn, that, out of the crews of three ships
which have been wrecked within the last year
and a half at.these islands, no man kas lost his
life by the savage Feejeeans: a few years
ago, if a Véssel had been “wrecketl.at any of
these islands,, every -nvan--would have been
killed, and many of them eaten: this cireum-
stance shews that the tone” of feeling at the
Feejee group is improving; and that the'Lord
is causing his great name to be known among
this long Jost part of the human family. t

MISSION OF THE CHURCH MISSIONARY SO-
CIETY IN EGYPT.

From a joint letter of Messrs. Kruse, Mueller,
and Lieder, dated at Cairo, August Ist, 1833,
it appears that public worship is held by them
statedly on the Sabbath, both in Arabic and
English, and that a considerable portion of
each week is devoted to religious intercourse
with the people. Mr. Leider makes journeys
to all parts of the country circulating the
Scriptures and tracts, and freely, in a conver-
sational way, preaching the gospel to all.

Seminary for Schoolmasters and Catechists.

I am glad to say, (writes Mr. Ksuse,) that
all things are now ready for the boarding-
school; so that to-morrow the children will
enter our house. I shall have no rest till they
are under our roof; but it is difficult to decide
who are most anxious for this establishment,
the boys or myself. Indeed, their eagerness
to come in gives me much pleasure; and it has
been very painful to me that I could not get
ready to receive them sooner. It was a trial
to them and to me; but the greater is the joy,
now the hour is come, when they can enter;
and I firmly believe that each boy will bring
his peculiar blessing with him into the house.

There are, at present, only ten boys, select-
ed from the day school, with whom to begin
the boarding-school; and they are generally
very promising. A boy was sent to me, a
fortnight ago, who seems to be more promis-
ing than all the rest: since which, he has at-
tended school and lived in my house, and I
am more delighted with him eyery day.

This schoot is regarded as a seminary for
training up schoolmasters and catechists. For
this purpose, the pupils are instructed by a
superior teacher in literal Arabic, reading and
writing, composition, arithmetic and geogra-
phy: they are also to have, for an hour every
day, lessons in English, which will not only
enable them the better to understand their own

1834. | Church Missionary Society:—Abyssima. SEF

mmar, but also, at a future time, to read
nglish tracts and books: and in case any one
should exhibit a capacity for translation, pe-
culiar attention will be paid to him in this
branch. However, the principal part of in-
struction given by Mr. Kruse himself will al-
ways be religious, making them acquainted
with the doctrines of the Bible and with church
history. In the first instance, the greatest at-
tention will be given, and all instructions di-
rected, to make them true Christians; for, ex-
cept their hearts are truly converted to Christ,
all other attainments will be in vain. They
are therefore (besides receiving religious in-
struction) under the constant inspection of Mr.
Kruse; living in the same house, as children of
the same family; and attending morning and
evening prayers: so that, whether they are
Jearning in the school, or otherwise employed
in their leisure hours, in whatever they. do,
truly Christian principles will be inculcated
upon their minds.

Mr. Mueller remarks respecting the
State of the Day School.

It is true, we cannot boast of many conver-
sions or revivals; but, notwithstanding that,
we have reason to rejoice in hope. Our two
teachers, respecting whose sincerity we were
formerly in much doubt and fear, now give us
reason to believe that they are under the in-
fluence of saving grace. With regard to the
children in our schools, we rejoice, but with
trembling; for what seems firm to-day, ap-
pears tottering or broken on the morrow. Bui
the eyes of Jehovah are upon his truth, and
his arms are extended to support -and further
it. Our comfort and encouragement are to
know, that however slow the progress of
God’s cause in Egypt may be—however great
and multiplied the difficulties it has to encoun-
ter—it must eventually triumph; for prayer
will be heard, and the divine promises will be
accomplished.

Mrs. Mueller has at present two girls under
her care, besides her own: one of them is the
daughter of a free black; the other is of the
Galla tribes of Abyssinia, whom Mrs. Mueller
saw in the house of Dr. Dussap, to be sold,
with several others. The sight of this poor
girl much affected Mrs. Mueller, especially as
the girl wished to be sold to Christians. She
is now a particular object of prayer and in-
struction; and if our endeavors should be
blessed with success, we hope, sooner or later,
to find in_her a faithful female servant, so
scarce and precious in this country. She is,
of course, now free. May the truth in Christ
Jesus make her a alliallly free woman in the
Lord!

MISSION. OF THE CHURCH M@SSIONARY
SOCIETY IN ABYSSINIA.

Tue Rev. S. Gobat, whose labors and trials
in Abyssinia, in company with the Rev. Mr.
Kugler, since deceased, were noticed at pp.

123, 166, and 262, vol. xxviii, subsequently
returned from that benighted field of labor
to Europe, and has published a journal of his
residence in Abyssinia, and is about returning
to that country again. The Rev. C. W. Isen-
berg gives the following account of his studies’
at Cairo, preparatory to entering Abyssinia.

I have lessons in Amharic, in the afternoon;
from my Abyssinians; but not yet regularly.
They are present at the lessons which I have
every night from my Arabic teachers. Thesé
two youths go on very well in the Christiar
course. I witness, with great satisfaction, the
working of the Holy Spirit in their hearts;
and, what gives me a decisive proof of this is,
that I observe them growing more and moré
honest and simple-minded—the general dispo-
sition of the Abyssinians tending rather to dis-
simulation and falsehood. Having arranged
to celebrate the Lord's supper on Christmas
day, all the members of our missionary family
here participating, we fixed upon that festival
for our monthly communion. As soon as the
two Abyssinians were informed of it, which
was on the Sunday before Christmas day;
they expressed a great desire to join us in that
sacrament; and told me, that, from the first
time they had seen us at the communion,
which was on Good Friday, they had felt this
desire, but did not dare to mention it. J
asked them their views of the Lord’s supper,
and entered into a serious examingtion of their
state of mind; whereupon I was stren
in the conviction that they were brought, by
the influence of. the Holy Spirit, to a vi
knowledge of the gospel, and that their anx-
iety to partake of the sacrament
from a sincere desire to be established in their
faith and spiritual union with Christ. I stated
the case to-our brethren; who were very glad
to hear of it, and, by this outward act, to te«
ceive them into our bond of fellowship. Ac¢
cordingly, I stated to them again, as I had
done before, the. views of our Protestant
church, and the doctrine of the Bible respect-
ing the holy sacrament, and the errors of their
own church; and recommended them particu-s
larly to have recourse to prayer. They were
extremely glad to be admitted; and when the
day arrived, we had service before the com-
munion was administered, when I preached,
in German, on Luke ii, 10, 11; and afterward
Mr. Mueller administered the sacrament to us,
using, to the Abyssinians, the Arabic transla-
tion of that part of the English communion
service where the priest administers the bread
and wine after consecrating them. You can
easily imagine the satisfaction I felt in behold-
ing here the first-fruits, as it were, of our
Abyssinian mission——these two promising
youths joining us in the chief part of oar con-
fessicn. I rejoiced indeed with trembling, re-
membering Girgis, and the:.many dangers and
temptations to which they would be exposed;
but my joy was tempered, not embittered, by
these considerations; and it was, and is, an

important matter of thankfulness, that, at the

very beginning of my course, I should be able
to have such a cheering experience. But I
must not omit to mention here, that Provi-
dence had prepared their minds for grace; as
appears from the affliction they suffered on
account of Girgis, previously to their joining
Mr. Gobat. He, as a faithful laborer, cast the
seed of the gospel into a well-prepared soil,
the fruits of which I am allowed to gather. I
recommend them very strongly to your prayer,
that the Lord may preserve them, and make
them grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in order that they may
save their own souls, and become instrumenta!
to the conversion of many of their brethren.
Last week I took into my house another
Abyssinian, who a fortnight ago arrived here
from his own country, on his way to Jerusa-
lem. From the Coptic convent, in which he
resided, he several times came to see his coun-
trymen; on which occasions he found them
learning from their Bibles and Testaments.
Last. Thursday, when I came home from a
call on Mr. Kruse, I found him at my house,
desiring to speak to me. He told me, that,
as he had been made, by the governor of his
province, (the province of Gojam, which bor-
ders to the south, on the Lake of Tzana),
head or overseer of the church in his town, he
ought to have learnt to read and write; but
having been a soldier previously, he knew
nothing, and was afterward ashamed to learn
the alphabet, like a little child. Now being in
a foreign country, where nobody knew him,
he had a great desire to learn; and entreated
me very earnestly to receive him into my
house, and instruct him. I first consulted with
my brethren here, who concurred in opinion
that I should take him on trial. I then sent
one of the Abyssinians, Kidam, with him to
the bath; where Kidam had to take his filthy
rags from him, and, after the bath, to clothe
him with a new dress. When he came to me.
and testified his gratitude, I told him, that. as
as he remained with me, and learned, he
should have the new dress; but when he wish-
ed to leave, he must also leave his new dress,
and I would give him back his old rags. He
said he thought he should not go to Jerusa-
lem; but stay with me till we went to Abys-
sinia, where he would join me. Kidam and
Hadara are now constantly engaged in teach-
ing him, when they are free from business;
and he appears very eager in study.

a

DOMESTIC.

SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE AMER-
ICAN TEMPERANCE SOCIETY.

THE report is introduced by the following
remarks, presenting the very clearest and
strongest ground of encouragement to those
who are devoting themselves to the promotion
of human welfare.

Report of the American Temperance Society.

Ocr.
Auspicious Peculiarities of the present Age.

The present age is marked with strong and
auspicious peculiarities. One of them is, in-
creasing numbers of people are disposed to
inquire, with regard to every moral principle
and practice, “Is it right?” It is less satisfac-
tory now, than in former times, that a thing is
pleasant merely; that it is popular, has been
practised a long time, by respectable men, or
even by good men. The question is, and
with numbers increasing continually, “Is it
right?”

Another auspicious indication of the present
time, is, the standard of right and wrong, with
increasing numbers, is the Bible. ‘This has,
by good men, long been aeknowledged in
theory, as the only sufficient and perfect
moral standard. But they are now, more
than ever before, applying it to practice. Not
only are they laboring with new vigor to send
it to all nations, and convey a knowledge of
its contents to all hearts; but they are appeal-
ing to it, as the criterion of thought and ac-
tion; and are endeavoring, with new diligence,
to bring every soul, under its all-controlling
power.

It is not so decisive, as it once was, that a
thing is legal, according to human statutes; or
honorable in human society; but the question
is, Does it accord with the will of God as re-
vealed in the Bible? To the law, and the
testimony; if they speak not according to this
word, increasing numbers conclude, there is no
light in them. Nor do they confine the super-
vision of the Bible, as much as they once did,
to subjects that are purely religious. They
are extending it to all the affairs of life. Busi-
ness, amusement, legislation, every thing in
which men are engaged, they feel bound to
prosecute in accordance with the Bible; and
whether they eat, or drink, or whatever they
do, to do all in obedience to its dictates.

Another momentous indication of the pre-
sent time, and one whieh takes hold with a
mighty grasp on the destinies of men, is, that
the number is increasing who feel conscience-
bound daily to listen to the Bible as the voice
of God, speaking to them; and with fervent
supplication for the teaching of his Spirit, that
they may understand his will; and who, when
they do understand it, are not afraid, or
ashamed to do it.

The number is rapidly increasing, who,
when they learn that the Bible condemns a
practice, will renounce it; and who, when
they leara that it requires an «ction, will at-
tempt, with the spirit which the Bible incul-
cates, to perform it, whether other men do this
or not; and who will leave the consequences
to the divine disposal.

There is a deeper and more pervading con-
viction, than ever before, of individual per-
sonal respénsibility directly to God; binding
each one, in all situations, for the character
and tendency of his actions, to the retributions
of eternity. Efforts to do good are not so
much confined, as they once were, to ways
only which have the sanction of general ex-

ie

cov VwweitieesgE#nt ws?

1834. Report of the Amcrican Temperance Society. 385

ample; or that are deemed by the great body
of men, to be respectable. It is less neces-
sary now, than it once was, for a good man to
see a great multitude ahead, before he thinks
it expedient for him to do right; or attempt,
by sound argument, and kind persuasion, to_
induce others to do right.

The consequence is, it is becoming more
and more common, if a man wishes to have |
good done, to do it himself; if a man wishes to_
have a little good done, to do that; and if he |
wishes to have great good done, to do that; |
and to do it now. There is less disposition
than formerly to depend on other people, aad |
to put off present duty to future time. Men
are not so much afraid, as they once were, or
ashamed, if needful, to go in the path of duty,
alone; and, whether others do it or not, at-
tempt to do good as they have opportunity to.
all men.

And men are less satisfied now, than they
once were, with clipping off the twigs or lop-
ping off the branches; they are more disposed
to go to the root, and in order to make the
fruit good, to make the tree good. They have
learned that they cannot stop the stream,
without drying up the fountain.

The consequence is, efforts to do good, are
more successful than ever before. They take
a wider range; exert a more pervading influ-
ence; and the same amount of effort accom-
plishes vastly greater results. And tne more
men do the will of God, the more plain his
will is; and the blessings of obeying it, are |
more obvious and abundant.

A striking developement of these principles
has been made in the temperance reformation. |
A vicious practice had obtained, had received
the sanction of legislation, and the support of
the example of nearly the whole Christian
world. But it was followed, as its natural
and necessary result, by loss of property,
character, life and soul, to an extent which
must fill every person who comprehends it,
with amazement. And the question was
started, no doubt, by the Spirit of God, “Is it}
right,” to continue a practice which produces
such results; and which, if continued, will per-
petuate and increase them to all future ages? |
The Bible was examined, and providences |
observed; divine teaching was sought, and
the conviction was fastened on the mind, that |
the practice was not right; and that to pre-
vent the evils which it produced, men must,
cease to perpetuate the cause.

And for the purpose of making known to}
them, especially to our own countrymen, the |
reasons why they should do this, the Aimeri- |
can Temperance Society was formed. Its,
object, is, by the diffusion of information and |
the exertion of kind moral influence, to at-
tempt, with the divine blessing, to produce
such a change of sentiment and practice with
regard to intoxicating drink, that intemperance
shall cease, and temperance, with all its at-

tendant benefits to the body and the soul, ||

shall universally prevail.
Temperance, in the view of those who formed
this society, is the moderate and proper use of

things beneficial; and abstinence from things
hurtful. Ardent spirit, being in its nature, as
manifested by its effects, a poison; and of
course, one of the hurtful things, and in this
country, the grand means of intoxication,
their object required them to abstain from the
drinking, and from the furnishing of it; and to
endeavor, by all suitable means, to induce the
whole community to de the same.

It is quite impossible to give an abstract of
a document filled with statements and reason-
ings, of so interesting and important a charac+
ter, and presented in so condensed a form, as
this report. The following items are inserted
here, selected from a multitude of others
equally deserving the serious perusal of all the
friends of religion, civil liberty, national pros-
perity, and human welfare.

Progress of the Reform during the Year.

At our last annual meeting, there had been
formed in the United States 21 state temper-
ance societies; and in smaller districts, it was
supposed, more than 5,000 other temperance
societies, embodying, on the plan of abstinence
from the drinking of ardent spirit and from the
traffic in it, more than 1,000,000 members.
More than 2,000 men had ceased to make it;
and more than 6,000 had ceased to sell it.
They believed that the business was wicked,

|| and they applied this belief to their practice.

More than 5,000 men, who once were drunk-
ards, had within five years ceased to use in-
toxicating drink; and were, as all men who
pursue this course will be, sober men. Many
of them had become highly respectable and
useful, and not a few truly pious men.

More than 700 vessels were afloat on the
ocean, in which ardent spirit was not used.

The United States Temperance Conven-
tion, that had been invited by this society to
meet in Philadelphia, assembled in that city
on the 24th of May. It was composed of
more than 400 delegates, and from 21 states.
Seldom has a body of men assembled of
greater weight of character, and of higher and
better influence in the country.

On the 18th of September, a State Temper-

!!ence Convention was held at Worcester in

Massachusetts. More than 500 delegates

|| were present, and from all parts of the com-

monwealth. Distinguished gentlemen of all
professions were n.embers, and the governor
of the commonwealth was president of the
convention. Since that time rumerous indi-
viduals in the commonwealth have renounced
the traffic; licenses for the sale of spirit have
been refused in many towns; about 10,000
persons embodied in Ward Temperance So-
cieties in Boston, and great humbers in other
parts of the state. .

There are now in Boston, five temperance
| hotels and twenty temperance groceries. In
| the county of Suffolk, the number of licenses
‘has been reduced from 613 to314. In Hamp-

shire county, the number of grog-shops has
been reduced from eighty-three, to eight. In
Plymouth and Bristol counties, and in numer-
ous towns no licenses are given; and in many
of them ardent spirit is not sold.

On the 18th of November, a similar conven-
tion was held at Utica in New York; and on
the 3d of December in Middletown in Connec-
ticut. Both of these conventions, after mature
deliberation, expressed the same conviction
with the others.

On the 18th of December, a State Tem-
perance Convention was held at Columbus
in Ohio. The governor of the state, who
is president of the State Temperance Society,
was one of the committee who invited the
meeting, and was president of the conven-
tion.

On the 25th of December, a similar con-
vention was held at Jackson in Mississippi;
and on the 7th of January at Frankfort in
Kentucky. At both these meetings they ex-
pressed unanimously their conviction of the
immorality of the traffic in ardent spirit. Of
the latter the governor of the state was ap-
pointed the president, and the lieutenant gov-
ernor, who is president of the senate, was ap-
pointed one of the vice presidents.

On the 15th of January, a State Temper-
ance Convention was held in Vermont; on the
5th of February, in Maine, and on the 12th, in
New Jersey; and on the 19th of the same
month, a Convention of Cities was held in
the city of New York. Each of these con-
ventions, like the others above mentioned,
was numerously attended, and at each, the
resolution was passed, that the traffic in ardent
spirit, to be used as a drink, is an immorality;
and ought to be universally abandoned.

On that day, the American Congressional
Temperance Society held its first anniversary
in the Capitol at Washington. In the absence
of the president, honorable Lewis Cass, secre-
tary of war, on account of official duties, the
chair was taken by the honorable William
Witkins, senator from Pennsylvania, one of
the vice presidents.

On the 4th of March, a State Temperance
Convention was held at Harrisburg in Penn-
sylvania. Here also a deep conviction of the
immorality of the traffic in ardent spirit was
expressed by many.

A convention has also been held, and a
State Temperance Society formed in Mis-
souri.

In May, a State Temperance Convention
was held at Dover, in Delaware. Here, also,
as in other similar bodies, a resolution was
passed, that, in the judgment of the conven-
tion, the traffic in ardent spirit, is an immoral-
ity, and ought to be universally abandoned.
Thus has this sentiment been expressed by
bodies embracing more than five thousand
ministers of the gospel, and six thousand
Christian churches; hy the American Con-
‘gressional Temperance Meeting, by the United
States Temperance Convention, by ten State
Temperance Conventions, and numerous other
bodies and claéses of men, in varions ways
and places, throughout the land.

Report of the American Temperance Society.

Ocer.

More than 7,000 temperance societies have
already been formed in the United States, em-°
bracing, it is supposed, more than 1,250,000
members. These persons, who are of all ages
from 12 to 90 years, of all varieties of condi-
tion, profession, and employment, know by
experience that ardent spirit is needless; and
multitudes of them know that it is hurtful, and
that men are in all respects better without it.
Of course it is wicked to drink it, or to furnish
it to be drunk by others. And the conviction
of this truth is rapidly extending among all
classes of people. More than 3,000 distilleries
have been stopped; and more than 7,000 mer-
chants have ceased to sell the poison.

More than 1,000 vessels are now afloat on
the ocean, in which ardent spirit is not
used. And though they visit every clime
and at all seasons, and many of them actual-
ly go round the globe, the men who navigate
them are in all respects better than when they
used it.

The use of spirituous liquor by officers and
men has long been among the chief causes of
shipwreck Should insurance offices generaily
discriminate between temperance ships end
others, it would be a source of great pecuniary
profit; and should owners of vessels employ
none who use the poison, to navigate them,
they would save, annually, an immense amount
of property, and multitudes of valuable lives.
This subject is exciting increased attention
not only in this country, but in Europe.

Baring, Brothers, & Co. of London, wrote
to their agent in Amsterdam, to know why
he had not obtained freights. His reply was,
that there were American vessels, com-
manded by temperance captains, taking
freight; and while they remain, none offer to
other ships.

More than 10,000 drunkards have, withia
five years, ceased to use any intoxicating
drink. And when sober men all set the ex-
ample, and treat drunkards kindly, it has been
found comparatively easy to induce them to
follow it. More than thirty such cases have
occurred in a population of less than 3,000
souls. Let there be the same number in pro-
portion to the population, throughout the
United States, and it would make more than
130,000. The salvation of drunkards from
this fell destroyer, is evidently in the hands of
sober men. And if they will take the course
pursued by those who have already been so
successful, in less than five years, they will
achieve a victory such as creation never saw:
save 130,000 drunkards from this double
death, and preserve from falling into it
130,000 more. Let them cease to sell the
poison, cease to use it, and go, with love in
their hearts, and kindness on their tongues, to
those who are now twice dead, and well nigh
buried, and it will cause them to live. Their
life or death is in the hands of sober men.

A rum-seller in Massachusetts was visited
by the wife of one of his customers, who be-
sought him not to sell the poison to her hus-
band. It made him so cruel to her and her
children, that she could not endure it. But
he let her know that if her husband wanted

i
:

—_— = SS

= aS Sr lU!DClODOO OULD Ci

[
}
t

1834.

rum, he should have it. She went away to
mourn in silence, and to try to guard her
children against the direful influence of him,
who, for money, was killing their father. He
continued to sell. His customers, from time
to time, became drankards. Their estates
fell into his hands. He became a rich man.
At length he died; and went as poor to judg-
ment, as if he had gained nothing by destroy-
ing his neighbors. His sons inherited his
estate. They moved into the western coun-
try. The eldest opened a store, and prose-
cuted the business of his father. He soon,
like his father’s customers, became a drunkard,
and sunk into an ignominious grave. His
brother took his place, and prosecuted his
business. He, too, became a drunkard, and
was shortly with his brother, in the drunkard’s
grave. The third and only remaining son
took the property and prosecuted the business.
And when our secretary, the last winter,
passed that way, he was a drunkard, stagger-
ing about the streets. And as the father wit-
nesses his iniquities visited upon his children,
and beholds them ceming in such a rapid suc-
cession to mingle with those, whom his, and
their business have ruined, in the place pre-
pared for them, does he not feel, that should
the way of destroying others, appear even
right unto a man, the end thereof is the way
of death. “It is found,” says Judge Platt,
‘that of the tavern keepers and retailers of
ardent spirit in the State of New York, during
the last forty years, more than two-thirds have
become drunkards, and reduced their families
to poverty and wretchedness.

More than 4,500,000 copies of various pub-
lications have been issued the past year, by
the New York State Temperance Society,
and vast numbers by other temperance socie-
ties and individuals in various parts of the
country. The eagerness with which they are
sought, while they inculcate, with the greatest
plainness and power, the gross immorality and
enormous wickedness of the traflic in ardent
spirit, shows that this truth commends itself to
the conscience, and is producing permanent
settled conviction in the minds of sober men
throughout the nation.

The statements contained in the report,
show that views and measures, similar to those
adopted in this country, are prevailing in Eng-
land, Scotland, Ireland, Sweden, Russia,
Prussia, and other countries in the eastern
hemisphere. A writer in Sweden, endeavor-
ing to awaken attention to the threatening
evil, states that—

In a population of about 3,000,000, they
have 170,000 distilleries; and consume an-
nually 60,104,570 canns (45,078,427 gallons)
of distilled liquor; at an expense to the con-
sumers of 62,177,636 rix dollars, (about
$65,000,000.)

During the past year copies of the 6th an-
nual report, in which the immorality of the

Report of the American Temperance Society. 387

license laws is discussed, have been sent to
various individuals, with two inquiries—

1. Are the principles exhibited in this re-
port in your view correct, and the arguments
sound?

2. What would probably be the effect on
the great interests of the community, should
the people generally, and legislators, choose
to have all legislation on this subject conform-
ed to those principles?”

Replies have been received, cordially ap-
proving of the ground maintained in that re-
port, and expressing a decided conviction that
all laws licensing the sale of ardent spirits as
a drink are immoral and of a highly injurious
tendency, from the Hon. Samuel Fleccher,
N. H.; Rev. President Wayland, R. I.; Hon.
Mark Doolittle, Mass.; Rev. President Fisk,
of the Wesleyan University, Con.; Gerrit
Smith, Esq., and E. C. Delevan, Esq., N. Y.;
Hon. George Sullivan, N. H.; Hon. Joseph
Lumpkin, Geo.; Rev. President Young, Ken-
tucky; Rev. President Humphrey, Mass.;
Hon. Theodore Frelinghuysen, N. J.; and
Hon. Judge Daggett, and Hon. John Cotton
Smith, Con.

The report shows conclusively that “The
trafic in ardent spirit, to be used as a drink,
is a violation of the law of God, and is an im-
morality.” The following are a few of the
humerous facts introduced in the course of
this discussion,

Of 253 paupers in the county of Oneida,
New York, 246 were made such by ardent
spirit. Of 1,134 in the county of Baltin:. ve,
Maryland, 1,059 were made paupers ir. the
same way. Of 3,000 admitted to the alms-
house in Salem, Mass., the superintendent,
who is as well able to judge as any other man,
states that, in his opinion, 2,900 were brought
there by intemperance. Of 572 men in the
almshouse in New York, the superintendent
states, that there are not 20 that can be called
sober men; and that of 601 women, he doubts
whether 50 of them can be called sober. 95
drunkards were committed to the penitentiary
in Boston in a single month.

Of 1,969 paupers in different almshouses,
1790, according to the testimony of the over-
seers of the poor, were brought there by
spirituous liquor; and of 4,969, in different
almshouses, 4,690 were brought there in the
same way. And very few individuals are
found in any almshouse, but what have been
in the habit of using strong drink, It has
been the grand cause of pauperism throughout
the United States.

In one year, the superintendent of the alms-
house in Albany states, 633 persons have been
|| received there. He classes them as follows:
|| six hundred and sixteen brought there directly

or indirectly by rum; one an insane person;
seventeen others being sent from remote
towns in the county, could not be ascertained
to a certainty, but the cause of this poverty
ean hardly be doubted. Two hundred and
ninety-seven persons were in the almshouse
when the present incumbent took charge, so

that nine hundred and thirty have been re- |

lieved at the pub'ic expense during the year—
these, added to the commitments to the jail,
make two thousond one hundred and forty-six
in the jail and poor-house during the year—
about one to every fourteen of the whole popu-
lation!!! _

Of 643, who were committed to the house
of correction in Boston, in one year, 453 were
drunkards. And the keeper states, that in-
temperance is almost the sole cause of com-

Method of Conducting the Monthly Concert for Prayer.

|

Ocr.

mitments, and that he does not believe, there
were ten among the whole, who were not intem-
perate.

From the statements of sheriffs, judges, and
keepers of prisons, it appears that from three-
fourths to seven-eighths of the crimes commit-
ted are owing to the use of ardent spirits.

The report is concluded with affectionate
but pungent addresses to moderate drinkers;
to those who furnish ardent spirit to moderate
drinkers; to ministers of the gospel, of every
name, and in every country; and to the mem-
bers of the churches of Christ of every denom-
ination, throughout the world.

PRiscellanies.

METHOD OF CONDUCTING THE MONTHLY CONCERT FOR PRAYER.

Some months since, a gentleman, believing that the fervent and importunate prayer
of Christians is, by divine appointment, essential to the rapid dissemination of the
gospel over the world, offered a premium of fifty dollars to the writer of the most

roved essay On the best method of condu-ting the monthly concert for
hat premium was awarded by the committee named for the purpose, to the

er.
ev.

Ansel D. Eddy, of Canandaigua, State of New York, the writer of the following
0

article.—It is

ped that the views and statements presented here, and the appeals

made, may give both ministers and private Christians a higher sense of the im-
portance of that meeting, and incite to greater exertion to render it interesting and

useful.

General Efforts to awaken an interest in
Missions.

It is the design of God, to restore this world
unto himself, through the instrumentality of a
preached gospel. To aid in advancing this
object, and to hasten its accomplishment, is
the duty and the privilege of man. For this

rpose God has constituted and continued
his church on earth; to his disciples the Savior
early taught the prayer, THY KINGDOM COME;
and it was his /ast injunction, Go YE INTO
ALL THE WORLD AND PREACH THE GOS-
PEL TO EVERY CREATURE. ‘

Whatever may have been the obedience,
engagedness and success of early Christians,
it cannot be denied that the strength, the ac-
tivity, the resources of the church. are yet to
be secured and enlisted in the cause of Chris-
tian missions, or this world will never be con-
verted to God. Rapidly as the spirit of evan-
gelical enterprise has arisen, and widely as it
has spread, the wastes of heathen desolation
and of pagan darkness are far more extended;
and the spirit of deep-rooted infidelity and
hatred of God and virtue, was never more in-
veterate. At the same time, the facilities for
successful exertion and the encouragements to
immediate effort were never so abundant. All
that is now needed is the united and vigorous
exertion of the church of God. Occasional
and limited efforts wil] not accomplish the ob-
ject. . A part only of the church aroused and
active, cannot secure it. It must be the

united, prayerful, laborious, and systematic
action of the Christian church throughout the
world,

It is obvious, that, on the ministers of the
gospel chiefly rests the responsibility and the
labor of arousing the churches to the great
subject of the world’s conversion. It is by
their spirit, their preaching, their prayers,
their appointments and labors, that this is to be
done.

To secure the interest and engagedness of
Christians in the cause of missions, the first
thing required is that ministers of the gospel
cultivate a missionary spirit.

This is the spirit of their office; it is the
spirit of piety and of the gospel of Jesus
Christ. The spirit of a pious, evangelical
ministry, is the spirit of universal benevolenee
—of that charity which seeketh not her own,
but looks, with the unaffected sympathy of
Christ on the miseries of a world, and will la-
bor for the salvation of all to whom the
benevolent designs of Christ’s mediation ex-
tend.

To cultivate and preserve the spirit of mis-
sions, ministers of the gospel should examine
more and more the nature and designs of the
kingdom of Christ; how it is in every respect

fitted for universal extension, and perfectly
} adapted to the Wants of men, in whatever
| situation they are found. Let them dwell
upon the predictions of its success, and mark
the certainty of its enlargement. Let them
‘observe, how human instrumentality has als

OO OOO Tela lCUDSlCt—t—‘“‘itsa

1834. Methed of Conducting the Monthly Concert for Prayer.

ready aided its advancement, and how the
— is preparing for its speedy and universal

‘ae the next place, to secure the cordial and
co-operation of the churches in the
cause of missions, let the minister cherish not
only, but let him MANIFEST ‘the spirit of .a.
Christian missionary. While he comes from
Sabbath to Sabbath to his people, with fresh
apointings from the Holy Ghost, and with the
tenderest solicitude for their salvation, the
wholé world-should. also ‘rise before him, and
the heathen hold a prominent place in his af-
fections. Nor shouldhe fear that he loses in-
terest for his own people, or endangers their
solicitude for themselves, by throwing before
them, for their sympathy and prayers, the mil-
lions of perishing pagans.* He should pray
for the heathen; for the missionaries who have
gone, and for these who are en their way, to
pagan lands; for those institutions that are de-
signed to sustain them; and that the church
may feel her obligation to ransom’ the world
from the dominien of sin. Thus let the mis-
sionary cause, in all its departments, be pre-
sented in the supplications of the sanctuary,
and no assembly of Christians can long re-
main uninterested in a subject, which they are
so often called to contemplate before the
throne of e, while their hearts are softened
and sanctified by the spirit of prayer.

The minister of the gospel should also, oc-

, PREACH On the subject of missions.
Let him show that the history of redemption
is but the history of missions; that the history
of the Bible is but an inspired Missionary
Herald, \eading back over ages of darkness
and sin, and then tracing the advancement of
virtue and religion, with the efforts of man and
the blessing of God. He should exhibit the
prophecies respecting events already fulfilled
and the instrumentality of their accomplish-
ment; hed also those which point to the future,
with the human agency which they involve.
Let him declare from the word of God, the
certainty of the universal spread of the gos-
pel, with the high privilege allowed to man of
uniting in a cause so sure and sacred.

He should trace the history of missions;
show their influence on private character, do-
mestic habits, and social life; on literature and
the arts and sciences; on political and national
prosperity. From this history he may show
that the loud eulogium bestowed on Christian-
ity is nothing but a just encomium or the
cause of missions. While he thus traces the

of civilization and Christianity, as
identified with the labors of the Christian mis-
sionary, let him present the numerous remain-
heathen tribes, and show from the history
of evangelized nations, that their relief is
found alone in the spirit of Christian missicns.

* It is doubtful whether the gospel ever appears
with stronger claims to the immediate and personal
attention of men, than when its adaptedness to reach
and remedy the moral evils of the entire world are
most distinctly seen; and Christians can never feel
more intense desire that their immediate and personal
friends may be saved, than when engaged to extend
salvation to all men.

VOL. XXX.

389

To awaken attention to the cause of mis-
sions, as it now exists, and to secure its con-
tinued support, oceasionally there should be
given a history of the risé- and progress of
more recent missionary éfforts:—how they
originated, by what means they have been
advanced, and to what results ye have led.
The numerous missionary stations, where the
beloved men that have gone out from us now
live and labor, should be spread out to view.
The minister should lead his hearers into
fields which they‘ have cultivated, and let them
see the arts of agriculture, manufacture, and
commerce, introduced and flourishing ameng
them. He should: open before his hearers
their schools, with hundreds of thousands of
children, which they have t t to read; and
conduct ‘them to their hoes of weep
their communion tables; and point to those
numerous death-bed scenes, where the con-
verted pagan gives the last and highest testi-
mony to the value of the gospel and the effi-
cacy of missions.

The signal success which has crowned the
missionary cause should be brought to relieve
from the discouragement which the magnitude
and diffieulty of: the work yet to be accom-
plished are liable to occasion. While all sue-
cess should be referred to the grace of God,
encouragement in the prosecution of the work
shouldbe presented by pointing to his sove-
reign power and purpose to effect its full ac-
complishment.

Let a minister thus imbibe and cultivate the
spirit of missions, and preach and pray for the
cause of missions, and present its claims tg his
people, and it will be impossible for them not
to feel its importance; it will be impossible for
the pious not to feel its strong claims upon
their patronage and prayers; and that the day
which shall show its full and final accomplish-
ment, will be a day of fearful responsibility
to those who refused to aid in its advance
ment.

With this preparation, the season which is
consecrated to special prayer and effort for the
cause of missions, hy so large a portion of the
Christian world will return with constantly in-
creasing interest. A subject so
from the pulpit; so commended to God in
prayer; so full of sacred charity, and |
such claims to ,Christian effort, cannot
secure the attendance and affectionate ath
of Christians at the place where its character
is more fully to be developed, its claims to be
renewed, and the blessing of God, in a special
manner, to be implored upon it.

No invitation that can be given, and no
pressing demand for attendaace, will secure a
general respect for the season of the monthly
concert for prayers, where such a —

as has been mentioned is neglected.
will not consider that object worthy of ye

time, their prayers; and their contributions,

which is not presented in the solemnities of the
Sabbath, and made important as a t of
pulpit discussion, and in view of which their
minister does not appear to be deeply interested.
If it is not made to appear connected with the
gospel and the duties of Christians, it will not

50

secure the Sifectionate interest even of the

i But whete the course ; resented above

been adopted and systematically pursued,

it is. believed that no imstance can be found,

where the monthly concert for prayer is

neglected, or where it returns without being a
most welcome season to the church.

To give interest to the monthly concert, as
well.as to prepare the way for it, almost every
thing depends upon the minister. ‘To these

ings be must bring the missionary spirjt.
He should be full of the subject of missions.
Howmuchsoever the spiritual necessities of
his own people may press upon his heart, and
a revival of religion may be required at home,
let these meetings a/ways be strictly of a mis-
sionary character:—as such, tightly conducted,
in the spirit of the missionary cause, they are
among the most powerful means of securing an
immediate revival of religion. .

Hints for conducting’ the Monthly Concert
for Prayer.

As to the best method of conducting these
meetings, there may be diversity of opinion,
and circumstances may not justify the same
course at all times and in all places. Yet
what is best adapted to one people, will gen-
erally be found, substantially, best adapted
to all.

1. First of ali, as.has been remarked, Let
the monthly concert for prayer be strictly a
missionury. meeting. The information given;
the. exhortations made; the prayers offered,
and songs addressed, should all be appropriate
to the occasion.

2. The minister should come prepared for
the service of the monthly concert. This pre-
pemtice should not be made during the leisure

of the day that precedes the mecting,

bat during the whole month. In all his read-
ing of missionary intelligence and of benevo-
lent operations; of Christian effort, privilege,
and duty, the minister should have his eye on
the monthly concert;- and the interesting and
important facts, so treasured up, should here
be communicated to the people. With the
subject of.missioas, he must be familiar, and
be able to give the history of each missionary
station; its establishment, growth, difficulties
encountered, and the success which it has at-
tained. Possessed of the most recent infor-
mation, he should eompare the present with
the past, and thus encourage to new effort by
the success which has erowned previous exer-
tion; and by presenting new facilities and en-
couragements,- lead to more expansive and
efficient plans of operation. Acquaiuted with
the wants of each missionary station, and each
system of operation for the world’s conver-
sion, with what is essential to more vigorous
and enlarged action, and with the views of
the managers and agents of the cause, in its
various departments, he wi!!.be prepared to
enlist the feelings of his people to pray and
contribute to further all the proposed objects
- of the most intelligent 7nd cularged enterprise.
Thus enlisted in the object of these monthly

Method of Conducting the Monthly Concert for Prayer.

Oct.

that their prayers and labors are identified
with its existence and prosperity.

The minister should, at one time, give an
extended history of some one mission;
fasten the mind upon it separately, glancing
perhaps very briefly at others and the whole
subject, to magnify the importance of separate
and distinet effort, as connected with the
majestic enterprise of the world’s conversion.

At another time, he should draw the picture
of heathen ignorance, superstition, cruelty,
and guilt; and then give a true and glowing
description of what missionary labor has ac-
complished—how all private, domestic, and
political prosperity stamds connected with it;
and that on this ‘alone rests the emancipation
of the world from ignorance, degradation, and
death. He should enforce igation and

‘stimulate to effort by what has been accom-

plished; showing at the, same time what re-
mains to be done—-what sacrifices, labors,
and prayers are demanded.

Again, let the minister draw the character,
the sacrifices, labors, perils, sickness, suffering
and death of the foreign missionary >—what led
to his choice of a missionary hife, and the
cheerfulness with which he left his home and
his country: let him speak of his studies; the
protecting providence of God on the sea; his
introduction and first efforts in pagan lands;
how he looked upon the heathen, wept and
despaired; then reviewed the prophecies amd
the promises of God, and became strong and
confident in the Lord. Let him tell what the
missionary first saw among the heathen;—of
his trials and labors, his failures and successes.
Let him exhibit the feelings, with which be
reviews his life when called to sickness and to
death; and how the ashes of the Christian
missionary hallow the spot where he died, and
as he died, gave his Jast tribute of affectionate
fidelity to the cause of missions to the heathen.
And let bim speak too, im just terms of Jemale
weakness and fortitude; of the widow and the
offspring of the devoted missionary, so strong-
ly claiming the prayerful remembrance and
kind support of the friends of Christ and of
humanity.

The minister. should occasionally review the
most formidable obstacles in the way of the
missionary enterprise; the opposition of scep-
tics at home; the indifference of many in the
church; avarice and indolence; the want of
men well qualified for the work, and means
adequate to its successful advancement; the
obstinate resistance of the heathen; their num-
bers and prejudices; their distance and degra-
dation, with their fast security in the chains of
caste. With all these in full view, let. him
present the force of truth; the spirit of benevo-
lence; the resources of the church; the proph-
ecies, the promises, and the power of God,
more than adequate to surmount every diffi-
culty: that all these obstacles have often died
away before the means of grace, and serve to
show what efforts are to be made, what vi
and perseverance are required, and what will
be the glory of the conquest when achieved.

There is one consideration, which should be

seasons, it becomes their own, and they feel, |] repeatedly presented, which. is, that missiona-

1834.

ries abroad are the accredited agents of the
church at home; and the very article of their

commission is our pledge of affectionate re-

memlsrance and kind support: and. as the suc-
cess of their labors’ is dependent, under God,
on our prayers, the value and efficacy of their
service, in a most important sense, rests in
our hands. Thus, with their accredited and
sustained agents abroad, Christians, through
the grace of God, secured by prayer, may
promote the salvation of heathen men, and
each in person may fulfil the command of
Christ, to preach the gospel to every crea-
wre,

Sometimes the minister should glance at all
these subjects, and in addition to any specific
information which he may have to give, crowd
into a single evening, as far as possible, every
thing that, in general, respects the cause of
missions, and the various plans of Christian
benevolence, and let his hearers become bur-
dened with the overwhelming influence of this
mighty subject. :

3. While it is unquestionably the duty of
the minister to communicate missionary intel -
ligence at these seasons of prayer, and while
much of their interest and value depend upon
it, the expediency of reading largely from
missionary papers and periodical journals, is
very questionable. The time allotted is not
sufficient for this minute detail, and. more than
this, if the missionary cause, in each distinct
department, and occasionally other operations
of benevolence, are thus minutely and formally
presented, there is not only danger of becom-
ing tedious, but of failing to stimulate the peo-
ple to read for themselves. The minister
should rather read extracts of a very brief
character, and throw out, in his own language,
in a condensed form, just sufficient to excite
the desire of his people for a more full ac-
quaiatance with the subject, and thus prompt
them to read and inform themselves in relation
to the whole subject of Christian missions and
of the world’s conversion. He may opén the
way and create in them a desire for that in-
formation, which he would have them all pos-
sess. Indeed he should make the history of
the church, in its present advancement, like
the records of inspiration, a faithful delineation
of God’s gracious providence, an ignorance of
which should be made to reflect on Chris-
tian character, as much as ignorance of the
recorded history of the church in the word of
God.
This method of communicating missionary
intelligence, with occasionally brief state-
ments of what is done at home; of benevolent
institutions, of revivals of religion, and the in-
crease of religious. @fforts, (all of which are
adapted and may be shown to act, and be
re-acted upon, favorably, by the cause of mis-
sions); with prayers, short, comprehensive, and
appropriate, will seldom, if ever, fail to give
interest to these seasons of devotion.

4. In connection with these religious ser-
vices and this missionary intelligence, the pe-
euniary aid, necessary to sustain the cause of
missions, should never be forgotten. It is not
enough that we have an intelligent apprehen-

Method of Conducting the Monthly Con:ert for Prayer.

sion of an object and pray for its success. The
method of attaining it must be pointedout, and
an opportunity for practical exertion must be
given, before the spirit of Christian -benevo-
lence can be satisfied. The alms and the
prayers of the Christian must eome up before
God together.

And when the duty of a proper conseera-
tion of our worldly possessions to the service
of God and the claims of the missionary cause
are considered, and the essential connection
between human instrumentality and the sove-
reignty of God is exhibited, a constant increase
of pecuniary contribution may be safely antie-
ipated. And when the minister urges this
duty, of contributing to the cause of missions,
upon his people, he must not be unmindful of
the salutary influence of his own example, and
not allow the value of his precept, persuasion,
and prayers to be lost, and the cause which
he advocates to be undervalued, by withhold-
ing from its sapport his own liberal contribu-
tion: nor should a thought be indulged, that
extensive contribution to the cause of foreign
missions, will diminish the support of religious
and charitable institutions at home.*

There are many additional and auxiliary
arrangements, which may be made in every
congregation, by which the interest, thus ex-
cited, and the efforts thus created, may be
continued and rendered more and more effi-
cient. Various associations may be organized
to secure this end. These must depend upon
circumstances for the peculiarity of their ar-
rangements; at the same time, there are some

* The advantages of cultivating a missionary spirit’
and of benevolent pecuniary contribution as
great to the minister and to his own people, as to
church of Christ at large and to the heathen.
minister is thus prepared to feel more and to do
for the conversion of souls at home; and he and his
people have presented to them the best substitute for
the more severe discipline which, in some form, the
church requires.

The cause of foreign missions, urged upon the
ple for their sympathies and snpport, increases their
persunal iuterest in the pel and augments their
desires for the salvatien of their children and friends
at home. It advances every kindred cause. It en-
larges the views and Jiberalizes tho feelings of the
people; and instead of endangering or dimini
their disposition and ability to sustain their own in»
stitutions and their own minister, it will enlarge
their benevolence and increase their ability to do
{t is believed, that no minister ever suffered the loss
of support from his own people on account of bis ex-
ertions to secure from them efficient and enlarged
aid for the cause of foreign missions; but that many
lave suffered for not doing it.

The cultivation of the spirit and the enforcing of
the claims of the missionary cause, by the
ministry. will do much towards diminishing the ar-
duous und expensive labors of agents, who are now
required to do that which in many cases might ‘be
done by the stated and permanent mivistry. More
than this, the exhibition of the missionary spirit, and

these efforts. would present the ew x cause in
a commanding and engaging attitude before the youth
of their regation them a

raise up

strong band of friends to its p lead out
fom tines them many, who, Ty my Newell
and Gordon Hall, would go forth as missionaries to
the heathen. Thu’ means, and men, and the heav-
enly spirit that would sustain them, might all be

secured by an intelligent, active, and
ary ministry, and the fruits of ministerial and Chrie-

tian exertion would be seen to rise and ripen ail over
the world. ;

= principles which should govern all.
associations should, as far as practica-
ble, be made to agree with those of asimilar
character, already formed and in successful
operation, in other congregations; and they
should be so arranged as to secure the coun-
_ sel and co-operation of the most. influential,

, and aged of the community; to call
into exercise the feelings and efforts of the
young; and every member of society, as far
as ible, be induced to contribute
directly to the cause of missions;—thus be
made early and constantly to cherish desires
for its prosperity.

The light in which the Missionary Cause is
; to be Viewed.

The grand object, which the spirit of mis-
sions contemplates, is the CONVERSION of
THE WORLD. The WORLD then, in the mul-
tiplicity and magnitude of its wants, should
always be kept in view. Hence, the safe and
salutary influence of contributing to the cause,
as one general object, in preference to select-
ing any one separate mission, individual mis-
sionary, or family. One mission may be at-
tended with special and peculiar embarrass-
ments; the climate, pestilence, famine, or war
may annihilate its prospects, and discourage all
further efforts; and if the attention is confined
to this alone, a fatal discouragement may suc-
ceed, and interest in the cause of missions gen-
erally may be sacrificed with it. An indi-
vidual missionary or family may be cut off, or
fail, as to prudence, or moral character, with
consequences more disastrous still, and all ef-
forts and expenditures there directed, may be
lost. But in casting our contributions into one
general fund for the promotion of missi

the heathen, and for this great cause,
offering our daily prayers, partial failure will
stimulate to new efforts and to wiser plans,
while general prosperity and success will sus-
tain from ragement. If one missionary
fails ies, multitudes whom we support
live and succeed, If one station is abandoned,

others rand new oues are established.
Not so, but there is semething peculiarly
impressive and ennobling, in contemplating

the claims of a world, to Christian sympathy
and prayer, and such wide wastes of moral
darkness will sustain the demand for the most
enJarged su Christians are more ready
to engage in those enlarged enterprises, which
are i , in some measure, to the final
object to be accomplished, than they are, to
sustain an humble effort, which promises but
litle. Present one missionary; one family;
one missionary station; this may interest deep-
ly perhaps; but we easily estimate the amount
ired to sustain them, and we soon limit

the extent of efforts end expenditures demand-
ed. But*present the whole army of missiona-
ries, with their families, their schools, their
wide extended operations, hundreds of mis-
stations in various parts of the earth,

the whole heathen world perishing in sin, and
from every quarter sending their supplications
for relieff and who can measure the amount of

Method of Conducting the Monthly Concert for Prayer.

Ocr.

expenditure and effort required? or who can
answer this demand but with expanded liber-
ality? Here is the only appropriate sphere of
sympathy and action for that pure and bound-
less benevolence which reigns in the bosom of
every child of God. As we contribute here,
we are giving for a world, and we increase,
not a solitary stream; we add, not to the deep
current of the mighty river; but we swell the
ocean that washes every shore; a world uni-
versal is blessed by our contributions and our
prayers.*

The missionary cause, as far as practicable,
should be presented and regarded, not as the
cause of a sectional, party society, but as the
great and endeared cause of Jesus Christ and
of the church universal; the grand and leading
cause, to which all others should be subordinate
and auxiliary; and which, from its nature and
design, is to unite the hearts and hands of all
who love God and human happiness, and in
its ultimate triumph and complete success, to
give eternal joy to the saints of the mosT
HIGH.. This single thought, a WORLD TO BE
SAVED; to be saved by CHRISTIAN EFFORT;
—this great work, the same which Christ com-
menced—which is now doing and svon to be
accomplished:—the brief and uncertain period
of human life, the only time allotted us to par-
ticipate in this service, with eternity before us,
to survey from the “sanctities of heaven,” the
glory of such a moral achievement! If there
is any thing that can arouse to effort; make
labor easy; sacrifices cheerful; feeling high
an¢ strong; prayers, intelligent, believing,
and ardent; this surely will do it. The time,
the place, the service of the MONTHLY CON-
CERT, which concentrate all these efforts that
bear upon the destinies of the world, must be-
come a season of high and constantly increas-
ing interest, to which the Christian will look
with waiting anxiety, to hear something new
from the cause he loves, and to which, he
hastens to add another pledge of his affec-
tionate fidelity, and to pour out his heart
anew for the blessing of God upon it.

Confirmation of the foregoing Remarks.

In confirmation of what has now been ad-
vanced, may be adduced the history of an
ecclesiastical association, in a section of this
country, where forty years ago there was not
an established Christian congregation, and the
country around for hundreds of miles was an
unbroken wilderness. Ten years ago, not one
handred dollars were contributed to the cause
of foreign missions, and the monthly concert, if
observed at all, was observed, rather as an
ordinary meeting for prayer, than with special

*Cases have occurred and have been reported,
where a limited sum was attem to be raised, to
aid in the support of a single m + This was

fuund to be difficult and but little interest in the
cause of missions existed. When this course was
abandoned, the individual inissionary resigned to the
support of the general funds, the conversion of the
world made the subject of prayer and contribution, it
was found easy to raise double the amount before
required, and a vast increase of interest in the cause
of missions has resulted. ° .

reference to the object for which it was origi-
nally formed. .In but few instances, were
contributions taken at the monthly corcert-in
aid of foreign missions. This ecclesiastical
association now embraces forty churches, most
of which have been formed within fifteen years
and are now small and feeble. Twenty-five
of them only are supplied with the stated min-
istrations of the gospel—sixteen only are able
to sustain pastors without foreign aid. In the
churches of this association the rise of a mis-
sionary spirit has been recent and rapid.
Within a few years past, have been settled
im some of the largest churches, pastors, who
are specially interested in the cause of foreign
missions. Some of them were early associat-
ed with the first missionaries from our country,
and had been e as agents in the cause
of missions. This cause held a prominent
place in their prayers and preaching. They
sought to diffuse information among their peo-
5 to raise and sustain the monthly concert.
n their ecclesiastical meetings they recom-
mended its observance, and among their peo-
ple they enforced the duty of attending it and
of contributing to the object for which it was
estublished. One of their number they ap-
pointed to visit all the congregations in their
connection, and to preach on the subject of
foreign missions, to form associations, and to
secure annual and monthly contributions to the
cause of missions. As the result of their in-
terest and efforts, the monthly concert for
prayer is now the most highly prized and the
best attended of any of the special seasons of

religious worship. Numerous copies of the |

Missionary Herald are circulated; associations
are generally well sustained; and contributions
are made monthly in every congregation to
aid the cause of missions.

In one congregation, where ten years ago
there were not forty dollars contributed to this
cause yearly, the resolution was adopted two
years since to support one foreign missionary.
And more than sufficient to do this has been
easily secured. The monthly concert is al-
ways well attended, and an increasing interest
is constantly manifested in the object for which
it was formed. When some new feature of
the missionary cause has been presented; some
new occurrence of suffering or sacrifice on the
part of foreign missionarics made known, the
amount of contribution has been doubled to
meet and relieve it. When brief extracts
have been given from the Missionary Herald,
numbers have been seen to step forward and
request the work as permanent subscribers,
and seemed impatient for its arrival. Indeed,
it is obvious that the most commanding cause
is that of foreign missions, while a reflex in-
fluence is exerted on all the kindred objects of
Christian benevolence, and a liberal support is
extended to them.

In a nei ing society, where, eight years
ago, there were but two families of prayer; not
a benevolent institution of any kind; no
monthly concert, and no efforts to extend the
gospel abroad; systematic exertions, on the
plan suggested above were commenced and
followed with unexpected success. That small

Method of Conducting the Monthly Concert for Prayer.

society, the last year, contributed. four hua-
dred dollars to the cause of foreign missions,
and this year they have resolved to raise suf-
ficient to sustain one missionary abroad. The
monthly concert is declared to surpass in inter-
est every other extraordinary service upon
which they are permitted to attend. Most of
the families of the church read the Missionary
Herald, and from them two have gone as mis-
sionaries to the heathen.

Another congregation, (whuse -pastor, in a
remote section of the country, organized the
first missionary association on the present ap-
proved plan of auxiliaries to the American
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions,
and which has advanced with increased effi-
ciency from the time of its formation,) in which,
eight years ago, there was not even a contri-
bution taken for the cause of foreign missions,
at the monthly concert, now surpasses
the congregations above mentioned in its con-
tributions to the missionary cause.

As the result of this system of efforts, the
churches of this association, the past year,
have contributed about seven thousand dollars
to the cause of domesti¢ and foreign missions;
sustained twenty young men in preparation for
the ministry; given more than two thousand
dollars towards supplying the country with
Bibles; contributed Jargely to the object of
foreign tract distribution; and every other be-
nevolent society has been generously remem-
bered; while the disposition and ability to sus-
tain their own more private institutions, have
constantly been increasing. In no ¢ase has
the monthly concert been known to decline, or
interest in the cause of missions to abate.
One of the most valued and endeared pastors
in this connection, has left his charge and gone
to the heathen; another is permanently en-
gaged in the cause of missions among the
churches in this conntry, and a number of
young men are now preparing themselves for
the service of the church abroad.

And should it be asked, is there co
ing piety to sustain this example of benevolent
exertion? To this question it may be replied,
that every church, within four years, has been
blessed with a revival of religion; between two
and three thousand have been admitted to the
communion of the churches, and God in his
mercy has preserved them in peace and har-
mony. The wilderness is made to blossom
as the rose, and the precious promise is ful-
filled, that they which water shall be watered
again.

Let the churches of our land follow the ex-
ample of these congregations, which have
arisen, almost before the wilderness
away, aud there will be wanting neither men
nor means, to carry the gospel to every family
on the face of the globe; and then, too, there
will be no want of interest in that precious sea-
son, which assembles the Christian world, to
pray for the universal reign of Jesus Christ.
This shall soon become the time—the place,
to celebrate the Jubilee of the world’s emanci-
pation from sin and death.

What minister of Christ, what Christian,
what philanthropist, can refuse to meet the

elaims which such considerations urge? Here
is the sphere, the appropriate sphere, where
the minister may act worthy the heavenly
commission of his master: where the Christian
may obey the command of Christ and prepare
for heaven: where the philanthropist may |
wisely expend his charity to raise and bless
mankind. Not to the Christian and the Chris-
tian minister alone. would we put the ques-
tion, Is there nothing here to interest and ||
stimulate you to effort? but to the philanthro-
pist, the scholar, the statesman, the friend of ||
political economy, we would put the question, |,
Is there nothing here to interest you? Before |
you, are six hundred millions of heathen, of |.
your own species, whose influence is lost, and ||
worse than lost, to the world; who yield no

['

.Embarkation and Return of Missionaries—Obituary—Auriliaries. Oct.

revenue to its wealth, its intelligence, nor its
happiness. We urge the question, Shall all

| this physical and moral power be lost? Is it

no object to redeem and raise, to enlighten
and save these wretched millions? Is it no
object to create, as it were, a world of mind
and of moral feeling; to prepare for endless

life a countless crowd of immortal souls?

As ministers, as Christians, and as men,
God holds us responsible, and calls upon us
to awake at once to the grand enterprise of
saving the world from sin and death. And
happy shall they be, and only they, to whom,
amid the scenes of the judgment, Christ shall
declare, as much as ye have done it unto the
leust of these, ye have done it unto me; enter ye
into the joy of your Lorp.

American Board of Commissioners for foreign Missions.

EMBARKATION OF MISSIONARIES.

Tue Rev. John B. Adger and wife, from the
State of South Carolina, destined to the Ar- |
menians at Smyrna or Constantinople; the
Rev. Samuel R. Heuston and wife, from the
State of Virginia, destined to the island of |
Scio; the Rev. Lorenzo W. Pease and wife,
from the State of New York, destined to the
island of Cyprus; and the Rev. James L. |
Merrick, from the State of Massachusetts, |
destined to the Mohammedans of Persia, re- |
ceived their instructions from the Prudential |
Committee, at the church in Essex-street, |
Boston, on Sabbath evening, August 17th.
On the 20th they embarked at Boston for |
Smyrna, in the brig Pedang, capt. Williams.

‘RETURN OF MR. ABEEL.
Rev. David Abeel, missionary of the Board
in Siam, arrived in New York, September 6th.
He left Siam on account of impaired health,
and returned by the way of England.

}
DECEASE OF MR. LOCKWOOD. |
Rev. Jesse Lockwood, of the Arkansas Cher-
okee mission, died at Dwight, on the II!th of |
Jely. An obituary notice will be given in a
future number.

A daughter of Mr. Jacob Hitchcock died

|

at the same station, on the 6th of July, at the |
age of five years.

Other members of the mission family have |

suffered from sickness, and great mortality has |

prevailed among the Cherokees.

ANNIVERSARIES OF AUXILIARIES.

Massacnusetts.—The Auziliary of the
Essex South Conference of Churches, held its
annual meeting at Lynn, July 9th. The an-
nual report was read by the Rev. G. Cowles,
Secretary, and the audience was addressed by

Rev. Wiliiam Adams, and by Mr. Greene,
one of the Secretaries of the Board.—Hon.
Willam Reed, President; Rev. George
Cowles, Danvers, Secretary; Mr. Joseph
Adams, Salem, TJ'reasurer.

Matne.—The annual meeting of the Auz-
iliary of York County was held at Biddeford,
June 4th. After the reports of the secretary
and treasurer had been read, the audience was
addressed by Rev. Messrs. Johnson, Fuller,
Fiske, and Adams.—-Rev. Charles S. Adams,
Wells, Secretary; Charles W. Williams, Ken-
nebunk, Treasurer.

ANNUAL MEETING OF THE BOARD
Tue Twenty-Fifth Annual Meeting of
the Board will be holden in the city of
Utica, State of New York, on Wednes-
day, the 8th day of October next, at 10
o’clock in the forenoon. Sermon by the
Rev. Dr. Spring, of New York.

Donations,
FROM AUGUST IlTH, TO 3IsT, INCLUSIVE.

Board ef Foreign Missions in Ref. Dutch chh.
W. R. Thompson, New York, Tr.
Albany, &. Van Rensselaer, 100;
ackn. in July, p 270.
Belleville, N. J. Mon. con. in R.

D. ehh. 25 00
Bloomingburgh, Gent. of R. D.

chh. to constitute Mrs. Louisa

Van Vecnten an Honorary

Member of the Board, 100 00
Bridgepoint, Harlington, N. J.

Mon. con, in R. D. chh. 10 00
Chittenango, Mon. con. in do. 31 83
Lebanon and White House, Mon.

con. in do. 14 00
Long Island, I. L. 20 00
Rhinebeck, Fem. for. miss. so. 40 00—240 83

Southern Bow d of Foreign Missions,
James Adger. Charleston, 8. C, Tr.
For miss. to Asia Minor, 500
Cheshire co. N. H., Aux. So. 8. A. Gerould, Tr.

Dublin, Mon. con. 33
Jaffrey, Gent. and la. 11 00
Keene, Mon. con. 417
Marlboro’, Mon. con. 476
Roxbury, C. box, 6 50
Westmoreland, 8. chh. 5 00—40 76

1834.

Burlington, Young la. sew. so.
33; mon. con. 8,04; miss. asso.

in ———s 5; 46 04
Essex, Gent. 19,75; la. 9,52; mon.

con. 13,41; a gent. and his wife,

for Rev. H. Read, 5; 7 68
Milton, Gent. 11; la. 11,85; a

revol. pensioner, 10; 32 85
Westford, Contrib. in cong. chh. 15 00
Williston, Contrib. 17,50; gent.

and la, 14; mon. eon. 7,75; 39 25—180 82

Greene co. N. Y. Aux. So, Rev. Dr. Porter, Tr.

Catskill, O. Day, to constitute

Grorce B. Vay and CHar_es
H. Dav Honorary Members of
the Board, 200; T. B. Couke,
(of which for miss, at Constan-
tinople, 100;) to constitute Mrs.
CatuHanine Cooxe and Josnua
A. Cooxe Honorary Members
of the Board, 200; Rev. Dr. Por-
ter, to constitute Henry M.
Hitt, of Boston, an Honorary
Member of the Board, 100;

500 00

Lowell and vic. Ms. Char. Asso. W. ‘peemaeaace

Tewksbury¢ Gent. and la. 37,37
mon. con. 9;

Merrimack