SOURCE: https://archive.org/download/biblicalresearch02robi/biblicalresearch02robi_djvu.txt

I

PRINCET  ON.  N.  J.

Part  of  the
A1)I>IS0K    ALEXANKKR  I.IBKaRT.
which  was  presented  bv
Mksskr.  R.  L.  and  a.  Sti  art

•  ■f  mi:

Theological  Seminary,

PRINCETON,    N  J.

DS  107    .R649  1856  v. 2
Robinson,   Edward,  1794-1863
Biblical  researches  in
Palestine,  and  in  the

I

Digitized  by

the  Internet  Archive

in  2015

https://archive.org/details/biblicalresearch02robi

BIBLICAL  RESEARCHES

IS

PALESTINE,

AND   IN   THE   ADJACENT  KEGIONS.

A

JOURNAL  OF  TRAVIiLS  IN  THE  YEAR
1838.
BY  E.  ROBINSON  AND  E.  SMITH.

DRAWN  UP  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  DIARIES,  WITH  HISTORICAI.  ILLUSTEATIONS,

BY

EDWARD  ROBINSON,  D.  D.  LL.  D.

rBOFBBSOB   or   BIBLICAL   LITEBATUBE   IK   THE    VMIOH  THBOLOOIOAL
BEUIMABT,   NBW  YOBK.

WITH   NEW   MAPS   AND  PLANS.

IN   TWO  VOLUMES.

VOL.  II.

BOSTON  ;

PUBLISHED  BY  CROCKER  AND  BREWSTER,

No.  47  WAsniNQTON  Stkeet.

LONDON  JOHN  MURRAY.

1856.

<■

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1866,
By  EDWAED  KOBINSON.
In  the  Clerk's  OfiBce  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the  Southern
District  of  New  York.

JOHN  F.  TKOW,
BINTIR,  6TKRK0TYPKE,  AND  ELtCTEOTTPEE,
87T  AND  379  BKOADWAT,  N.  >

CONTENTS.

SECTION  XI.

From  Jeetisalem  to  Gaza  and  Hkbeon.
Pages  1-94.

Shuttirig  up  of  Jerusalem,  1.  We  stop  but  a  single  day,  1,  2.  Preparations,  guide,
etc.  2. — May  Vlth.  Departure  ;  go  round  by  Beit  Jala,  2.  Statistics  of  the  village,
2-4.  Way  to  the  village  el-Khiidr,  4.  View  from  high  point  beyond  Wady  Bittir,
and  notices  of  the  country,  4-6.

Kustul,  probably  Lat.  '  Castellum,'  6.  Soba,  its  situation,  6.  Not  Modin,  6,  7.
Possibly  for  Zuph,  Zojihim,  the  ancient  Ramathaim-Zophim  of  Samuel,  7,  8.  Objection
from  the  position,  8,  9.  Objection  as  being  on  Mount  Ephraim,  9,  10. — Boundary  be-
tween Benjamin  and  Judah,  10.  It  passes  KirjcUk  Jearim,  probably  the  present  Kur-
yet  el-'Enab,  10-1 2.    Its  farther  course,  12.

Way  to  Beit  'Atab,  13.  Beit  'Atab  and  wide  view,  13,  14.  Way  to  Beit  Nettif ;
ancient  road,  14,  15.  Beit  Nettif  and  country  around,  15.  Climate,  15.  Wide  view
of  many  ancient  places,  16,  17.  Inhabitants;  the  parties  Keis  and  Yemen,  17,  18.
Hospitality  of  the  people,  18,  19.  General  hospitality,  the  Medafeh  or  Menzil,  19. —
3Iay  18th.  Fog  in  the  valleys,  19.  Proposed  search  after  the  site  of  Eleutheropolis  ;
reported  ruins  at  Beit  Jibrin,  etc.  19.  Wady  es-Sumt,  20.  Socoh,  21.  Place  of  Da-
vid's combat  with  Goliath,  21.  Well  with  flocks;  drawing  water  "with  the  fgot,"  22.
Remarkable  excavations  near  Deir  Dubban,  22-24.    Way  to  Beit  Jibrin,  24.

Beit  Jibrin,  ruins  of  a  strong  Roman  fortress,  25,  26.  Ruined  church,  Santa
Hanneh,  26.  People  wish  the  Franks  to  come,  26.  Former  Sheikhs  of  the  district,
27.  Beit  Jibrin,  if  not  Eleutheropolis,  is  certainly  the  ancient  Betogabra,  27,  28.  Hist,
notices,  28,  29.  Way  to  Tell  es-Safieh,  29.  Dhikrin,  29.  Tell  es-Safieh,  29,  30.
The  Blcmchegarde  of  the  crusaders,  31,  32. — May  \9th.  Leave  for  Gaza  ;  fertile  coun-
try, 32,  33.  Siimmeil,  deep  well;  error  of  Breydenbach,  33.  General  wish  for  the
Franks,  34.  Bureir,  35.  Threshing  and  winnowing,  35.  Lively  harvest-scenes,  35,
^mense  olive  grove  near  Gaza,  35,  36.    Quarantine  guard,  36.

May  2lgt.    Gaza;  letter  of  introduction,  36.  Visit  to  the  mosk,  an  ancient  church,  •

36.  Governor's  secretary,  Tezkirah,  37.    Remains  of  antiquity,  places  of  former  gates,

37,  38.  Geogr  position,  38.  Daron,  38.  Sandy  tract  along  the  sea,  38.  Fertility,
39.  Population,  39.  Trade,  39.  Hist.  Notices,  40-43.  Gaza  probably  not  "  desert,"
when  the  book  of  Acts  was  written,  41.

Region  S.  E.  of  Gaza,  Gerar,  43,  44.  Leave  Gaza  for  Beit  Jibrin  by  a  more
southern  route,  44.  Huj,  recently  built  up,  44,  45.  Return  to  Bureir,  45.  Agricul-
ture ;  all  the  rich  plains  held  by  the  government,  45,  46. — May  22d.  Um  Lakis,  not
Lachish,  46,  47.    Turn  off  to  Tell  el-Hasy ;  harvest-scenes,  47.    Wady  el-Hasy,  47,

iv

CONTENTS.

48.  The  Tell  and  region,  48.  'Ajlan,  Eglon,  49.  Es-Sukkariyeh,  probably  an  an-
cient site,  49.  Difficulty  for  a  guide,  laziness,  50.  Reapers  and  gleaners,  "parched
corn,"  50.  El-Kubeibeh,  51.  Beit  Jibrln,  61.  Men  of  Beit  Jala,  51.  The  Sheikh
takes  us  to  three  clusters  of  very  remarkable  excavations,  51-53.    Cufic  inscriptions,

62.  Sepulchres,  62.    The  Tell,  52.    Singxilar  excavated  labyrinth,  53.

Not  yet  satisfied  as  to  Eleutheropolis,  53.  Roads  to  Hebron  furnish  a  certain  test,
64.  Go  to  Dawaimeh  for  the  night  by  mistake,  54,  65.  Conclude  to  visit  el-Burj
and  hire  a  guide,  55,  56. — May  23i.  The  Sheikh  attempts  imposition ;  we  return
towards  Beit  Jibrin,  56.  Take  the  road  for  Hebron  by  Idhna,  Jedna,  56.  Incident,
disarming  of  the  peasants,  67.  Reach  Idhna  in  two  hours  from  Beit  Jibrin,  which
identifies  the  latter  with  Eleuthcropohs,  57.

Eleutheropolis,  57.  Identical  with  Betogabra  and  Beit  Jibrin ;  evidence  from  the
specifications  of  Ensebius  and  Jerome,  57-59.  Hist.  Notices,  serving  to  sustain  their
testimony,  69-63.  Writers  who  mention  Betogabra  make  no  allusion  to  Eleutheropo-
lis, and  vice  versa,  63.    The  expression  "  Betogabra  of  Eleutheropolis"  probably  a  gloss,

63.  Tradition  of  Samson's  fountain  in  the  vicinity,  64,  65.  Hist.  Notice  identifying
Eleutheropolis  and  Betogabra,  65,  66. — Goth,  66,  67.  Maresha,  Maressa,  67.  More-
sheth,  68.  Invasion  of  the  Edomites  ;  the  south  of  Palestine  called  Idumea,  68.  Pos-
sible origin  of  the  excavations  we  \-isited,  69.

Village  of  Idhna,  Jedm,  69-71.  Hospitality  of  the  Sheikh,  70.  Ascent  of  the
mountain,  71.  Tefifuh,  Beth-Tappiiah,  71.  Violent  Sirocco ;  drops  of  rain  with  dust,
72.  Large  oak,  72.  Reach  Hebron  and  encamp  on  the  grassy  western  slope,  72.
Pressing  invitation  from  Elias,  73.    Delay  at  Hebron,  73.

Hebron.  May  2ith.  General  character  and  situation,  73,  74.  Ancient  pools,
74.  The  Haram,  description,  75,  76.  A  mere  wall  around  an  interior  court,  76,  77.
Probably  a  Jewish  structure  surrounding  the  sepulchre  of  the  patriarchs,  77.  Hist.
Notices,  77-79.  Jews'  window,  79. — Citadel  in  ruins,  79.  Manufactory  of  water-
skins,  79.  Bazars,  79.  Manufactures  of  glass,  80.  Go  out  to  breakfast  with  Elias
under  the  great  oak,  80-82.  Camel  loads  of  arms  from  Dura,  80.  Vineyards,  how
trained,  81.  Wine  and  Dibs,  81.  The  oak,  81.  Elias  and  his  family,  breakfast,  82.
Threshing-floors ;  scenes  of  the  book  of  Ruth,  83. — 3fa)/  25th.  Visit  to  the  Rabbi  of
the  Jews,  83.  Synagogue  and  manuscripts,  84.  Ascend  the  western  hill ;  extensive
view,  85.  Visit  to  the  three  governors  of  Gaza,  Jerusalem,  and  Hebron,  85-88.  Offi-
cial dinner.  Sheikh  Sa'id  of  Gaza,  his  character  and  fall,  86-88. — Population  and
trade  of  Hebron,  88.  Historical  Notices,  88-94.  Question  as  to  the  identity  of  the
ancient  and  modern  site,  91,  92.  Hospital  and  former  distribution  of  bread,  etc.  92.
Rebellion  in  1834  ;  the  town  sacked  by  the  Egyptians,  93,  94.

m

SECTION  XII.

Feom  Hebeon  to  "Wady  Musa  and  Baoz.
Pages  95-212.

Delays  at  Hebron,  05.  Visit  from  the  Sheikh  of  the  Jehiliu,  and  bargain  for
camels  and  guides,  95,  96.  Further  delay ;  shudling  conduct  of  Elias,  96. — Jfai/  26.    So  too  Doubdan  p.  170.    Maun-    ed  by  the  Franks.

drell  Apr.  2.  Pococke  Descr.  of  the  East,  About  2J  lbs.  English ;  Lane's  Mod.

II-  >•  P-  45.  Egyptians  II.  p.  372.

u.  322-324

4

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Stxx  XI

only  a  common  man,  paid  more  tlian  three  hundred  piastres,  or
fifteen  Spanish  dollars  annually.

We  set  off  again  from  Beit  Jala  at  10^  o'clock,  ■winding
around  the  hill  above  the  village  towards  the  northwest  among
vineyards  and  gardens  of  olive  and  fig  trees.  The  hill  is  every-
where terraced  and  cultivated,  as  in  ancient  times  ;  indicating
more  industry  and  thrift  than  is  usual  in  the  villages.  At  half
past  ten,  we  came  out  upon  the  height  of  land,  whence  we  could
see  Jerasalem,  and  had  also  a  view  before  us  of  the  httle  "\dllage
of  St.  George,  and  of  Beit  'Atab  in  the  distance  on  a  high  hill.'

Before  us  was  now  a  level  rocky  tract  of  no  great  breadth,
and  then  a  long  descent  into  the  short  but  very  deep  Wady  Bit-
tir,  running  northwest  into  the  Werd.  After  a  delay  of  ten
minutes  we  set  foi-ward,  and  came  in  fifteen  minutes  to  a  small
fountain  about  half  way  down  the  descent,  called  Hand  Kibriyan,
"  Cyprian's  Trough,"  by  which  are  the  remains  of  a  wall  of  very-
large  stones.  Instead  of  descending  any  further  into  the  deep
valley,  we  now  made  a  circuit  to  the  left  around  its  head,  and  at
11^  o'clock  were  near  the  little  village  St.  George  (Arabic  el-
Khiadr)  on  the  rocky  land  west  of  the  head  of  Wady  Bittir.
We  had  formerly  seen  this  place  as  we  approached  Solomon's
pools  from  the  south.*  ^'here  is  here  a  small  Greek  church  con-
nected with  a  convent ;  the  latter  being  a  branch  of  the  large
Greek  convent  in  Jerusalem.  The  earher  travellers  were  accus-
tomed to  visit  it  as  one  of  the  holy  places  around  Bethlehem  ;
and  were  shown  in  the  church  the  long  chain  and  iron  collar,
with  which  St.  George  had  been  bound. ^  The  land  around  be-
longs to  the  convent.^

The  village  lay  somewhat  to  the  left  as  we  passed  along
northwest  to  gain  the  ridge  west  of  Wady  Bittir,  which  we  then
continued  to  ascend,  till  at  11|  o'clock  we  reached  its  highest
point  ;  having  lost  not  less  than  twenty  or  thirty  minutes  by  our
circuit.  From  this  sightly  spot,  over  Wady  Bittir,  we  had  a
commanding  view  of  the  country  before  us  ;  and  halted  for  a
time  in  order  to  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  its  leading  fea-
tures.

The  view  towards  the  right  embraced  the  whole  tract  north
and  west  of  J erusalem,  drained  by  the  great  Wady  Beit  Hanina.
The  Holy  City  itself  was  not  visible,  being  situated  behind  the
high  ground  which  lies  between  Wady  Bittir  and  Wady  el-Werd.
But  from  er-Ram  and  Neby  Samwil  the  whole  course  of  the
great  Wady  could  be  traced  as  it  passes  down  southwest  by

'  The  bearings  were  as  follows  :  Jemsa-  vie.  p.  240.    Qnaresmins  IT.  p.  11.  Donb-

lem  N.  E.   M.ir  Elvas  N.  65"  E.    St.  dan  p.  171.    Pococke  U.  i.  p.  44.

George  S  60'  W.    Beit  'Atab  N.  72°  W.  *  We  visited  this  rlace  in  1852 ;  see

'  See  Vol  I.  p.  217.  Vol.  IIL  Sec.  VI,  penult

'  Felix  l  abri  in  Reissb.  p.  283.  Coto-

iU  324,  325

May  17.]

WIDE  VIEW.

5

Kulonieh  and  east  of  Kustul  and  Soba.  Near  at  hand  Wady
el-Werd  was  seen,  here  also  a  deep  nigged  valley,  running
nearly  west,  on  the  south  of  the  village  el-Welejeh  (the  St.
Philip's  of  the  Latins)  ;  and  uniting  with  the  former  valley  not
far  beyond  the  village  el-Kabu,  among  steep  rocky  mountains.
Below  this  junction,  the  great  valley  takes  the  name  of  Wady
Isma'in  (Isma'il)  ;  bends  W.  S.  W.  through  a  ridge  of  higher  land  ;
and,  issuing  upon  the  western  plain  under  the  name  of  Wady  es-
Surar,  turns  northwest  and  runs  through  the  plain  to  the  sea  near
Yebna  ;  where  at  last  it  is  called  Wady  Rubin.  Up  this  valley
there  was  said  to  be  a  very  rocky  and  difficult  road.  The  ridge
just  mentioned  forms  the  western  brow  of  the  high  mountainous
tract,  on  which  Jerusalem  is  situated,  just  where  this  latter  sinks
down  precipitously  to  the  lower  hills,  which  lie  between  it  and
the  western  plain.  The  ridge  in  question  forms  a  continuation
of  the  high  ground  around  and  west  of  Neby  Samwil,  running
off  towards  the  south  ;  and  is  skirted  on  the  east  by  the  valley
in  which  Kuryet  el-'Enab  is  situated,  running  in  the  same  direc-
tion to  join  the  great  valley.  Although  Wady  Isma'in  breaks
through  this  ridge,  yet  a  spur  or  promontory  from  it  runs  out
towards  the  west,  along  the  north  side  of  that  valley,  quite  to
the  plain,  interrupting  for  a  time  the  tract  of  lower  hills,  and
forming  a  bastion  around  which  Wady  es-Surar  bends  north-
west.

South  of  Wady  Isma'in  the  land  is  still  at  first  high,  and  on
the  brink  of  the  descent  to  the  valley  stands  the  lofty  village
Deir  el-Hawa.  But  the  surface  soon  descends  gradually  towards
the  south  ;  and  here  somewhat  lower  and  nearer  to  where  we
stood,  though  stiU  quite  elevated,  is  the  village  Beit  'Atab.

Towards  the  southwest  our  view  rested  upon  a  lower  region
of  country,  seen  down  another  deep  broad  valley  called  Wady
el-Musurr,  here  running  W.  S.  W.  and  uniting  further  down
with  several  others  to  form  Wady  es-Sumt.  This  latter  valley
runs  for  a  time  nearly  west,  and  then  bends  northwest  and  join-
ing Wady  es-Surar  upon  the  plain,  goes  to  the  sea  near  Yebna.
Between  the  Surar  and  the  Musurr  and  Sumt,  the  elevated  land
around  Deir  el-Hawa  and  Beit  'Atab  declines  gradually  towards
the  southwest,  forming  a  high  tract  of  broken  table  land,  which
sinks  down  suddenly  to  lower  hills  just  west  of  the  village  of
Beit  Nettif.

South  of  Wady  el-Musurr,  the  precipitous  western  wall  of
the  higher  mountainous  tract  towards  Hebron  lies  further  back,
nearly  in  a  Ime  with  the  spot  on  which  we  stood  ;  while  a  broad
.region  of  lower  hills  and  open  valleys  is  spread  out  between  it
and  the  western  plain.  The  liigher  tract  of  mountains,  as  we
have  seen,  rises  to  the  height  of  nearly  2800  feet ;  the  region  of

ii.  325-327

6

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XL

hills  reaches  apparently  about  one  third  of  the  same  elevation
above  the  sea  and  plain. — Upon  an  isolated  hill  in  the  midst  of
Wady  el-Musurr,  on  the  south  side  of  its  bed  and  near  the
moimtains,  lies  the  village  of  Jeb'ah.  This  is  doubtless  the
Gibeah  of  the  mountains  of  Judah  ;  and  probably  the  Gabatha
of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  twelve  Roman  miles  from  Eleuthero-
polis. '

As  we  now  saw  the  somewhat  remarkable  points  Soba  and  el-
Kustul  for  the  last  time,  I  prefer  to  bring  together  here  all  that
I  have  yet  to  say  respecting  them.

The  latter  name,  el-Kustul,  is  obviously  an  Arabic  corruption
of  the  Latin  word  Castellum  ;  but  I  am  unable  to  say  what
castle  is  meant,  or  whether  there  was  an  earher  Arabic  name,
Kustrd  lies  on  a  conical  liill  about  an  hour  from  Kuryet  el-'Enab
towards  Jerusalem,  south  of  the  road  ;  and  also  near  the  way
from  Soba  to  Kulonieh  and  Jerusalem,  about  equidistant  be-
tween the  two  former  places.'^

Soba  is  also  situated  on  a  conical  hill  upon  the  lofty  ridge
overlooking  the  great  Wady  Isma'in  on  the  west,  nearly  opposite
to  the  convent  of  St.  John.  From  Kuryet  el-'Enab,  looking
down  the  valley,  it  is  seen  at  some  distance  in  the  south.  It  is
one  hour  distant  from  Kulonieh,  and  two  hours  and  a  half  from
Jerusalem.^  Soba  belongs  to  the  family  of  Abu  Ghaush,  whose
seat  is  at  Kuryet  el-'Enab  ;  and  the  chief  of  that  name  whom
we  saw,  related  to  us,  that  when  governor  of  Jerusah'm,  he  had
been  compelled  to  lay  the  place  in  ruins  on  account  of  the  re-
bellion of  the  inhabitants,  and  had  not  visited  it  since.*

By  a  singular  perversion,  of  which  I  am  not  able  to  trace
the  origin,  Soba  has  now  for  centuries  been  regarded  in  monastic
tradition  as  the  site  of  the  ancient  Modin,  the  city  of  the  Mac-
cabees, where  they  lived  and  were  buried,  and  where  Simon
erected  a  lofty  monument  with  seven  pyramids  to  their  memory.^
But  this  monument,  according  to  the  nearly  cotemporary
writer  of  the  first  book  of  Maccabees,  was  visible  to  all  who
sailed  along  the  sea  ;  and  Modin  lay  adjacent  to  the  plain."

'  Josh,   l.";,  r>7.    Onomast.  art.    Oa-  Vol.  III.  Sec.  HI,  under  Apr.  27th,  pe-

baatha. — From  this  point  (west  of  Wady  nult.

Bittir)  the  bearings  of  the  various  places       '  For  the  specifications  in  this  and  the

were  as  follows  :  er-Rim  N.  38"  E.    Nehy  preceding  paragraph,  I  am  indebted  to  the

Samwil  N.   IK'  E.    el-KustuI  N.  5'  E.  notes  of  Mr  Smith  on  a  former  visit  to

Soba  N.    el-Welcjeh  N.  2'  W.    Kuryet  these  places.
es-Sa'ideh  N.  13'  W.    el-Kabn  N.  38"  "W.       •  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  247.
Kefr  Som  N.  54'  W.    el-Hus,m  N.  55°  W.       '  1  Mace.  2, 1. 15.    13,  25-80.  Joseph.

Deir  el-Hawa  N.  57=  W.    Beit  'At*b  N.  Ant.  13.  6.  5.
63°  W.    Sunasin  W.    Jeb'ah  S.  7V  W.         '  1  Mace.  13,  29.    IC,  i.  5.
'  We  j)asscd  near  Kustul  in  1852 ;  see
ii.  327-329

Mat  17.]

SOBA.

7

Eusebius  and  J erome  likewise  testify  expressly,  that  Modin  was
near  to  Diospolis  (Lydda),  where  the  sepulchres  yet  remained  in
their  day.^  On  wlaat  pretext,  therefore,  the  name  can  have  been
transferred  to  Soba,  a  spot  several  houis  distant  from  the  plain
upon  the  mountains,  and  wholly  shut  out  from  any  view  of  the
sea,  I  am  unable  to  divine.*  The  crusaders  found  Modin  still
in  the  plain,  where  they  speak  of  it  along  with  Nicopolis  and
Beit  Niiba  ;  and  as  late  as  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century,  it
was  yet  pointed  out  from  the  road  between  Lydda  and  Eamleh.^
Yet  Brocardiis,  two  centuries  earlier,  had  already  jilaced  it  six
leagues  eastward  from  Beth-shemesh  ;  by  which  position  he  pro-
bably meant  Soba.^  So  too  apparently  Breydenbach  ;  and  from
the  sixteenth  century  onward  to  the  present  day,  the  correctness
of  this  position  seems  rarely  to  have  been  drawn  in  question  by
travellers.^

The  legend  has  also  found  entrance  among  the  common
people,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Soba  relate,  that  the  tombs  of
the  Maccabees  still  remain  there,  though  buried  deep  under
ground.  Tliis  account  my  companion  once  heard  on  the  spot  ;
and  it  was  repeated  to  us  by  Abu  Ghaush  in  Jerusalem.  In  a
similar  way,  Arab  guides,  accustomed  to  intercourse  with  Franks,
may  have  spoken  of  the  place  to  travellers  as  Modin  ;  but  the
ordinary  native  population  certainly  know  nothing  of  any  such
name.*

I  have  already  dwelt  upon  the  reasons  wliich  render  it  impos-
sible, that  the  Ramah  of  Samuel  should  have  been  situated  at
Neby  Samwil,  where  modern  tradition  now  shows  the  prophet's
tomb.'^  A  few  words  respecting  its  probable  actual  position,
may  here  not  be  out  of  place.  Samuel  was  descended  from  an
ancestor  named  Zuph,  an  Ephrathite  of  Bethlehem  f  his  city
was  called  in  full,  Ramathaim-Zophim,  and  lay  apparently  in  a
tract  spoken  of  as  the  land  of  Zuph.'  Under  these  circum-
stances, the  name  Ramathaim-Zophim  probably  signifies  nothing

'  Onomast.  art.  Modim.

'  Mariti  indeed  pretends  that  Soba  is
visible  from  the  sea,  and  that  he  saw  it
from  the  road  of  Yafa.  But  from  the  spot
where  we  stood,  we  could  look  over  Soba
to  the  much  higher  ridge  beyond  it  on  the
west;  and  could  distinguish  no  trace  of
the  sea.  What  he  perceived  from  Yafa
was  perhaps  Neby  Samwil ;  which  we  also
saw  from  the  tower  of  Ramleh.

'  Will.  Tyr.  8.  1.  F.  Fabri  in  Reissb.
p.  240.

*  Brocardus  c.  10.  p.  186.

'  Breydenbach  in  Reissb.  p.  105.  Coto-
yic.  p.  14G.  Maundrell  Apr.  2.  Mariti,
Germ.  p.  563.    Richardson  II.  pp.  226,

383.  Cotovicus  in  an  excursion  to  Em-
maus  (el-Kubeibeh),  seems  to  find  Modin
near  Neby  Samwil,  p.  317;  but  his  ac-
count of  this  excursion  is  so  confused,  that
I  can  make  nothing  of  it. — Pococke  ques-
tions the  identity  of  Suba  and  Modin  ;  II.
i.  p.  46.  So  too  Biisching,  Th.  XI.  p.  442.
Raumer  Palast.  p.  194.  edit.  3.  Quares-
mius  makes  no  allusion  to  the  place.

°  Van  Egmond  u.  HejTnan  Reizen  I.  p.
317.    Richardson  II.  p.  226.

'  See  above,  Vol.  I.  pp.  458,  459.
1  Sam.  1,  1.    Comp.  Ruth  1,  2,  where
Elimelech  and  his  sons  are  called  Eplira-
thites  of  Bethlehem-Judah.

'  1  Sam.  1,  1.    9,  5  sq.

ii.  329,  330

8

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec  XL

more  than  "Kamah  of  the  Zophites,"  or  descendants  of  Zuph.'
But  where  are  we  to  look  for  this  land  and  city  of  the  Zophites  ?
Saul,  departing  from  Gibeah  of  Benjamin  in  search  of  his
father's  asses,  went  first  through  Mount  Ephraim  on  the  north
and  through  other  places,  and  then  "  jjassed  through  the  land  of
the  Benjamites,  (of  course  from  north  to  south,)  and  came  to  the
land  of  Zuph  "  and  the  city  of  Samuel.^  As  he  returned  from  this
city  to  Gibeah,  apparently  after  travelling  some  distance,  he  was
to  pass  "  near  Rachel's  sepulchre,  in  the  (southern)  border  of
Benjamin,  at  Zelzah."^  These  circumstances  show  conclusively,
that  the  land  of  Zuph  and  the  city  of  Samuel  were  situated  on
the  south  of  the  territory  of  Benjamin,  in  such  a  position,  that  a
person  proceeding  thence  to  Gibeah  would  not  unnaturally  pass  in
the  vicinity  of  Rachel's  tomb.  This  is  a  known  point  ;  and  I
have  already  spoken  of  the  reasons  which  forbid  any  attempt  to
disturb  its  general  position.*

The  name  Ramah  signifies  '  a  height  ; '  and  we  made  it  a
particular  point  of  inquiiy  to  ascertain,  whether  on  the  high
ground  around  the  tomb  of  Rachel,  and  especially  towards  the
west,  there  are  any  traces  either  of  a  name  or  site,  which  might
be  regarded  as  the  remains  of  the  city  of  Samuel.  We  in-
quired of  many -persons,  who  were  born  and  had  spent  their  lives
in  the  immediate  vicinity  ;  but  no  one  knew  aught  of  any  such
name  or  site.*  It  is  only  since  my  return  to  Europe,  that  the
thought  has  occurred  to  my  mind,  whether  a  reminiscence  of  Ra-
mathaim-Zophim  and  of  the  land  of  Zuph,  may  not  be  contained
in  the  name  Soba.  The  letters  of  this  name  correspond  to  those
of  the  Hebrew  Zuph  and  Zophim  ;  {ph  or  p  being  not  unfre-
quently  changed  into  h  in  Arabic  ;)  and  its  position  on  a  lofty
hill  south  of  the  land  of  Benjamin,  accords  in  the  main  with
the  view  above  given.'

At  first  sight,  two  difficulties  seem  to  militate  against  this
hypothesis.  The  one  arises  out  of  the  position  of  Soba  ;  since
it  might  be  made  a  question,  whether  a  person  returning  from

'  The  triliteral  roots  t)l2£  and  ME2t,  from
■which  the  names  rjlS  (Zuph)  and  CBIS
(Zophim)  are  derived,  are  of  course  re-
lated, being  only  different  phases  of  the
biliteral  ~S.  The  name  C]1S  (Zuph)  takes
also  the  form  "'BIS  (Zopbai)  in  1  Chron.
6,  11.  [2G.]

'  1  Sara.  9,  4-6.

•  1  Sam.  10,  2.

•  See  Vol.  I.  pp.  218,  254.

'  The  monks  of  the  present  day  do  in-
deed point  out  the  site  of  Ramah  a  few
rods  east  of  the  tomb  of  Rachel ;  Prokesch
p.  110.  Salzbacher  II.  p.  1G4.  But  neither
ii.  330,  331

our  Arabs  of  the  TaVimirah,  nor  our  Chris-
tian guide  of  Beit  Jala  knew  anything  of
it ;  nor  did  Quaresmius  and  the  older
travellers.  Yet  Eusebius  and  Jerome  also
assume  a  Ramah  near  Bethlehem,  unneces-
sarily indeed,  in  order  to  afford  an  expla-
nation of  Matt.  2,  18.  Jer.  31,  11.  See
Onomast.  art.  Ramala.  Reland  Pal.
964. — See  more  in  Vol.  III.  Sec.  VI,  under
May  7th,  18.')2.

'  Cotovicus  identifies  Soba  with  Rama-
tlmim-Zophim,  by  transferring  tlie  name
of  Soba  to  Neby  Samwil.  But  his  account
is  so  contused  as  to  be  inexplicable.  Itin.
p.  316.

Mat  17.]

SOBA.

9

Soba  to  Gibeah,  would  naturally  pass  in  the  vicinity  of  Rachel's
tomb.  If  he  took  the  present  direct  road  from  Soba  to  Jerusa-
lem or  its  vicinity,  passing  near  el-Kustul,  he  certainly  would
not  approach  the  sepulchre  of  Rachel  ;  but  if,  crossing  the
great  Wady  Isma'in,  he  followed  up  Wady  el-Werd,  he  would
by  this  detoiir  come  near  enough  to  the  sepulchre  to  satisfy  all
the  conditions  of  the  case.  It  is  sufficient,  if  we  suppose  that
the  Zelzah  mentioned  lay  on  the  high  ground  north  of  Rachel's
tomb,  not  far  from  the  convent  of  Mar  Elyas,  or  more  probably
still  further  towards  the  northwest.  The  distance  from  S5ba  to
the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  direct  course,  as  we  have  seen,
is  two  and  a  half  hours  ;  on  the  route  along  Wady  el-Werd  and
the  vaUey  of  Rephaim  it  would  probably  be  three  hours  or  more.
So  that,  other  circumstances  being  equal,  the  identity  of  the
name  might  perhaps  be  held  to  counterbalance  the  apparent  cir-
cuitousness  of  the  route.'

The  other  difficulty  refers  not  to  Soba  alone,  but  to  every
position  of  Ramah  which  places  it  on  the  south  of  Benjamin.
Elkanah,  the  father  of  Samuel,  is  said  to  have  been  a  "  man  of
Ramathaim-Zophim,  of  Mount  Ephraim  ;  which  certainly  im-
plies that  the  city  itself  was  situated  on  Mount  Ephraim.  Here
then  apparently  is  a  circumstance  directly  at  variance  with  our
preceding  conclusion  ;  siuce  the  mountains  south  of  Benjamin
belong  not  to  Ephraim,  but  to  Judah.  But  as  the  circumstan-
ces above  adduced  seem  conclusively  to  fix  the  position  of  this
Ramah  on  the  south  of  Benjamin,  may  we  not  suppose  that  the
mountains  of  Ephraim  continued  to  bear  that  name  quite
through  the  land  of  Benjamin  ;  much  as  the  Swiss  mountains
may  be  said  to  extend  into  Italy,  or  the  Welsh  mountains  into
England  ?  This  indeed  has  been  assumed  by  Bachiene,  on  the
ground  that  iu  the  first  division  of  the  land  by  Joshua  at  Gil-
gal,  the  territory  of  Benjamin  was  actually  given  to  Ephraim  ;
not  having  been  assigned  to  Benjamin  until  the  later  division  at
Sluloh.'  All  this  may  be  true  in  part  ;  but  still,  the  heights
round  about  the  sepulchre  of  Rachel,  could  not  well  have  been
any  other  than  the  mountains  of  Judah.

There  is  however  another  consideration,  which  seems  to  re-
lieve the  position  of  Soba  from  the  difficulty  in  question,  and
thus  adds  something  to  the  probability  of  its  identity  with  Ra-
mah.   I  have  already  remarked,  that  the  mountain  ridge  west

'  On  comparing  upon  the  map  the  pod-  of  the  name,  and  Ae  fhrther  corroborating

tions  of  S  'ba,  Rachel's  tomb,  and  Jemsa-  circumstances  presented  in  the  text,  restrain

lem  or  Gibeah,  I  am  free  to  confess,  that  me  from  at  once  rejecting  the  hypothesis,
the  circnitons  route  required  by  the  above       '  1  Sam.  1,  1.

view,  is  too  great  to  admit  of  very  much       '  Josh.  c.  16.  c.  18,  1  sq.  See  Bachiene

reliance  being  placed  upon  the  reasoning  Th.  L  Bd.  I.  p.  220  sq.    Bd.  EL  p.  32(5

in  the  text.    Still,  the  apparent  identity  sq.

ii.  332,  333

10

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XT.

of  Wady  Beit  Hanina,  of  which  the  hill  of  Soba  fonns  a  part,
is  a  continuation  of  the  ridge  of  Neby  Samwil  and  the  high
grounds  around,  extending  in  the  southwest  quite  out  to  the
plain  at  the  mouth  of  Wady  SOrar.'  Now  all  this  mountainous
tract  stands  in  immediate  connection  with  the  proper  mountains
of  Ephraim  around  el-Bireh  and  further  north  ;  it  is  separated
entirely  by  the  great  Wady  Beit  Hanina  from  the  proper  moun-
tains of  Judah  towards  the  south  ;  and  further,  as  we  shall  see,
the  greater  part  of  it  did  not  even  fall  within  the  later  limits  of
the  tribe  of  Judah.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  seems  not  too
much  to  assume,  that  this  tract  west  of  the  great  Wady,  a
regular  continuation  of  Mount  Ephraim,  including  Neby  Sam-
wil, might  have  continued  to  bear  the  name  of  Ephraim  ;  wliile
the  Wady  would  naturally  form  the  dividing  line  between  this
range  and  the  proper  mountains  of  Judah.  That  the  name
Mount  Ephraim  did  actually  thus  extend  through  Benjamin,  is
rendered  probable  by  the  fact,  that  we  nowhere  hear  of  any
mountains  of  Benjamin  ;  and  further,  the  rebel  Sheba,  a  Ben-
jamite,  is  also  said  to  have  been  "  a  man  of  Mount  Ephraim."*

In  view  of  all  these  suggestions,  it  seems  to  me,  that  the
hypothesis  which  would  identify  Soba  with  the  Kamah  of  Samuel
is  not  without  some  slight  grounds  of  support  ;  and,  in  the  to-
tal absence  of  anything  more  definite,  is  not  perhaps  to  be
wholly  rejected  without  consideration.' — Yet  after  all,  there  is
perhaps  a  question  lying  back  of  this  whole  discussion,  viz.
Whether  the  city  where  Saul  and  the  servant  came  to  Samuel
was  his  own  city  Ramah  ?  *  The  name  of  the  city  is  nowhere
given  ;  and  the  answer  of  the  maidens  ^  would  perhaps  rather
imply  that  Samuel  had  just  arrived,  possibly  on  one  of  his  yearly
circuits,  in  which  he  judged  Israel  in  various  cities."

Another  topic  which  immediately  connects  itself  with  the
preceding,  is  the  common  border  between  Judah  and  Benjamin  ;
of  which  two  accounts  in  an  inverse  order  are  given  in  the  book
of  Joshua.'  We  have  already  traced  it,  as  it  went  up  from  the
well  of  Nchemiah  through  tlie  valley  of  Hinnom  to  the  northern
end  of  the  valley  of  Rephaim.'  From  that  point  it  was  drawn
to  the  water  of  Nephtoah  ;  and  as  it  passed  also  by  Zclzah  not
for  from  Rachel's  sepulchre,'  it  would  seem  to  have  followed  the
plain  of  Rephaim  and  so  along  the  Wady  el-Werd  to  'Ain  Yalo.

'  See  the  account  of  this  region,  p.  5,       '1  Sam.  7,  15-17,  "and  Samnel  .  .  .

above.  went  from  year  to  year  in  circuit  to  Bethel

'  2  Sam.  20,  1.  21.  and  Gilgal  and  Mizpeh,  and  judged  Israel

'  All  direct  tradition  respecting  the  Ra-  in  all  those  places;  and  his  return  was  to

mall  of  Samuel  seems  to  have  been  very  Ramah  ;  for  there  was  his  house."

early  lost ;  see  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  459.

.  «"l  Sam.  9,  6  sq.
»  Ibid.  V.  11.  12.
ii.  ;!33  334

'  Josh,  ir.,  .'i-lO.    18,  U-19.
'  See  under  Kn-Rogel,  VoL  I.  p.  333.
'  1  Sam.  10,  2.

Mat  17.}

KIEJATH-JEARm.

11

Tliis  fountain  would  then  answer  to  Nephtoah ;  unless  we  choose
to  refer  the  latter  with  less  probability  to  'Ain  Karim,  the  foun-
tain near  the  convent  of  St.  John  in  the  Desert.  In  either
case,  the  next  point  in  the  border  is  the  long  lost  city  Kirjath-
Jearim.

The  probable  position  of  this  ancient  city  engaged  much  of
our  attention,  all  the  time  we  were  in  Jerusalem  and  the  vicin-
ity ;  without  arriving  at  any  satisfactory  conclusion.  At  first,
as  we  koow,  Kirjath-Jearim,  lite  Beeroth  (el-Bireh),  belonged
to  the  territory  of  Gibeon,  and  could  not  therefore  well  have
been  very  far  distant  from  that  city.'  At  a  later  period,  the  ark
was  brought  thither  from  Beth-shemesh  ;  the  place  was  rebuilt
and  inhabited  after  the  exile  ; "-  and  Eusebius  and  Jerome  speak
of  it  in  their  day,  as  a  village  nine  or  ten  miles  from  J erusalem
on  the  way  to  Diospolis  (Lydda).^  These  circumstances,  taken
together,  have  quite  recently  suggested  to  my  mind,  whether,
after  all,  the  ancient  Kirjath-Jearim  is  not  to  be  recognised  in
the  present  Kuryet  el-'Enab  ?  The  first  part  of  the  name
(Kirjath,  Kuryet,  signifying  city)  is  the  same  in  both,  and  is
most  prijbably  ancient  :  being  found  in  Arabic  proper  names
only  in  Palestine  and  Syria,  and  not  very  frequently  even  there.
The  only  change  then  has  been,  that  the  ancient  '  City  of  For-
ests' has  in  modern  times  become  the  '  City  of  Grapes.'*  The
modem  place  too  is  situated  on  the  direct  way  fi-om  Jerusalem
to  Eamleh  and  Lydda,  just  three  hours  or  nine  Roman  miles
from  the  former  city,  lying  west  of  Neby  Samwil,  and  therefore
not  far  remote  from  el-Jib  or  Gibeon.

Thus  then  we  have  a  place  corresponding  both  in  name  and
position  to  the  ancient  Kirjath-Jearim.  I  am  aware  of  no  ob-
jection to  this  hypothesis  ;  except  perhaps  the  assertion  of  Jo-
sephus,  that  Kirjath-Jearim  was  near  to  Beth-shemesh.^  But
the  expression  •  neighbour  city,'  is  too  indefinite  to  weigh  against
the  preceding  considerations  ;  especially  as  the  actual  distance
does  not  exceed  three  or  four  hours.'  It  might  also  be  asked.
Why  then,  supposing  Sfjba  to  have  been  the  Eamah  of  Samuel,
the  men  of  Beth-shemesb  should  not  rather  have  caused  the
ark  to  be  transferred  to  that  place,  as  being  nearer  than  Kir-

'  Joeh.  9,  17.    Ezra  2,  25.  name  'Anab  is  still  fotind  beyond  Hebron;

'  1  Sam.  7,  1.  2.    Ezra  2, 25.    Xehem.  see  above,  VoL  L  p.  194.    A  Betoannaba  is

7,  29.  spoken  of  a  few  miles  from  Lydda,  probably

'  Onomast.  arts.  Baal  asad  Cariathiarim.  Beit  Xiiba  ;  Reland  PaL  p.  661.
There  is  no  Liter  notice  ot  the  place  as       '  Joseph.  Antiq.  6.  L  i,  ytiroya  xoAjr

still  extant :  unless  it  be  that  of  Brocardus,  toij  Bn^T'ifiirais.

who  fixes  it  4i  kagoes  west  of  Jerusalem,       '  The  same  writer  saya  too  that  Hebron

probably  copying  only  from  -Jerome  ;  c.  9.  was  "  not  far  from  Jerusalem,"  ov  ir6p^M

P-  l>t-  'Upo  337

Mat  17.]

BEIT  'aTAB.

13

Leaving  the  high  ground  west  of  Wady  Bittir  at  12.20,  we
began  to  descend  very  gradually  towards  the  village  el-Husau
over  a  roclc}^  tract.  After  fifteen  minutes  we  were  opposite  the
head  of  Wady  el-Musurr,  deep  below  us  on  the  left ;  in  which
appeared  a  small  village  called  Nuhhalin  bearing  S.  5°  W.  From
it  the  Wady  ran  W.  S.  W.  The  village  Husan  was  close  on
our  right  at  12.40.  Proceeding  along  the  high  water-shed  be-
tween the  Wadys  Musurr  and  el-W^erd,  we  had  not  far  distant
on  the  left,  a  ^dllage  called  Fukin,  which  at  1.10  bore  S.  S.  W.
It  was  somewhere  about  this  time,  that  we  came  in  sight  of  a
place  with  ruins  on  the  brow  of  the  high  mountain  ridge  towards
the  south,  called  Jediir;  wliich  is  doubtless  the  same  as  the
Gedor  of  the  mountains  of  Judah.'  This  remained  in  sight  for
the  whole  day.  Jeb'ah  likewise  on  its  conical  hill  in  Wady
Musurr,  was  continually  before  our  eyes.  At  1.40  we  came  upon
the  ancient  highway  from  Jerusalem  to  Askelon  and  Gaza,
which  comes  down  along  or  across  Wady  el-Werd  from  the  plain
of  Rephaim  or  the  tract  further  west.  This  road  we  should
have  taken  from  Jerusalem,  had  we  not  gone  round  by  Beit  Jala.
At  the  same  point  was  a  small  ruin  on  the  left  called  'Adas.

Wishing  to  visit  Beit  'Atab,  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  see
much  of  the  country  from  that  lofty  spot,  we  left  the  ancient
road  again  after  five  minutes,  and  turning  more  to  the  right  pro-
ceeded in  that  direction.  As  we  advanced  the  hills  became  more
covered  and  green  with  shrubs  and  bushes,  chiefly  the  prickly
oak  mingled  with  arbutus.  The  country  however  was  little  cul-
tivated, and  most  of  the  villages  were  deserted  or  in  ruins.  At
five  minutes  past  two,  a  small  ruin,  Hubin,  was  below  us  in  a
valley  running  to  the  left,  bearing  S.  S.  W.  At  the  same  time
Beit  'Atab  bore  N.  75°  W.  A  ruined  Khan  was  also  visible  at
some  distance  upon  the  ancient  road,  bearing  S.  65°  W.

We  reached  Beit  'Atab  at  ten  minutes  before  3  o'clock.  It
is  situated  on  a  high  hill,  and  is  seen  from  all  parts  of  the  coun-
try around  ;  but  although  it  overlooks  a  great  extent  of  the  lower
region  towards  the  south  and  west,  yet  it  does  not  afi'ord  so  ex-
tensive a  view  of  places,  as  we  had  hoped  to  find.  The  country
is  full  of  sites  of  ruins  and  villages,  some  inhabited  and  some
deserted,  at  least  for  portions  of  the  year.  Beit  'Atab  has  seve-
ral high,  square,  tower-like  houses  of  two  stories;  the  rest  are
small  and  low  ;  but  all  are  of  stone,  solidly  biult.  In  the  centre
is  a  ruined  tower  or  castle  ;  but  so  dilapidated  as  to  be  nearly
lost  among  the  houses.  The  place  contains  perhaps  one  hundred
and  fifty  men,  or  a  population  of  six  or  seven  hundred  souls.  It
is  the  chief  town  of  the  district  'Arkiib,  belonging  to  the  pro-

'  Josh.  15,  58.  1  Chron.  12,  7.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  narrative  in  1  Chron.
4,  39,  refers  to  the  same  place.

Vol.  II — 2  ii.  337-339

14

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XI.

vince  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  is  tlie  residence  of  the  Nazir  (warden)
of  the  district,  who  was  now  one  of  the  former  Sheikhs  of  the
house  called  el-Luhham.  We  found  several  of  the  chief  men
sitting  on  carpets  under  a  fig  tree  in  the  middle  of  the  village,
smoking  and  holding  converse  with  each  other.  The  Sheikh
himself  soon  came,  a  good  looking  man  ;  coffee  was,  served  for
us  ;  and  he  tried  to  persuade  us  to  remain  all  night,  saying  the
people  of  the  village  where  we  expected  to  lodge  were  not  to  be
trusted;  his  hospitaHty  thus  leading  him  even  to  defame  his
neighbours.    But  our  time  was  too  precious  to  stop  thus  early.

The  prospect  from  Beit  'Atab  towards  the  southeast  and
south  presented  nothing  new  ;  towards  the  southwest,  along  the
ridge  between  the  Wadys  Sumt  and  Surar,  the  place  of  Beit
Nettif  was  pointed  out,  where  we  were  to  stop  for  the  night;
and  in  the  northwest  we  could  see  the  mouth  of  Wady  es-Surar
as  it  issued  from  the  mountains  and  turned  across  the  plain  ])e-
yond.  It  was  here  a  fine  deep  valley,  ^dth  a  ruin  in  it  called
'Ain  Shems,  which  we  afterwards  visited  and  identified  with
Beth-shemesh  ;  while  on  the  high  northern  hill  was  seen  the  site
of  Sur'ah,  in  which  we  could  not  but  recognise  the  ancient
Zorah,  the  birthplace  of  Samson.'

We  left  Beit  'Atab  at  3^  o'clock,  notwithstanding  the  some-
what importunate  in\itations  of  the  Sheikh  ;  who  even  took  hold
of  us  in  order  to  detain  us.  Descending  in  the  direction  of  the
Khan,  we  crossed  two  small  Wadys  running  towards  the  Surar.
In  the  first,  lower  down  on  the  right,  the  guide  spoke  of  a  very
large  cavern  with  a  fountain  in  it,  capable  of  containing  hun-
dreds of  people  ;  it  is  called  et-Tuweimeh.  The  second  Wady
is  called  er-Rumany ;  in  it  at  4  o'clock,  we  came  to  a  village
called  'AUar  es-Sifla  (the  lower),  to  distinguish  it  from  another,
'Allar  el-Foka  (the  upper),  on  higher  ground  a  little  furtber  to
the  left.  Here  was  a  ruined  church,  large  and  solidly  built,  and
apparently  very  ancient.  A  few  rods  on  the  left,  higher  up  the
valley,  is  a  fine  fountain,  which  waters  a  tract  of  gardens  and
fruit  trees  along  the  bottom.  Here  were  also  many  olive  trees  ;
which  indeed  are  very  abundant  throughout  all  this  region.

Ascending  the  hill  we  came  out  again  upon  the  ancient  road
at  4^  o'clock,  at  the  Khan  already  mentioned.  It  is  a  ruin ;
and  around  it  are  the  ruins  of  a  small  village.'    We  stopped

'  .Tudg.  13,  2.    First  given  to  Judah,  were:  Ruined  Kh.ln  S.  1 7MV.    Beit  Net-

bnt  afterwards  assigned  to  Dan,  Josh.  15,  tif  S.  G0°  W.    'Ain  Sbems  N.  6.">^  W.

33.    19,  41.     See  above,  p.  12.     Fuse-  Sur'ah  N.  56"  W.    Deir  el-Hawa  N.  30°

bius  and  Jerome  place  it  at  ten  miles  from  \V.    Sunasin  S.  13'  E.    Jedur  S.  11^  E.

Eleutlieropolis  towards  Nicopolis ;  Ononi.  '  From  the  Kliiin,  Beit  'Afib  bore  N

art.  Saara.    We  visited  Sur'ah  in  18.')2  ;  17"  E.    'Allar  es-Sitla  N.  30'  E.  '^llar

see  Vol.  Ill,  unuer  April  27tli.— The  hear-  el-F6ka  N.  50'  E.  Beit  Nettif  S.  85'  W.
ings  of  various  places  from  Beit  'Atab

ii.  339,  340

Mat  17.]

BEIT  KETTIF,

15

here  five  minutes,  and  then  descended  for  a  time  along  a  "Wady,
called  Wady  el-Khan,  which  runs  into  the  Musurr.  The  ancient
road,  still  called  the  Sultana  or  royal  road,  apparently  follows
down  this  Wady  to  the  Musurr,  and  there  divides ;  one  hranch
passing  on  direct  towards  Gaza,  and  another  keeping  along  the
MusOrr  and  Sumt  in  the  direction  of  Askelon.  This  latter  we
afterwards  followed  for  a  time  ;  and  found  wells  upon  it  at  inter-
vals. We  now  turned  more  to  the  right,  keeping  upon  the  ridge
between  the  Sumt  and  Surar  ;  and  at  5  o'clock  had  an  extensive
view  of  both  these  valleys,  spreading  out  into  fine  fertile  plains
full  of  fields  of  grain.  The  ridge  now  became  higher  towards
the  west ;  and  we  continued  to  ascend  gradually,  until  at  5.50
we  reached  the  village  of  Beit  Nettif,  situated  upon  its  highest
part.

Beit  Nettif,  lying  thus  upon  the  high  ridge  between  the  two
great  Wadys,  enjoys  a  wide  view  over  the  broad  western  plain
and  the  Mediterranean  beyond.  A  tract  of  lower  hills,  an  hour
or  more  in  breadth,  lies  between  it  and  the  plain.  On  the  north,
the  Siirar  was  visible  ;  on  the  south,  the  Sumt  was  full  of  fields
of  grain  now  ripening  for  the  harvest ;  and  beyond  it  and  more
towards  the  left  extended  for  a  great  distance  the  lower  region,
which  we  had  first  seen  from  above  the  head  of  Wady  Musurr.
This  may  be  called  the  hill  country,  in  distinction  from  the  high-
er mountains  on  the  east.  It  is  the  middle  region  between  the
mountains  and  the  plain,  stretching  as  we  have  seen  far  to  the
north  and  south,  except  where  interrupted  north  of  the  mouth
of  Wady  es-Surar.  This  region  is  for  the  most  part  a  beautiful
open  country,  consisting  of  low  hills  usually  rocky,  separated  by
broad  arable  valleys  mostly  sown  with  grain,  as  are  also  many
of  the  swelling  hills.  The  whole  tract  is  full  of  villages  and
deserted  sites  and  ruins ;  and  many  olive  groves  appear  around
the  former.  To  this  hill  country  belong  also,  strictly,  both  the
ridge  on  which  Beit  Nettif  stands,  and  that  adjacent  to  Wady
es-Surar  on  the  north  ;  although,  as  being  higher  and  directly
connected  with  the  mountains  further  back,  they  appear  like
promontories,  jutting  out  through  the  range  of  hills  nearly  or
quite  to  the  plain.

Indeed,  in  the  tract  through  which  we  had  descended  to-day,
between  the  two  great  Wadys,  the  usual  steep  descent  of  the
mountain  towards  the  west  is  interrupted ;  and  we  now  found
ourselves  in  the  midst  of  the  lower  hill  country,  without  having
made  any  long  or  steep  descent,  such  as  occurred  to  us  in  other
parts  of  the  mountains,  both  towards  the  north  and  south.

The  climate  in  this  region  was  more  advanced  than  at  Jeru-
salem ;  though  less  so  than  in  the  western  plain.  The  grass  was
chiefly  dried  up ;  and  the  peasants  were  in  the  midst  of  their

ii.  340-342

16

FEOM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XI.

barley  harvest.  The  wheat  was  still  partially  green,  and  would
not  be  ripe  for  harvest  until  about  two  weeks  later.  We  en-
camped on  a  level  plat  on  the  east  of  the  village,  near  by  the
threshinp:  floors  of  barley.

The  inhabitants  of  Beit  Nettif  received  us  with  kindness  ;
several  of  the  chief  men  came  around  us,  and  answered  our  in-
quiries with  readiness  and  inteUigence.  We  found  the  view  from
this  high  spot  to  embrace  a  larger  number  of  villages  and  sites,
than  almost  any  other  we  visited.  We  took  here  quite  a  num-
ber of  bearings,  given  in  the  note  ;  the  places  being  all  pointed
out  and  named  by  one  of  the  chief  men. '

In  respect  to  several  of  the  places  thus  pointed  out,  it  is  to
be  remarked  that  Jennabeh  and  Shuweikeh  lie  upon  the  hills  on
the  south  side  of  Wady  es-Sumt ;  the  latter^ about  one  hour  dis-
tant from  Beit  Nettif.  Not  far  from  Beit-Ula  near  the  foot  of
the  moimtains,  we  were  told  also  of  a  place  called  Nusib,  not
here  visible.  Zanu'a  lies  on  the  low  slope  of  a  hill  not  far  east
of  'Ain  Shems.  The  Wely  Neby  Bulus  (Paulus)  is  on  a  lower
hill  near  the  plain,  half  an  hour  distant ;  and  Yarmuk  among
the  hills  further  south  at  about  the  same  distance.  Near  Neby
Bulus  was  said  to  be  a  village  called  Arba'in.  Still  beyond,
nearer  the  plain,  and  near  where  Wady  es-Surar  issues  upon  it,
a  deserted  site  called  Tibneh  was  spoken  of,  not  visible  from  Beit
Nettif  Near  Tell  Zakariya  is  also  a  village  Zakariya,  in  which
is  a  Mukam  (station,  tomb),  dedicated  to  Zechariah.

Among  the  places  here  \asible,  not  less  than  ten  appear  to
bear  names  which  have  come  down  from  antiquity ;  and  these
are  probably  to  be  regarded  as  still  marking  the  same  ancient
sites.  Shuweikeh  we  have  formerly  found  to  correspond  to  the
Hebrew  Socoh  ;  and  it  here,  as  we  shall  see  later,  answers  to  the
Socoh  of  the  plain  of  Judah.'^ — Jeb'ah  and  Jedtir,  and  also  Sur'ah
and  'Ain  Shems,  we  have  already  noted  as  the  Gibeah  of  J udah,
Gedor,  Zorah,  and  Bethshemesh,  of  Scripture.^  Not  far  from
Zorah  lay  also  Zanoah,  which  was  re-inhabited  after  the  exile  ;
and  to  this  the  name  and  site  of  Zanu'a  still  correspond.^ — In

'  Bearings  from  Beit  Nettif,  beginning  N.  54°  W.    Tell  Zakariya  about  N.  78°

in  the  west  and  proceeding  towards  the  W.

left:  Jennibth  S.  70   W.    Denisieh  S.  '  Josh.  15,  3.5.    See  Vol.  I.  p.  494  sq.

62'  W.    .SliuweikeH  S.  48'  W.    Beit  Fusl  »  See  above,  pp.   6,   1.3,    14.  The

S.  15'  W.    Jurfa  S.  5'  E.    Beit-ula  S.  proofs  in  respect  to  Beth-sheniesh  will  be

10°  E.    Kh.ir.is  S.  14'  E.    Jimrln  S.  19'  given  in  connection  with  our  subsequent

E.    Ghi'iniheh  S.  31°  E.    Um  er-Rus  S.  visit  to  tlint  spot,  Jnne  8th.

63°  E.    Jedur  S.  50°  E.    Jeb'ah  S.  C5°  *  Josh.  15,  34.   Neh.  11,30.   The  name

E.   Bnrj  Kcis  E.   AbbekN.  70'  E.    Beit  Zanua  existed  in  Jerome's  day,  in  the  re-

'Atiib  N.  (JO  E.    Jcr.lsh  N.  44'  E.    Dcir  gion  of  Elciitheropolis  on  the  way  to  Je-

el-Hawa  N.  37'  E.    Um  Esbteiyeh  X.  35'  rusalem;  Onomu^t.  art.  Zanohua. — Another

E.    Z.iuiVa  N.  12' E.    Sur'ah  N.  4'  W.  Zanoah  biy  upon  the  mountains  of  Judah,

'Ain  Shems  N.  12°  W.    Neby  Bulus  N.  Josh.  15,  66.
34' W.  cl-Khcisbi'im  N.  44  W.  Yarmuk

ii.  342.  343

May  17]

BEIT  NETTIF.

17

Tibneh  we  may  recognise  the  Timnah  or  Timnatli  of  Dan,  the
city  of  Samson's  wife  to  which  he  "went  down"  from  Zorah  ;  it
lies  south  of  west  from  Zorah,  and  not  more  than  an  hour  distant
from  it.'  We  were  therefore  now  amid  the  scenes  of  Samson's
history  and  exploits. — Yarmuk  seems  to  represent  the  Jarmuth
of  Scripture,  a  city  in  the  plain  of  J udah  not  far  from  Socoh,  which
so  early  as  the  days  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome  was  already  called
Jermucha,  and  lay  ten  miles  from  Eleutheropolis  towards  Jerusa-
lem.*— Nusib  answers  to  the  Nezib  of  the  low  country  of  Judah,
and  to  the  Nasib  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  lying  seven  miles  from
Eleutheropolis  towards  Hebron.^ — The  name  Zakariyeh,  as  ap-
plied to  a  village,  does  not  indeed  belong  to  Scripture  ;  yet  it  here
probably  marks  the  site  of  the  Caphar  Zacharias  mentioned  by
Sozomen  in  the  region  of  Eleutheropohs.*

The  name  of  Beit  Nettif  itself  has  probably  come  down  from
the  Hebrew  ;  but  I  have  been  able  to  find  no  ancient  place  cor-
responding to  it.  A  village  Netopha  is  indeed  mentioned  in
Scripture  ;  it  lay,  however,  somewhere  between  Bethlehem  and
Anathoth.*  The  Eabbins  speak  also  of  a  vaUey  called  Beth
Netopha  ;  but  the  present  place  is  on  a  high  hill.*

Beit  Nettif  is  a  small  village  near  the  western  extremity  of
the  district  'Arkub,  which  constitutes  the  southwest  part  of  the
province  of  Jerusalem.  Its  inhabitants  are  of  the  Keis  party.
Throughout  the  provinces  of  Jerusalem  and  Hebron,  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  different  villages  are  broken  up  into  two  great  parties;
one  called  Keis  (Keisiyeh),  and  the  other  Yemen  (Yemeniyeh);
the  inhabitants  of  the  former  province  being  mostly  Yemeniyeh,
and  those  of  the  latter  Keisiyeh.  No  person  of  whom  we  inquired,
could  tell  the  origin  or  the  nature  of  this  distinction  ;  except
that  it  goes  back  beyond  the  memory  of  man,  and  does  not  now
pertain  in  any  degree  to  religious  worship  or  doctrine.  It  seems
indeed  to  consist  in  little  more  than  the  fact,  that  one  is  the
enemy  of  the  other.  In  former  times  blood  was  often  shed  in
their  quarrels  ;  but  now  all  are  quiet.  Yet  this  inbred  enmity
shows  itself  in  mutual  distrust  and  calumny  ;  and  it  was  proba-

:  '  Josh.  1.5,  10.  19,  43.  Judg.  14,  1.
6.  2  Chr.  28,  18.— Another  Timnah  lay
in  the  mountains  of  Judah,  Josh.  15,  57.
Gen.  38,  12-14.  Still  a  third  Timnah  or
Thamna  lay  northeast  of  Lydda,  and  gave
name  to  the  "  Toparchia  Thamnitica"  in
that  quarter ;  Joseph.  B.  J.  3.  3.  5.  Ono-
mast.  art.  Thamna.  This  was  probably
the  Timnah  fortified  by  Baochides ;  1  Mace.
9,  50.    Joseph.  Ant.  13.  1.  3.

«  Josh.  15,  35.  Neh.  11,  29.  Onomast.
art.  Jcrmus. — The  '  Jarimuth  '  of  Jerome,
which  he  says  \&y  four  miles  from  Eleu-
theropolis, is  not  improbably  the  same

Vol.  II.— 2*

place ;  since  it  is  also  said  to  have  been
adjacent  to  Eshtaol,  which  must  certainly
have  been  much  nearer  to  Zorah,  and  is
placed  by  tbe  same  Wj  iters  at  ten  miles
from  Eleutheropolis ;  Josh.  15,  33.  19,
41.    Onomast.  art.  Enthaul,

'  Josh.  15,  43.    Onomast.  art.  Neesib.

*  SoEom.  Hist.  Ecc.  9.  17.  It  seems  al-
so to  have  been  visited  by  St.  Willibald  on
his  way  from  Gaza  to  Hebron  ;  Hodoepor.
20.  p.  377.

^  Ezra  2,  22,  Neh.  7,  2G.  Roland
Patest.  p.  909.

"  Reland  Palajst.  p.  650.

ii.  343  -345

18

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XL

bly  on  tMs  ground,  that  the  Sheikh  of  Beit  'Atab,  where  the
people  are  of  the  Yemen  party,  spoke  evil  of  his  neighbours  the
Keisiyeh  of  Beit  Nettif.

We  did  not  hear  of  the  prevalence  of  thes*  parties  in  any
other  region  at  the  present  day  ;  but  it  is  singular,  that  the  same
names  of  hostile  parties  existed  in  Syria  in  the  very  first  century
of  Muhammedanism.  It  would  be  interesting  to  inquire,  whether
there  is  perhaps  any  connection  between  parties  thus  bearing  the
same  names  in  the  seventh  and  in  the  nineteenth  centuries.'

We  found  the  inhabitants  of  Beit  Xettif  very  civil  and  hos-
pitable ;  the  bad  reports  about  them  to  the  contrary  notwith-
standing. In  the  evening  several  of  the  chief  men  visited  us  in
our  tent,  drank  cofiee,  and  gave  us  much  information.  On  going
away,  one  of  them,  whom  we  supposed  to  be  a  Sheikh,  (though
he  seemed  not  to  be  the  chief  Sheikh,)  inquired  if  we  would  have
a  couple  of  men  from  the  viUage  to  watch  during  the  night.
This  we  declined,  as  unnecessary.  We  heard  however  the  voices
of  men  all  night  around  our  tent,  whom  we  took  to  be  persons
watching  the  threshing-floors  of  barley,  and  enjoying  the  comfort
of  our  fire  ;  indeed  they  disturbed  our  sleep  by  their  talking,  and
especially  by  their  loud  manner  of  story-teUing.  In  the  morn-
ing, we  learned  that  the  Sheikh  himself  and  two  men  had  kept
guard  during  the  night  of  their  own  accord,  and  without  expect-
ing any  remuneration.  We  afterwards  found  the  same  custom
at  most  of  the  villages  where  we  encamped.  It  arises,  however,
rather  out  of  a  regard  for  their  own  security,  than  from  any  par-
ticular respect  towards  the  stranger.  Every  viUage  is  made  re-
sponsible by  the  government  for  all  thefts  committed  within  its
precincts  ;  had  we  at  any  time  lost  any  thing  by  theft  or  robbery,
on  complaining  to  the  government,  the  village  where  the  loss
occurred  would  have  been  compelled  to  make  it  good.  On  this
ground,  therefore,  and  for  their  own  sakes,  they  usually  preferred
to  set  a  watch  around  our  tent.

Being  now  off"  the  track  of  all  former  travellers,  we  came  in
contact  here  with  oriental  hospitahty  in  its  primitive  and  genuine
form.  The  Anllages  supplied  us  with  every  thing  we  desired  ;
regarding  it  as  an  honour,  and  without  expecting  a  recom])ense.
Such  is  the  custom  of  all  these  mountains.  The  Fcllahin  never
sell  food  to  one  another ;  but  every  stranger  is  the  guest  of  the
village.    Our  five  muleteers,  honest  and  faithful  peasants  from

Al>nlfeda  mentions  a  great  battle  be-
tween the  Yemeniyeh  and  Keisiyeh,  A.  II.
64  (A.  I).  CS4)  at  Merj  Rihat  near  Damas-
cus; which  is  also  celebrated  by  .\rabian
poets.  Auiiales  ^d  Ann.  G4.  Tabula  Syriae
ed.  Kohler  p.  17.  See  also  Reiske's  Sole,
ibid.  p.  107. — Kdrisi  has  likewise  the  u.ime
ii.  345i  346

Keis,  as  of  a  tribe  in  the  south  of  Pales-
tine ;  p.  341.  ed.  Jaubert.  The  same  par-
ties formerly  prevailed  throughout  Mount
Lebanon,  both  among  the  Druzes  and  the
Christian  ffopulation  ;  N'iebuhr  ReiscbeachTi
II.  p.  447.    Burckhardt  p.  159.

Mat  is.]

BEIT  XETTIF.

19

the  village  of  Lifta  near  Jerusalem,  never  thought  of  p^P^S
their  food  ;  not  for  the  sake  of  spunging,  like  our  former  Muka-
riyeh,  but  because  it  vras  furnished  to  them  as  a  matter  of  course.
In  every  village  there  is  a  public  room,  or  more  than  one,  according
to  the  size  and  ability  of  the  place,  devoted  to  the  entertainment
of  strangers.  Such  a  room  is  called  a  Menzil  or  Medafeh,  a  guest-
room. The  guest  lodges  in  the  Menzil,  and  his  food  is  supplied
by  the  families,  to  whose  circle  it  belongs.  Sometimes  they  take
turns  in  his  entertainment  ;  at  other  times  it  is  left  to  those  vrho
offer  themselves,  or  rather  who  claim  the  pri\-ilege.  If  the  giiest
be  a  person  of  consequence,  it  is  a  matter  of  course  that  a  sheep
or  goat,  a  lamb  or  kid,  is  killed  for  him.  The  Keisiyeh  usually
kill  two  ;  one  for  the  guest,  and  another  for  the  people  of  the
place.  When  the  guest  is  a  common  man,  as  a  muleteer  or  the
like,  he  is  fed  with  rice,  or  whatever  may  be  the  ordinary  food
of  the  people  themselves.  The  guest  gives  nothing  as  a  remu-
neration when  he  leaves.  To  offer  money  would  be  taken  as  an
insult  ;  and  to  receive  it  would  be  a  great  disgrace.  Such  is
universally  the  manner  of  entertainment  in  the  villages  through-
out the  provinces  of  J erusalem  and  Hebron,  as  well  as  in  other
parts  of  Syria.'

On  the  more  travelled  roads,  the  Franks  have  broken  in  upon
this  custom  :  and  the  people  have  learned  to  receive  pay  from
foreigners.  We  too  left  our  servant  behind  us  in  this  village,  to
offer  pay  for  the  milk  and  other  articles  we  had  purchased,  and
in  this  instance  it  was  received ;  though  subsequently  in  several
cases  it  was  refused.

Friday,  May  ISth.  We  rose  early,  and  found  the  lower  hill
countiT  enveloped  in  a  dense  fog,  over  which  the  tops  of  the
hills  were  seen  like  islands.  The  mist  however  soon  rose  from
the  landscape,  and  left  behind  a  clear  atmosphere  and  a  fine
breeze  the  whole  day.  The  Sheikh  who  was  with  us  last  evening
came  again  early,  in  order  to  assist  us  in  making  observations  ;
and  as  we  left,  he  accompanied  us,  in  token  of  respect,  quite  out
of  the  village.

The  great  object  before  us  to-day,  was  to  search  for  the  long
lost  site  of  the  ancient  Eleutheroj^olis,  an  important  episcopal  city
of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  assumed  indeed  by  Eusebius
and  Jerome  as  the  central  point  in  southern  Palestine,  from
which  to  fix  the  position  of  many  other  places.  We  had  been
making  inquiries  ever  since  we  first  reached  Jerusalem,  to  ascer-
tain whether  any  name  or  any  rains  stiU  existed  in  the  same
quarter,  which  might  afibrd  a  clue  for  determining  this  ancient
site.  But  no  trace  of  any  such  name  could  be  found  ;  nor  could
we  hear  of  any  such  ruins,  excepting  at  a  place  called  Beit  Jibrin.

'  See  the  leferences  above,  VoL  L  p.  445  n.  4.

ii.  346-348

20

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XL

These  the  Arabs  described  in  extravagant  terms  ;  and  although
we  placed  little  reliance  upon  their  accounts,  yet  we  determined
to  visit  the  spot  ourselves  in  the  course  of  our  journey.  On
arriving  at  Beit  Nettif,  we  were  surprised  and  gratified  t6  find
ourselves  surrounded  by  several  places,  whose  distances  from
Eleutheropolis  are  specified  by  Eusebius  and  J erome.  Thus  the
distance  both  of  Beth-shemesh  and  Zorah  is  given  at  ten  Koman
miles  towards  Nicopolis  ;  that  of  Jarmuth  (Jarmuch)  also  at  ten
miles  towards  J erusalem,  and  that  of  Socoh  (Shuweikeh)  at  nine
miles  towards  the  same  city,  probably  on  another  road.'  The
first  three  places  all  lay  within  a  circle  of  an  hour  and  a  half
west  of  north  from  Beit  Nettif ;  and  these  distances,  we  thought,
might  perhaps  serve  us  in  some  measure  as  a  clue,  in  our  search
after  the  site  of  Eleutheropolis  itself.

We  left  Beit  Nettif  at  7  o'clock,  descending  immediately
southwesterly  into  Wady  es-Sumt,  in  order  to  strike  again  the
Askelon  branch  of  the  ancient  road,  which  passes  down  this
valley.  The  hill  side  was  covered  with  fine  groves  of  olive  trees,
some  of  them  planted  in  rows  like  a  regular  orchard  ;  which  is
not  usually  the  case.  Twenty  minutes  brought  us  to  the  bot-
tom ;  and  we  now  followed  down  Wady  es-Sumt  on  a  course
west  by  north.  This  valley  is  formed  by  the  junction  of  three
Wadys  at  a  point  directly  south  of  Beit  Nettif,  viz.  Wady  el-
Musurr  coming  from  the  E.  N.  E. ;  Wady  es-Sur,  a  large  val-
ley from  the  south  ;  and  a  smaller  one  from  the  N.  N.  E.  just
under  Beit  Nettif  The  bottom  is  a  fine  fertile  plain  with
moderate  hills  on  each  side.  It  was  now  covered  with  fields  of
grain,  except  towards  the  western  part ;  where  are  a  good  many
of  the  trees  here  called  Sumt,  from  which  the  valley  takes  its
name.'^

We  crossed  the  water-bed  of  the  valley,  now  dry,  and  soon
came  upon  the  ancient  road,  which  had  followed  down  Wady  el-
Musurr.  The  other  or  Gaza  branch  goes  off  more  to  the  left,
and  crosses  Wady  es-Silr  near  an  immense  Butm-tree  about
twenty  minutes  south  of  the  junction  of  the  valleys.  On  our
left,  in  a  gap  of  the  southern  hill,  we  now  had  the  ruins  of  Shu-

■  Onomast.  arts.     Bctksctmis,  Saara,  thorny  tree  resembling  the  Tulh  or  Seyal,

Jermits,  Soccho.  with  whicli  it  has  sometimes  been  con-

^  The  form  Sumt,  seems  to  be  merely  a  founded. — This  Arabic  name  affords  an

corrupt  pronunciation  of  the  word  S^n^,  apt  etymology  for  the  Heb.  na'j  i.  q.  najia,

the  proper  Arabic  and  Egyptian  name  for  t,,g  s/nttim-wood  of  the  Bible  (Ex.  25;  5.

the  tree  whose  fruit  is  called  /fara^/Zi.  jq.  13.  etc.)  wliich  was  probably  the  same

This  IS  the  Mimosa  iV^t 'o,  dug  mostly
in  the  solid  rock,  and  apparently  ancient.  There  is  another  on
the  slope  of  the  hiU  southwest  of  the  church,  which  was  now
dry.'

In  returning  to  the  village,  as  we  passed  one  of  the  wells
where  the  peoi)le  were  watering  their  flocks,  a  man  called  out  to
us  :  "  Do  not  be  long,"  that  is,  in  coming  to  take  possession  of
the  country.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  we  were  supposed  to  be  in
search  of  our  hereditary  estates.  Such  expressions  we  often
heard  ;  and  this  desire  for  a  Frank  government  or  Frank  protec-
tion we  found  to  be  universal  in  Syria,  among  both  Chris-

'  The  only  allusion  I  find  to  this  church  '  From  the  hill  just  east  of  Siinta  Han-
is  in  Gaufr.  Vinisauf,  Iter  Hierosol.  Refjis  neh  the  following  bearings  were  taken  '
Richanli,  ctr..  44,  in  Gale  Scriptoros  Toll  cs-SAfioh  N.  20'  \V.  Beit 'At;"ib  N
Hiftoriaj  Angl.  Tom.  II.  p.  375.  See  G3"  E.  Min'in  S.  64°  E.  DQra  ou  tie
further  on,  p.  28,  n.  6.  mountain  S.  44°  E.

ii.  357,  358

Mat  18.]

BEIT  JIBRIN.

27

tians  and  Muhammedans  ;  not  excepting  even  the  Bedawin.
On  this  ground  we  were  everj'where  well  received.'  Here  at
Beit  Jibrin  the  people  were  kind  and  communicative.  The
Sheikh  of  the  village  was  understood  to  be  absent,  and  we  did
not  now  see  him.

Beit  Jibrin  is  a  village  of  moderate  size,  the  capital  of  a  dis-
trict in  the  province  of  Gaza,  beginning  just  west  of  Beit  Net-
tif,  called  the  district  of  the  'Azazeh.  It  takes  this  name  from
an  ancient  family  of  Sheikhs,  formerly  hereditary  lords  of  Beit
Jibrin,  and  of  great  power  in  these  parts,  being  one  of  the  three
chief  families  of  the  Keisiyeh.  Having  been  leaders  in  the  re-
belUon  of  1834,  some  of  the  family  were  beheaded,  and  the  rest
compelled  to  remove  to  Tell  es-Safieh.  Another  family,  called
the  house  of  'Amleh,  resides  at  Beit  Ula  ;  and  a  third,  the  house
of  Ibn  'Omar,  at  Dura  in  the  mountains  of  Hebron.  The  two
former  families  were  head  Sheikhs  of  the  lower  Keis  (el-Keisiyeh
et-Tahta)  in  and  near  the  plain. — These  families  of  Sheilihs
form  a  species  of  hereditary  nobility ;  but  they  are  here  less  an-
cient and  less  exclusive  than  those  of  the  Druzes  in  Mount  Leb-
anon.   There  are  also  smaller  flimihes  of  less  powerful  Sheildis.

Such  was  the  result  of  our  inquiries  and  obseiwations  at  Beit
Jibrin  on  this  our  first  visit.  The  question  now  naturally  arose,
Whether  all  this  presented  any  ground  for  regarding  this  spot  as
the  site  of  the  ancient  Eleutheropolis  ?  The  ruins  certainly
seemed  to  be  sufficiently  important  to  warrant  such  a  conclusion  ;
ruins  worthy  of  the  Roman  name,  and  of  a  powerful  city.  Fur-
ther, in  travelling  hither  from  the  well  where  we  had  halted,  we
had  by  a  winding  road  passed  over  the  anticipated  distance  of
two  and  a  half  hours  within  wliich  we  had  supposed  Eleuthero-
polis must  lie.  Still,  this  distance  might  apply  just  as  well  to
some  place  lying  more  to  the  northwest  ;  and  I  had  in  some  way
received  the  groundless  impression,  that  the  city  in  question  lay
actually  in  the  plain  itself,  and  not  among  the  hills.  "We  con-
cluded therefore  to  make  still  further  examination  ;  and  as  not-
withstanding all  our  inquiries,  we  could  hear  of  no  spot  where
there  could  be  the  shghtest  hope  of  finding  the  object  of  our
search,  unless  perhaps  at  Tell  es-Safieh,  we  determined  to  bend
our  steps  that  way. — We  felt  ourselves  constrained  to  push  our
researches  further,  because  the  site  of  Eleutheropolis  could  not
be  fixed  at  this  place,  without  making  it  identical  with  another
ancient  city,  wliose  name  has  been  preserved  ;  an  identity  of
which,  as  yet,  no  one  had  ever  dreamed.

Indeed,  whatever  might  be  the  fact  in  regard  to  Eleuthero-
polis, there  could  be  no  doubt  upon  our  minds,  that  in  Beit  Jib-
rin was  to  be  recognised  the  Betogabra  of  Ptolemy  and  the

'  See  .also  at  Ma'in,  above,  Yol.  L  p.  495.

ii.  358-360

28

FEOM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XI.

Peutinger  Tables  and  tlie  Beigeberin,  (an  episcopal  city)  of  the
ecclesiastical  Notitioe  of  the  subsequent  centuries.'  This  place
is  marked  in  the  said  Tables  at  sixteen  Koman  miles  from  As-
kelon,  a  distance  considerably  too  small ;  since  from  the  construc-
tion of  our  maps  it  appears,  that  the  actual  distance  cannot  be
less  than  about  twenty  geographical  miles.  ^  An  early  legend  of
the  life  of  Ananias  names  it  "  Betogabra  of  Eleutheropolis
which,  however  the  phrase  may  be  regarded,  imphes  at  least  that
these  places  were  not  far  remote  from  each  other.'  Such  is  the
amount  of  all  the  notices  respecting  the  ancient  city  under  tliis
name,  down  to  the  time  of  the  crusades.

In  the  twelfth  century,  the  crusaders  found  on  this  spot  an
ancient  site  in  ruins,  called  by  the  Arabs  '  Bethgebrim  ; '  ^  here
they  built  up  again  a  fortress  upon  the  former  foundations,  to
guard  against  the  incursions  of  the  Muhammedans  from  Askelon.
This  took  place  about  A.  D.  1134,  under  king  Fulco.  William
of  Tyre  describes  the  fortress  as  having  impregnable  walls,  with
a  mound  and  bastions  and  other  advanced  works.  The  defence
of  this  position  was  intrusted  to  the  knights  Hospitalers.  The
Arabic  name  became  corrapted  among  the  crusaders  into  "  Gib-
elin  ; "  and  they  and  the  Chiistian  writers  of  that  age,  held  the
place  to  be  the  ancient  Beersheba.^  It  is  not  unfrequently  men-
tioned by  Arabic  authors  ;  who  write  the  name  almost  indiscrim-
inately Beit  Jibrin  and  Beit  Jibril,  the  latter  signifying  the
*  House  of  Gabriel  ;  and  they  speak  of  it  also  as  including  the
surrounding  district.  Benjamin  of  Tudela  visited  the  spot,  and
found  here  three  J ews.^  After  the  decisive  battle  of  Hattin  and
the  capture  of  Askelon  by  Saladin,  in  A.  D.  1187,  the  fortress
of  Beit  Jibrin  also  feU  into  his  power  ;  *  but  it  seems  to  have  re-

'  Ptolemy  BoiTo-yo/Spa.    Tab.  Peut.  Be-  Kreuzz.  II.  pp.  595,  615.    Brocardus  c.  10.

togahri.    See  Reland  Palaest.  pp.  461,  421,  p.  186.  Marin.  Sanut.  pp.  163,  165.  Adri-

222,  627. — Josephus  mentions  a  large  vil-  cliomius  p.  133.    Yet  before  the  days  of

lage  BVjTapis  (Betaris)  in  this  region,  which  the  latter  writer,  the  true  Beersheba  had

Rufinus  read  B^^ojSpij  (Begabris)  in  his  been   visited  by  several  travellers ;  see

copy.    Reland  suggests  that  this  may  have  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  205.    G.  Vinisauf  seems

been  the  same  place,  which  is  not  im-  to  allude  to  the  church  of  Santa  Ilnnneh,

probable;  p.  626.    Joseph.  B.  J.  4.  8.  1.  when  he  speaks  of  Ybelin  (meaning  Gibe-

^  It  would  seem  probable  that  an  X  may  lin)  as  being  near  the  valley  in  which  St

have  been  dropped  in  the  Peutinger  Ta-  Anne  was  bom  ;  see  in  Gale's  Scriptores

bles  ;  the  original  reading  having  been  Historise  Anglic.  Tom.  II.  p.  395.
perhaps  XXVI  Roman  miles.  "  Edrisi  par  Jaubert  p.  360.    Ibn  el-

'  Acta  Sanctor.  Jan.  Tom.  11.  pp.  613,  Wnrdi  in  Ahulf.  Tab.  Syr.  ed.  Ktihlcr  p.

614.  170.    See  especially  Schulten's  Index  in

*  "  Urbem  veterem  et  dirutam.'.  ..  Vit.  Salad,  art.  BcitSjebrinum. — Still,  as

Arahice  Bethgebrim ;  "  Will.  Tyr.  14.  22.  the  interchange  of  /  and  jt  is  not  unfre-

This  writer  gives  its  distance  from  Askelon  qucnt  in  Arabic,  it  may  after  nil  be  a

at  twelve  miles  ;  meaning  apparently  Ital-  question,  whether  Jibrin  may  not  be  the

ian  miles  of  60  to  the  degree  ;  which  falls  ancient  Hebrew  form,  meaning  perhaps

short  even  of  the  sixteen  Roman  miles  of  "  House  of  Men."    The  Greek  form  Bairo-

the  Peutinger  Tables.    See  Note  2,  above.  yd0pa  accords  better  with  this  supposition.

^  Will.  Tyr.  14.  22.    Jac.  de  Vitr.  36,       '  Benj.  of  Tudel.  p.  77.
41.  pp.  1070,  1071.    Wilkeu  Gcsch.  der       '  Bohaed.  Vit.  Sal.  p.  72.
ii.  liOO.  301

May  18.]

BEIT  JIBRIN.

29

verted  into  the  hands  of  the  Franks,  perhaps  with  Askelon,  and
is  mentioned  in  A.  D.  1192,  as  a  station  in  the  march  of  one
part  of  king  Richard's  army  from  the  south  towards  Beit  Nuba.^
In  A.  D.  1244,  it  was  captured  hj  the  troops  of  Bibars.'^  I  find
no  further  notice  of  Beit  Jibrin  or  its  fortress,  excepting  in  Mari-
nus  Sanutus,  who  merely  copies  William  of  Tyre  but  the  in-
scription already  mentioned,  shows  that  it  continued  to  be  a
place  of  strength  even  under  the  later  Turkish  dominion  ;  being
kept  up  perhaps  in  order  to  hold  in  check  the  turbulent  spirits
of  the  ancient  Arab  families  of  Sheikhs,  the  former  lords  of
Beit  Jibrin  and  the  adjacent  territory.  Since  the  time  of  the
crusades,  I  am  not  aware  that  this  place  has  been  visited  by
any  Frank  traveller  ;  unless  perhaps  by  Breydenbach  and  Fabri
in  A.  D.  1483,  on  their  way  from  Hebron  to  Gaza  ;  who  how-
ever make  no  mention  of  Beit  Jibrin.*

We  now  left  Beit  Jibrin  at  2|  o'clock,  for  Tell  es-Safieh.
A  man  from  Eamleh,  returning  from  Hebron,  fell  into  our  train,
and  continued  with  us  ;  although  Tell  es-Safieh  was  out  of  his
direct  course.  The  way  led  at  first  down  the  same  broad  valley
by  which  we  had  approached,  and  then  more  to  the  left.  In  half
an  hour,  after  crossing  obliquely  the  low  western  slope,  we
emerged  from  the  hills  upon  the  wide  rolling  plain  which  ex-
tends to  the  sea  ;  it  is  here  not  very  fertile  nor  very  well  culti-
vated ;  though  as  we  advanced,  we  found  much  of  it  covered
with  a  crop  of  wheat.  At  4.10  we  passed  the  large  village  of
Dhikrin,  to  which  name  our  guide  added  the  epithet  el-Bura-
dan.  It  stands  on  the  left  slope  of  a  Wady,  which  I  suppose  to
be  that  coming  down  from  Beit  Jibrin,  and  here  sweeping  round
towards  the  Wady  Simsim  in  the  plain.  Near  the  village  are
excavations,  said  to  be  like  those  we  had  seen  at  Deir  Dubban  ;
but  being  in  a  low  situation,  the  water  of  a  small  Wady  is  in
winter  turned  into  them,  and  they  are  used  as  cisterns.

This  village  of  Dhikrin  is  mentioned  by  Tucher  of  Numberg
in  A.  D.  1479.  He  travelled  from  Bethlehem  to  Gaza,  passing  by
St.  George  and  lodging  at  Thikrin  (Dhikrin),  where  he  also
speaks  of  cisterns.*  His  route  down  the  mountains  must  there-
fore have  been  in  general  the  same  with  ours.

We  reached  TeU  es-Safieh  at  a  quarter  past  5  o'clock.  It  is
an  isolated  oblong  hill  or  ridge,  lying  from  north  to  south  in  the
plain ;  the  highest  part  being  towards  the  south.  The  village
lies  near  the  middle  ;  lower  down.    We  pitched  our  tent  just

-  Bohaed.  Vit.  SaL  p.  229.   Wilken ibid,  habited  village  in  this  quarter  ;  Vol.  II.  p.

rV.  p.  508.  ^  ^  310.  Poujoulat  professes  to  have  found  the

'  Makrizi  in  Wilken  Comment,  de  Bell,  fortress  (not  the  name)  four  hours  south-

Cruc.  p.  204.  east  of  Askelon  on  his  road  from  Gaza  to

'  De  Seer  Fidel.  Cruc.  p.  165.  Yafa  !  Correspond  ence  d'Orient,  V.  p.  448.

*  Volney  heard  the  name,  as  of  an  in-  '  Reissb.  des  h.  Landes  p.  G77.

Vol.  II.— 3*  ii.  301-363

30

FEOM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XL

above  tlie  village,  and  immediately  repaired  to  the  summit  of  the
lull,  in  search  of  the  ruins  of  which  we  had  been  told.  They
proved  to  be  merely  the  indistinct  foundations  apparently  of  a
castle  on  the  highest  part,  constructed  of  large  hewn  stones.  On
the  western  side  of  the  hill,  are  also  the  remains  of  a  terrace
built  of  like  materials.  There  is  no  fountain  here  nor  in  the
vicinity  ;  but  in  the  western  plain,  near  the  foot  of  the  hiU,  is  a
well  of  living  water,  which  was  said  to  overflow  during  a  part  of
the  year.  Upon  the  hill  is  seen  a  soHtary  palm  tree. — Safieh  we
were  told  is  the  name  of  a  ruin  in  the  plain  towards  the  northeast,
and  this  is  its  Tell  or  lull.

The  hill  itself  is  not  high  ;  but  rises  sufficiently  above  the
surrounding  country  to  be  seen  at  the  distance  of  some  hours  in
every  direction,  especially  towards  the  north  and  west.  Here  it
overlooks  the  plain,  which  extends  north  to  Ramleh  and  west  to
Esdiul  (Ashdod).  The  tower  of  Ramleh  was  distinctly  visible  ;
the  distance  was  said  to  be  five  hours.  Xearer  the  mountain,  in
the  northeast,  we  could  also  distinguish  Latron  upon  a  conical
hill. '  A  large  number  of  villages  and  sites  were  visible  on  every
side,  with  many  of  which  we  had  already  become  acquainted ;
though  not  a  few  were  also  new.  They  are  recorded  in  the  note
below.''

The  people  of  the  village  flocked  around  us  with  kindness  ;
and  at  evening  our  tent,  as  usual,  was  filled  with  visitors,  con-
versing and  drinking  coflfee.  The  Sheikh,  Muhammed  SeUim,
was  a  young  fine  looking  man,  of  prepossessing  manners  and
quite  intelligent.  He  belonged  to  the  family  of  the  'Azazeh,  the
hereditary  lords  of  Beit  Jibrin  ;  but  they  having  taken  part  in
the  rebellion  of  1834,  his  uncle  and  brother  were  beheaded,  and
the  rest  of  the  family  ordered  to  take  up  their  residence  in  this
place.

We  here  came  again  in  contact  with  the  genuine  hospitality
of  the  east.  The  Sheikh  sent  two  men  to  keep  watch  by  our
tent  all  night ;  and  when  we  left  in  the  morning,  the  people  re-

■  This  was  incorrectly  reported  to  ns  at  12'  E.    el-Kustineh  N.  36' W.  el-Mes-

the  time  as 'Amwas  (Xicopolis) :  and  so  niiyeh  X.  45   W.    Ustds  X.  50  W.  Tell

stood  in  the  former  edition.    See  Vol.  HL  et-Turmns  N.  55°  W.    Berkusieb  S.  53'

Sec  III,  under  April  27th,  1852.  W. — Among  these  places,  Ketla  might

'  We  took  at  Tell  es-Scifieh  the  follow-  suggest  the  Chftalon  of  Josh.  15,  10  ;  it  lies

ing  hear.ngs,  beginning  at  the  south  and  northeast  of  Beth-shemesh.    Compare  the

proceeding  towards  the  left  :  Dhikrin  S.  Chation  of  the  Ononinsricon. — El-Mesmi-

10'  E.    Santa  Hanneh  S.  20'  E.    Kudna  yeh  seems  to  be  the  Mesmit  mentioned  by

S.  34'  R    Deir  Ehibban  S.  50"  E.    'A|jur  Volney  between  Ramleh  and  Gaza,  four

S.  12'  E.    Jeb'ah  S.  77=  E.    Tell  Zaka-  leagues  from  the  former;  Vol  II.  p.  310.

riya  S.  85'  E.    Kefr  Zakariya  S.  87   El  In  that  case,  the  Tell  of  which  the  same

Beit  'Afib  X.  87'  E.    Kesla  X.  84°  E.  writer  speaks,  a  league  east  of  Mesmiyeh,

el-Khei?lu"im  X.  80'  E.    Deir  el-Hawa  N.  was  probably  Tell  et-Turmns;  but  he  con-

80=  E.    el-Bureij  X.  70'  E.    Sur'ah  X.  founds  it  in  part  with  Tell  el-Hasy;  see

67=  E     K.if.it  X.  64=  E.    el-MnghiiUis  X.  under  May  22.
65=  E.    Utrun  X.  49=  E    er-Ramlch  X.
ii.  3C3.  364

Mat  18.]

TELL  ES-SAFIEH.

31

fused  to  receive  pay  for  the  articles  which  they  had  fuinished  to
us  ;  saying  it  would  be  a  disgrace  to  do  so,  and  the  Sheikh  would
be  angry  and  beat  them  if  they  did.  They  were  simple-hearted
and  kind  ;  and  the  refusal  to  take  money,  seemed  to  be  the  un-
affected and  conscientious  observance  of  ancient  national  custom.

It  had  needed  but  a  short  survey  of  this  spot  to  convince  us,
that  the  site  of  Eleutheropolis  never  could  have  been  at  Tell  es-
Safieh.  One  of  the  places,  Zorah,  said  to  be  ten  Eoman  miles
from  Eleutheropolis  on  the  way  to  Nicopolis,  lay  in  sight  before
us  E.  N.  E.  upon  the  hills,  about  three  hours  distant ;  while  La-
tron,  which  lies  near  Nicopolis  was  distinctly  visible  in  the  north-
east not  more  than  an  hour  or  two  more  remote.  It  was  evident
that  Zorah  and  Beth-shemesh  could  never  have  been  said  to  lie
near  the  road  from  Tell  es-Safieh  to  'Amwas,  and  especially  not
at  the  distance  of  ten  miles  on  that  road,  without  attributing  to
Eusebius  ^md  Jerome  a  greater  absurdity  than  any  of  which  they
have  yet  been  accused.  Indeed  Tell  es-Safieh  lies  ob^dously
quite  too  far  westward  within  the  plain,  to  accord  with  any  of
the  ancient  accounts  respecting  EleutheropoHs.  Besides,  there
was  nothing  here  to  mark  the  site  of  an  ancient  place  ;  which
we  know  to  have  been  a  large  and  flourishing  city  so  late  as  the
sixth  century.

I  know  of  nothing  to  connect  TeU  es-Safieh  with  the  history
of  the  Bible  or  of  the  early  centuries  ;  unless  perhaps  the  name
may  have  some  relation  to  that  of  the  valley  of  Zepliathali  near
Maresha,  where  king  Asa  defeated  the  hosts  of  Zerah  the  Ethi-
opian. '  Maresha,  as  we  know,  was  near  Eleutheropolis  ;  and
the  valley,  as  well  as  the  Tell,  might  well  take  its  name  from  an
adjacent  city.  It  may  perhaps  have  been  the  broad  Wady  com-
ing down  from  Beit  Jibrin  towards  TeU  es-Safieh.

In  the  middle  ages  this  Tell  became  somewhat  celebrated  ;
although,  as  we  had  with  us  no  history  of  the  crusades,  we  were
not  aware  of  the  fact  at  the  time.  It  appears  that  about  A.  D,
1138,  several  years  after  the  rebuilding  of  the  ancient  fortress  at
Beit  Jibrin,  the  crusaders  under  king  Fulco  erected  upon  TeU
es-Safieh,  described  as  eight  ItaUan  mUes  from  Askelon,  another
castle  as  a  further  check  upon  the  excursions  of  the  Muham-
medans  from  that  city.'  It  was  buUt  of  hewn  stones  with  four
towers  ;  and  became  known  among  the  Franks  by  the  name  of
Blanchegarde,*    It  afterwards  came  into  the  possession  of  Sala-

"  2  Chron.  14,  10.  Kr.  II.  pp.  615,  616.  But  the  true  distance
'  Euseb.  et  Hieron.  Onomast.  art.  Ma-  from  Askelon  is  not  much  less  than  eight-
sera,  MopTjo-(£.  Reland  Pal.  p.  888  een  geographical  miles  ;  and  the  reading
'  "  Ab  Ascalona  octo  distans  miliaribus  in  William  of  Tyre  ought  probably  to  be
.  .  .  nomen  Arabice  Tellesaphi,  quod  apud  octodecem  instead  of  octo.
DOS  interpretatur  J/on«  slve  CoZiis  cZan« ;  "  *  Will.  Tyr.  15,25.  Jac.  dc  Vitr.  41,
Will.  ^jTT.  15.  25.    See  Wilken  Gesch.  der  p.  1071.    The  Latin  name  of  the  castlo

ii,  304-300

32

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sbk.  XL

din,  and  was  dismantled  by  him  in  A.  D.  1191 ;  ^  but  appears
to  have  been  built  up  again  by  king  Richard  of  England  the  very
next  year.*

Some  of  Eichard's  romantic  adventures  are  related  as  occur-
ring in  the  vicinity  of  this  castle.  Once,  riding  out  in  this  quar-
ter from  his  camp  near  Eamleh  hx  search  of  adventures,  he  nar-
rowly escajied  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  chosen  band  of  Turkish
horsemen,  whom  Saladin  had  despatched  from  Askelon  to
Blanchegarde.  At  another  time,  on  a  similar  excursion  hither
from  Askelon,  he  had  an  affray  with  a  party  of  Saracens,  of
whom  he  slew  three  and  took  five  prisoners.^  Afterwards,  this
spot  is  mentioned  by  Bohaeddin  in  connection  with  the  march
of  Eichard's  army  to  Beit  Nuba  ;  and  also  as  visited  by  Saladin,
who  then  proceeded  from  Tell  es-Safieh  to  the  place  called  es-
Safieh,  of  which  we  also  heard.*  From  that  time  until  the  pres-
ent day,  although  Blanchegarde  maintains  its  place  in  the  his-
tories of  the  crusades,  yet  Tell  es-Safieh  appears  to  have  been
lost  sight  of  by  all  writers  and  travellers.^

Saturday,  May  19th.  It  had  been  our  wish  and  plan,  if
possible,  to  proceed  to  Gaza  by  way  of  Ashdod  and  Askelon.
Finding  however  that  this  route  would  require  another  day,
which  we  could  not  weU  spare,  and  knowing  that  the  two  latter
places  had  been  often  visited,  we  gave  up  reluctantly  this  part
of  our  plan,  and  took  the  direct  road  to  Gaza.  Our  search  too
after  Eleutheropolis  had  thus  far  produced  no  decisive  nor  satis-
factory results  ;  and  we  determined,  after  visiting  Gaza,  to  return
again  to  the  region  of  Beit  Jibrin  on  our  way  to  Hebron.

Leaving  Tell  es-Safieh  at  5h  o'clock,  we  descended  the  western
side  of  the  hill  into  the  wide  plain.  The  morning  was  bright  and
balmy  ;  and  the  scene  was  enlivened  by  large  herds  of  cattle  and
flocks  of  sheep  and  goats,  going  forth  in  various  directions  to  pas-
ture. Our  road  lay  obliquely  across  the  plain  on  a  general  course
W.  S.  W.  JS.  This  is  a  beautiful  and  fertile  tract  of  country ;
for  a  time  almost  perfectly  level ;  and  after  a  short  distance
almost  without  a  stone.  The  soil  is  a  light  brown  loam.  The
barley  harvest  was  now  mostly  over.    The  peasants  were  in  fiill

was  '  Alba  Specula,'  also  '  Alba  Custodia,"  — 33,  pp.  388-390.    Wilken  1.  c.  pp.  457,

ibid.    Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  IV.  p.  426.  492.

So  too 'Candida  Custodia,' G.  Vinisauf  5.  *  Bobneddin  Vit.  Salad,  p.  229,  231,

48.  p.  398.  Also  G.  Vinisauf,  1.  c.  5.  48,  p.  398.— See

'  Gaufr.  Vinisauf,  Iter  Hierosol.  Ricbar-  above,  p.  30.    Scbultens  Index  in  Vit.

di  regis,  in  Gale  Scriptores  Hist.  Anglic.  Salad,  art.  Tcll-Astaplna.

Tom.  II.  lib.  4.  23,  p.  362.    Wilken  1.  c.  '  Poujoulat  suppo.scs  he  found  F.lanche-

p.  426.  pardc  (not  Tell  es-Sutieb)  at  tbe  village  of

'  Roger  de  Hov.  Annales  Anglic,  in  Sa-  Yasur,  not  far  from  tbe  sand-bills  of  Ask«-

ville  Scriptor.  Rer.  Angl.  fol.  407.  B.    Wil-  Ion,  on  one  of  the  roads  from  Gaza  to  Yft-

ken  1.  c.  p.  477.  fa;  Correspondence  d'Orient,  V.  p.  417.

•  Gaufr.  Vin.  1.  c.  4.  32,  p.  369 ;  5.  29
ii.  366.  367

May  19.]

HARVEST  SCENES,

33

activity  in  the  beginning  of  the  wheat  harvest ;  and  the  fields  full
of  reapers,  and  the  threshing-floors  aronnd  the  villages,  presented
a  lively  scene.  A  large  part  of  the  i)lain,  so  far  as  it  was  tiUcd,
■was  covered  with  grain  already  ripe.  Some  tracts  were  sown
with  Dhurah  (millet),  now  a  few  weeks  above  the  ground,  and
yielding  a  delightful  refreshment  to  the  eye  by  its  beautiful  green.
We  saw  one  field  of  cotton.  The  crops  were  good  ;  yet  hardly
one  half  of  the  plain  was  under  cultivation.

At  6.05,  we  passed  Ba'lin,  a  small  village  on  the  left  a  short
distance  from  the  road  ;  and  near  by  it  was  Berkusieh,  somewhat
larger.  At  6.50,  we  came  to  Summeil,  a  considerable  village  on
an  elevation  in  the  plain.'  Here  is  a  large  public  well  at  the
foot  of  the  hillock  ;  it  measured  one  hundred  and  ten  feet
deep  to  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  eleven  feet  in  diameter ;
the  walls  being  circular  and  composed  of  hewn  stones  of  good
masonry.  Women  were  drawing  water  from  the  well  by  a  rope
passing  over  a  puUey,  which  they  hauled  up  by  running  off  with
it  a  great  distance  into  the  field,  in  the  manner  of  sailors.  In
the  village  itself  is  a  portion  of  an  ancient  wall  apparently  once
belonging  to  a  castle,  built  of  large  squared  stones  uncemented,
resembUng  in  a  degree  the  oldest  foundations  at  Beit  Jibrin.  At
the  bottom  there  is  sloping  work  ;  and  along  one  side  is  a  long
round  arch  or  vault,  which  however  is  probably  modern.  From
here  Esdud  (Ashdod)  was  pointed  out  to  us,  upon  a  low  round
eminence,  with  trees  tliick  around  it  like  a  wood,  probably  olives.
The  distance  was  said  to  be  three  hours.'  Askelon  was  said
also  to  be  only  three  hours  distant ;  but  was  probabiy  not  less
than  four  or  five  ;  the  Arabs  in  general  specifying  distances  by
time  very  loosely.^

'  In  our  Arabic  list  of  the  province  of  Gaza  lers  have  since  taken  it  in  their  way.  The

this  place  is  called  Summeil    el-Khulil,  situation  is  described  as  strong ;  the  thick

i.  e.  of  Hebron.    This  accords  with  the  ac-  walls,  flanked  with  towers,  were  built  on

count  of  Tucher  in  A.  D.  1479,  who  says  the  top  of  a  ridge  of  rock,  that  encircles

it  \v%s  a  dependency  of  the  mosk  in  Hebron,  the  town  and  terminates  at  each  end  in

He  however  misunderstood  the  name,  and  the  sea.    The  ground  within  sinks  in  the

calls  it  the  castle  of  St  Samuel.    See  more  manner  of  an  amphitheatre.    The  dis-

in  Note  XXXI,  end  of  the  volume.  tance  from  Gaza  is  about  five  hours.  My

'  Esdiid  was  visited  by  Irby  and  Mangles  companion,  IMr  Smith,  passed  by  way  of

in  Oct.  1818  ;  and  by  Lord  Belmore  and  'AskuLin  in  Feb.  1827,  and  describes  it  as

his  party  in  April,  1819.    The  former  de-  one  of  the  most  mournful  scenes  of  utter

scribe  there  a  large  Klian  pp.  179-182  desolation  he  had  ever  beheld.    In  A.  D.

[56] ;  and  Richardson,  who  was  with  Lord  1666,  Von  Troilo  found  it  partially  inhab-

Belmore,  speaks  of  the  site  of  the  town  as  ited  ;  p.  350.^ — Askelon  bears  a  conspicu-

on  the  summit  of  a  grassy  hill ;  Travels  ous  part  in  the  history  of  the  crusades.

II.  p.  206.    There  are  said  t)  be  no  ruins ;  After  being  several  times  dismantled  and

and  the  place  seems  now  to  he  only  an  or-  re-fortified  in  the  times  of  Saladin  and

dinary  Muslim   village.     See   also  Von  Richard,  its  fortifications  were  at  letigth

Troilo  in  1666;  p.  349.  utterly  destroyed  by  Sultan  Bibars  in  A.

^  Lord  Belmore  and  his  party  visited  D.  1270,  and  its  port  filled  up  with  stones

'Askul.in   in   April    1818;    Ricliardson's  thrown  into  the  sea,  for  fear  of  further  at-

Travels,  11.  pp.  202-204.    Other  travel-  tempts  on  the  part  of  the  crusaders.  See

ii.  367,  368  ^

34

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  GAZA.

[Sec.  XL

While  we  were  taking  the  bearings  given  in  the  note  below/
the  men  of  the  -sallage  flocked  around  us,  and  seemed  much  inter-
ested in  our  proceedings.  This  indeed  was  the  case  in  most  of
the  villages.  The  people  in  general,  in  this  part  of  the  country,
"were  ready  to  give  us  information,  so  far  as  they  could  ;  and
seemed  not  to  distrust  us.  Here  too  we  found  the  same  general
impression,  that  our  object  was  to  collect  information  and  survey
the  country,  preparatory  to  the  arrival  of  the  Franks  ;  and  here
too  we  were  addressed  in  the  usual  phrase  :  "  Do  not  be  long."
Indeed,  the  inhabitants  everywhere  appeared,  for  the  most  part,
to  desire  that  the  Franks  should  send  a  force  among  them.  They
were  formerly  tired  of  the  Turks  ;  they  were  now  still  more
heartily  tired  of  the  Egj'ptians  ;  and  were  ready  to  welcome  any
Frank  nation  which  should  come,  not  to  subdue,  (for  that  would
not  be  necessary,)  but  to  take  possession  of  the  land.

After  a  delay  of  three  quarters  of  an  hour  we  left  Summeil
at  7.35.  In  about  half  an  hour  we  passed  Juseir  on  the  left,  the
first  village  we  had  yet  seen  in  Palestine  not  built  of  stone.  The
materials  of  the  houses  are  here  unburnt  bricks  ;  and  such  con-
tinued to  be  the  case  all  the  way  to  Gaza,  and  is  so  elsewhere
throughout  the  plain.  The  bricks  are  formed  from  the  common
loam  of  the  soU,  with  straw  intermixed  to  bind  the  mass  together,
as  in  Egypt  ;  they  are  of  very  large  size,  and  are  merely  dried
in  the  sun.  Many  of  them,  newly  made,  were  laid  in  rows  along
the  ground,  in  the  process  of  drying.  At  8.35,  the  similar  vil-
lage of  Hatta  was  on  our  right.  In  Kuratiyeh,  a  village  to
which  we  came  at  8.55,  is  a  rained  tower  of  modern  date,  built
partly  of  similar  bricks ;  and  we  saw  also  a  few  ancient  columns
lying  about.    Here  quite  a  number  of  places  were  in  sight.

The  country  now  became  more  undulating  ;  low  ridges  or
swells  ran  from  south  to  north,  but  the  general  character  of  the
soil  did  not  change.  Our  general  course  was  S.  W.  by  W.  The
white  sand-hills  which  here  skirt  the  shore  of  the  Mediterranean

Ibn  Ferath  in  Reinaud's  Extrnits,  etc.  p.
52.5.    Wilk.  Gesch.  der  Kr.  VII.  p.  586.

'  At  Sf.mmeil  we  obtained  the  follow-
ing bearings :  Tell  es-Safieh  N.  50'  E.
Bcrkiisieli  N.  70°  E.  Tell  et-Tunniis  K
7°  W.  Esdud  N.  40°  W.  (?)  Beit  Diii-as
N.  5:r  W.  (?)  Beit  'Affa  N.  85°  W.
Hatta  S.  84°  W.  Juseir  S.  80°  W.  Ku-
ratiycli  S.  80°  W.  el-Faliyy  S.  51°  W,
'An'ik  cl-Menshiye!i  S.

'•'  Those  places  bore  from  Kuratiyeh  as
follows  :  Tell  es-Sftfieh  N.  CS"  E.  el-Mcs-
miyeh  N.  7"  W.  Yasiir  N.  12°  W.  el-
Kustinoh  N.  16°  W.  es-Saw:.fir  N  32'
W.  'Ed.lis  N.  38  W.  el-Eah'ijy  S.  38°
E. — Eusebius  and  Jerome  mention  a  lla-
zor  ('Aawp  Asor)  belonging  to  Jiidah  in

ii.  309,  370

the  borders  of  Askelon  towards  the  east ;
Onomast.  art.  Asor.  This  accords  well
with  the  position  of  Yasur  as  above  ;  but  if
it  be  the  same,  we  have  here  the  very  un-
usual change  from  the  Hebrew  guttural
Hcttf(n)  to  the  Arabic  Ye  with  a  long
vowel.  The  Onomast.  incorrectly  takes  this
village  for  one  of  the  Hazors  of  Josh.  15,
25,  in  the  south  of  Jiidah. — Sawafir  seems
to  be  a  plural  fonn  for  the  Saphir  (Heb.
"i^sa)  of  Mic.  1,  11;  which  Eusebius  and
Jerome  place  between  Eleutheropolis  and
Askelon  ;  Onomast.  art.  Saphir.  Comp.
Gcsenius  Lex.  Heb.  art.  i''B"j.  There
are  three  villages  of  this  name,  near  each
other.

Mat  19.]

BUREIR.

35

began  soon  to  appear.  At  10|  o'clock,  upon  one  of  the  said
swells,  Tell  es-Safieli  bore  N.  61°  E.  while  the  village  of  Bureir
lay  before  us  S.  48°  W.  We  reached  the  latter  place  at  11.10;
and  rested  for  more  than  an  hour  and  a  half  under  the  shade  of
a  spreading  tree.

This  is  a  flourishing  village,  forming  a  sort  of  central  point
in  the  plain.  There  is  a  large  public  well,  at  which  camels  were
drawing  water  by  means  of  a  Sakieli,  or  water-wheel  with  jai'S,
as  in  Egypt the  first  machinery  we  had  yet  seen  in  Palestine.
Flocks  and  herds  were  collected  aroi^nd  the  well  ;  the  troughs  for
which  were  partly  laid  up  in  front  with  ancient  marble  columns.
Here  were  also  several  palm  trees  ;  and  the  whole  scene  was
animated  and  pleasing.

Setting  off  from  Bureir  at  three  quarters  past  noon,  we  at
first  took  a  wrong  road,  which  led  us  too  far  south  towards  the
village  of  Huj.  The  direct  road  keeps  along  on  the  north  side
of  the  broad  Wady  Simsim  already  mentioned,  near  which  Bu-
reir lies,  on  a  general  course  W.  by  S.  passing  the  village  of
Simsim  on  the  northern  edge  of  the  Wady,  about  three  quarters
of  an  hour  from  Bureir.  We  crossed  this  Wady  on  the  wrong
road ;  and  were  then  compelled  to  pick  our  way  through  the
fields  to  the  Gaza  road,  leaving  the  \'illage  of  Simsim  at  a  dis-
tance on  the  right.  At  2.10,  we  passed  the  little  village  Nijid
on  tlie  south  of  the  Wady  ;  here  the  peasants  were  winnowing
barley  by  throwing  it  up  into  the  air  across  the  wind,  with  a
wooden  fork.  Ten  minutes  later  (at  2.20),  we  came  again  into
the  Gaza  road,  having  lost  half  an  hour  by  our  detour.  This
road  had  here  crossed  the  broad  Wady  very  obliquely,  and  now
left  it  to  pass  over  low  swelling  hiUs.  The  valley  bends  more  to
the  right  ;  and  passing  by  Deir  Esneid,  empties  into  the  sea  at
'Askulan.  At  2.35,  the  village  of  Dimreh  was  on  our  right
near  the  bend  of  the  valley.

Our  course  stiU  continued  W.  by  S.  At  3.20  we  came  to  the
village  Beit  Huuun  on  our  right  in  a  low  rich  tract  of  the  plain.
Here  as  elsewhere  aU  were  busy  with  the  wheat  harvest  ;  the
reapers  were  in  the  fields  ;  donkeys  and  camels  were  mo'sang
homewards  with  their  high  loads  of  sheaves  ;  while  on  the
threshing-floors  near  the  village  I  counted  not  less  than  thirty
gangs  of  cattle,  occupied  in  treading  out  the  grain,  with  many
camels  and  donkeys  standing  idle  around.  The  whole  village
seemed  at  work,  and  presented  a  busy  scene.

Not  far  beyond  this  village,  we  came  upon  the  immense
olive  groves  which  stretch  far  to  the  north  of  Gaza.  At  4
o'clock  we  fell  into  the  Yafa  road,  at  the  line  of  hills  which
bounds  the  plain  west,  towards  the  coast.    The  road  here  crosses

'  See  Note  II,  at  the  end  of  Vol  I.

ii.  370-372

36

GAZA.

[Sec.  XI.

these  hills  at  a  low  spot  or  gap,  and  continues  along  their  west-
em  side,  on  a  course  southwest,  having  on  the  right  a  tract  of
drifts  and  hills  of  white  sand,  extending  to  the  sea,  here  an  hour
distant.  These  sands  seem  onlj^  to  need  water  in  order  to  be-
come fertile  ;  even  now  they  are  studded  with  trees  and  bushes
like  hedges  ;  a2:)parently  from  the  effect  of  the  rains  alone.  For
the  whole  distance  from  the  gap  of  the  hills  to  Gaza,  the  road
passes  through  a  vast  grove  of  olive  trees,  not  only  very  nume-
rous, but  also  large  and  productive.  Many  of  them  are  upon  the
sands.  It  is  said  to  be  the  largest  olive  grove  in  Palestine.  We
saw  but  a  single  one  more  extensive,  and  that  was  near  Beirut.
At  4|  o'clock  we  pitched  our  tent  among  these  trees,  ten  min-
utes from  the  entrance  of  Gaza,  just  at  the  edge  of  the  gardens
on  the  north  of  the  city.

We  found  a  quarantine  guard  stationed  near  by,  to  prevent
the  approach  of  persons  coming  from  Yafa,  where  the  plague
was  now  raging.  As  however  we  came  from  Jerusalem,  where
its  prevalence  was  less  known,  no  objection  was  made  to  our
passing.  Our  servants  said  to  them  :  "  Suppose  a  party  from
Yafa  tell  you  they  come  from  Jerusalem  ;  what  then  ?  "  The
reply  was  :  "  That  is  no  concern  of  ours."

The  next  day,  being  Sunday,  we  remained  encamped  ;  and
enjoyed  a  quiet  day  of  rest.

Monday,  May  2\st.  Our  Jerusalem  friend,  Abu  Selameh,
had  furnished  us  with  a  letter  to  an  Arab  Greek  Christian  in
Gaza,  named  Suleiman  el-Hashwy,  a  merchant  who  acts  in  some
sort  as  a  Frank  agent.  We  called  upon  him  this  morning,  and
found  him  in  his  shop,  one  of  the  open  stalls  of  the  bazar  ;
where,  like  his  neighbours,  he  was  sitting  cross-legged  upon  the
sort  of  low  counter  in  front.  He  received  us  with  great  kind-
ness ;  ordered  coffee  ;  and  introduced  us  to  his  neighbours,
many  of  whom  soon  gathered  around.  One  of  these  was  a  very
intelligent  Mussulman,  who  seemed  quite  interested  in  seeing
strangers  from  the  new  world,  and  made  many  inquiries  respect-
ing America.

After  the  conversation  had  been  carried  on  for  some  time,
our  new  Mussulman  friend,  to  our  great  surprise,  proposed  to
take  us  into  the  neighbouring  mosk,  the  oldest  and  most  impor-
tant one  of  the  city,  anciently  a  Christian  church.  Tradition,
as  a  matter  of  course,  ascribes  it  to  Helena,  and  regards  it  as
having  been  dedicated  to  St.  John  the  Baptist.'  We  were  not
slow  to  accept  the  invitation,  and  went  with  him  ;  pulling  oft'
our  shoes  at  the  door,  and  walking  in  our  stockings  over  the
mats  with  which  the  stone  floor  is  covered.    The  three  parallel

'  It  possibly  dates  from  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  as  we  shall  afterwards
have  occasion  to  4e.a  ;  p.  42.
ii.  372,  373

Max  31.]  GAZA.  37

•

aisles  of  the  ancient  church  remain,  as  well  as  the  columns  with
Corinthian  capitals  which  divide  them.  The  middle  one  is
higher  than  the  other  two,  and  has  a  second  r^w  of  columns  on
each  side  above.  The  length  of  the  building  is  about  one  hun-
dred and  ten  feet  ;  not  including  the  recess  of  the  altar  on  the
aoath,  which  is  about  twenty  feet  more.  On  the  west  side,  the
Ttfiialims  hare  added  another  low  aisle  in  an  inferior  style  of  ar-
chitecture.

We  returned  to  the  shop  of  Suleiman,  who  now  took  charge
of  my  letters,  in  order  to  forward  them  by  the  Pasha's  post  to
Cairo  and  Alexandria.  This  he  punctually  accompKshed.  We
thought  it  best  also  to  take  here  a  Tezkirah  (passport)  for  He-
hnm,  in  order  to  be  able  to  show  that  we  had  come  from  Gtiza
and  not  from  Jerusalem,  in  case  of  any  quarantine  regulations
at  Hebron  against  the  latter  city.  The  governor  of  Gaza,
ShfipA  Sa'id,  we  learned,  was  absent  at  or  near  Hebron,  (where
we  afterwards  met  him.)  collecting  arms  from,  the  peasantry  ;
who,  although  once  disarmed,  had  been  fighting  among  them-
adrea.  We  therefore  waited  upon  his  secretary,  accompanied
by  a  man  sent  by  Suleiman ;  and  found  bim  in  a  dirty  room
with  bare  stone  walk,  surrounded  by  sii  writers.  He  was  an
elderly  man  with  a  good  face  and  bright  eye.  On  learning  that
we  likewise  thought  of  visiting  Wady  Musa,  he  askeil  if  we
woaid  have  the  TezMrah  made  out  for  that  place  also  ?  "Sot
supposing  that  this  could  be  of  the  slightest  importance,  we
said  that  oi»e  for  Hebron  would  be  sufficient  :  and  he  ordered  it
to  be  made  out  accordingly.  We  afterwards  had  occasion  to  re-
gret our  decision,  or  rather  the  want  of  information  which  led
to  it  ;  for  we  found  at  a  later  period,  that  the  region  of  Wady
Mnsa  was  under  the  immediate  jurisdiction  of  Sheikh  Sa'id  ;
and  his  Tezkirah  would  have  commanded  a  more  impKcit  obe-
dience from  the  Arabs  of  that  quarter,  than  the  Firman  of  Mu-
hammed  Aly  himself

While  the  Tezkirah  was  making  out.  we  walked  around  the
city,  and  spent  in  all  several  hours  in  examining  its  various  jarts.
The  results  of  our  observation  and  inquiries  may  be  stmimarily
given  as  follows.

Gaza,  in  Arabic  GhQzzehj  is  situated  on  a  low  round  hill  of
considerable  extent,  not  elevated  more  than  fifty  or  sixty  feet
abore  the  plain  around.  This  hiU  may  be  regarded  as  the  nu-
cleus of  the  city  :  although  only  the  southern  haK  is  now  covered
with  houses.  Most  of  these  are  of  stone,  and  especially  all  such
as  belong  to  the  government.  But  the  greater  part  of  the  mod-
em city  has  ^ning  up  on  the  plain  below,  a  sort  of  suburbs,
stretching  far  out  on  the  eastern  and  northern  sides.  These  sub-
urbs appear  to  be  thickly  populated  ;  the  houses  are  nimaeroua

ToL-  n. — i  ii,  373-375

38

GAZA.

[Sec.  XL

and  wholly  built  of  mud  or  unbumt  bricks,  like  the  villages  we
had  passed  on  the  great  plain.'

The  ancient  city  of  Gaza,  renowned  as  'the  strong,'  lay  ob-
viously chiefly  on  the  hUl.  The  present  town  has  no  gates,
being  hke  an  open  \allage  ;  yet  the  places  of  the  former  ones
remain,  and  are  pointed  out  around  the  hill.  One  of  these,  at
the  foot  of  the  slope  on  the  southeast,  is  shown  as  the  gate  whose
doors  and  bars  were  carried  off  by  Samson  ;  and  just  by  it  is  a
Mukam  in  his  honour,  which  the  Muslims  pretend  is  also  his
tomb.  Towards  the  south  is  another  spot  called  Bab  ed-Daron,
a  name  probably  derived  from  the  fortress  Daron  celebrated  in
the  time  of  the  crusades.''  Indeed,  all  vestiges  of  the  ancient
walls  and  ancient  strength  of  Gaza  have  disappeared  ;  and
nothing  remains  to  mark  its  former  extent,  except  the  bounds
of  the  hill  itself  on  which  it  stood.  Even  the  traces  of  its  for-
mer existence,  its  vestiges  of  antiquity,  are  very  rare  ;  consist-
ing of  occasional  columns  of  marble  or  gray  granite,  scattered
in  the  streets  and  gardens,  or  used  as  thresholds  at  the  gates
and  doors  of  houses,  or  laid  upon  the  front  of  watering-troughs.
One  fine  Corinthian  capital  of  white  marble,  lies  inverted  in  the
middle  of  a  street  running  from  north  to  south  along  the  eastern
foot  of  the  hiU.

Gaza  is  said  to  be  an  hour  distant  from  the  sea  ;  which  is
not  here  visible.^  Between  the  city  and  the  shore,  are  the  hills
and  tracts  of  sand  already  mentioned,  on  which  are  scattered  a
few  trees  and  hedges.  Around  the  city  on  the  south,  east,  and
north,  are  numerous  gardens  hedged  with  prickly  pear,  which
forms  an  impenetrable  barrier.    The  soil  of  these  gardens  is  ex-

«

out  success  in  A.  D.  1170  ;  though  it  fell
into  his  hands,  and  was  enlarged  hy  him,
after  the  capture  of  Askelon  ;  Will.  Tyt.

I.  c.  Bohaed.  Vit  Salad,  p.  72.  Wilken
Gesch.  der  Kr.  III.  ii.  pp.  135,  138.  King
Eichard  took  it  after  a  short  siege,  and
destroyed  it  A  D.  1192  ;  Gaufr.  Vinis.iuf
5.  39,  in  Gale  Scriptor.  Hist.  Angl.  Tom.

II.  p.  392,  393.  Wilken  ib.  IV.  pp.  498-
.500,  537.  Wilken  suggests  that  this  for-
tress may  have  been  at  Khan  Yunas ;
which  is  four  hours  with  camels  from  Gaza ;
ib.  III.  ii.  p.  13(!.  AM  Bey's  Travels  II.
p.  206. — The  name  Daron  is  probably  the
Hebrew  cii^  '  the  south,'  which  Eusebius
and  Jerome  apply  as  a  proper  name,  Da-
roma,  to  the  southwest  part  of  Palestine  ;
Onomast.  art.  Gemra,  Sicelech,  etc

'  Arrian  gives  the  distance  from  the  sea
at  20  stadia  ;  Exped.  Alex.  2.  26.  Abul-
feda  de>icribe3  the  sandhills  in  the  same
manner ;  Tab.  S\t.  p.  77.  ed.  Kohltir.

ii.  375,  37G

'  So  far  as  I  know,  the  geographical  po-
sition of  Gaza  has  never  been  determined
by  astronomical  observation  ;  ncr  indeed
in  any  way,  except  by  Jacotin  during  the
march  of  the  French  army  in  1799.  The
relative  position  of  Gaza  in  respect  to  Ya-
fa  on  his  map,  is  the  best,  and  indeed  the
only  approximation  which  we  have.  The
position  of  Yafa  being  corrected  ac-
cording to  the  more  accurate  obser^•ations
of  Gauttier  and  Hell,  gives  therefore  for
that  of  Gaza,  Lat.  31"  27  30  N.  Long.
34'  27'  24  "  E.  from  Greenwich.  See
Berghaus'  Memoir  zu  seiner  Karte  von
Syrien,  pp.  25,  26.

'  The  fortress  Daron,  Lat.  Daruni,  was
built  by  king  Amalrich  on  the  ruins  of
a  Greek  convent  of  the  same  name,  de-
scribed as  four  (Italian)  miles  south  of  Gaza,
and  five  furlongs  from  the  sea ;  Will.
Tyr.  20.  20.  Marinus  Sanutus  gives  the
distance  from  Gaza  at  fifteen  miles;  pp.
86,  246.    It  was  stormed  by  Saladin  with-

Mat  21.]

GAZA.

39

ceedingly  rich  and  productive.  Apricots  and  mulberries  were
already  ripe  ;  the  former  delicious  and  abundant.  Many  palm
trees  are  scattered  around  the  city,  though  they  form  no  grove
as  in  Egypt  ;  wliile  beyond  the  gardens,  towards  the  north,  lies
the  extensive  olive  grove  through  which  we  had  passed.  Tliere
are  two  pools  of  water,  one  on  the  north  and  the  other  south  of
the  city  ;  but  they  seemed  to  contain  merely  stagnant  rain
water,  of  which  no  use  was  made.  The  public  cemeteries  lie
straggUng  and  scattered  in  all  directions,  minghng  with  the
houses  on  the  hill  and  along  the  roads  in  the  plain. — Towards
the  east  the  view  is  shut  in  by  the  line  of  hiUs  we  had  crossed.
The  highest  point  is  a  partially  isolated  hill  southeast  of  the
city  about  half  an  hour  distant.  On  it  is  a  Mukam  or  Wely
called  el-Muntar.  The  Christians  pretend  that  it  was  once  the
residence  of  a  bishop.'

The  population  of  Gaza  has  usually  been  rated  as  much  too
low,  as  that  of  Jerusalem  has  been  over-estimated.  Travellers
have  given  different  judgments,  usually  from  two  thousand  to
five  thousand  souls. The  number  of  inhabitants  has  probably
increased  of  late  years.  From  information  given  us  by  both
Christians  and  Mussulmans,  it  appears,  that  the  city  now  con-
tains nearly  four  thousand  taxable  Muhammedans,  and  one  hun-
dred Christians.  This  indicates  a  population  of  not  less  than
fifteen  or  perhaps  sixteen  thousand  souls,  and  makes  Gaza  larger
than  Jerusalem  ;  a  fact  which  is  also  confirmed  by  its  greater
extent  of  crowded  dwellings.  There  were  said  to  be  fifty-seven
resident  Christian  families  ;  but  their  number  is  increased  by
transient  sojourners.

We  heard  nothing  of  the  port  of  Gaza,  the  ancient  Ma-
juma  nor  did  we  learn  whether  it  is  now  visited  by  vessels.
Gaza  itself  has  no  more  the  appearance  of  a  maritime  city  than
Jerusalem.  Yet  it  certainly  might  be  a  place  of  considerable
commerce.  The  fertile  soil  produces,  in  abundance,  grains  and
fruits  of  every  kind  and  of  the  finest  quality.  Volney  speaks
here  of  manuiactures  of  soap,  and  also  of  cotton  for  the  supply
of  the  neighbouring  Bedawin.*     The  position  of  Gaza  on  the

'  Jacotin's  map,  copied  also  by  Berghaus,
gives  to  this  eminence  the  name  of  '  Sam-
son's mount,'  as  being  the  hill  before  (Heb.
towanls)  Hebron,  to  which  he  carried  oflf
the  doors  of  the  gate  of  Gaza;  Judg.  16,
3.  So  too  the  Latin  tradition  and  some
travellers  ;  Quaresraius  II.  p.  926.  San-
dy's p.  117.  Busching  Th.  XI.  S.  451.
Raumer  PaL  p.  174,  ed.  3.  There  is
nothing  improbable  in  the  supposition ;
but  the  people  of  Gaza  know  of  no  such
name,  and  have  no  such  tradition. — Rich-

ardson makes  this  hill  to  be  "  a  lofty  pro-
montory of  the  mountains  of  Hebron !  "
Vol.  II.'  p.  198.

'  Volney  2000  ;  II.  p.  313.  Richardsou
2000  to  3000;  II.  p.  199.  Fisk  5000;
Raumer's  Paliist.  p.  175. — Poujoulat  comes
nearer  the  truth,  when  he  estimates  the
population  at  ten  or  eleven  thousand  -souls ;
Corresp.  d'Orient  V.  p.  399.

'  Reland  Pahest.  p.  791.

*  Voyage  II.  p.  313.

ii.  376-378

40

GAZA.

[Sec.  XL

route  of  the  great  caravans,  which  in  all  ages  have  passed  be-
tween Egj'pt  and  Syria,  is  favourable  to  its  commerce  and  pros-
perity ;  both  as  affording  a  means  of  constant  communication
with  both  countries,  and  also  from  the  opportunity  of  furnishing
Eupphes  to  the  caravans  in  passing.  Those  travelling  towards
Egypt,  naturally  lay  in  here  a  stock  of  provisions  and  necessaries
for  the  desert ;  while  those  coming  from  Egypt,  arrive  at  Gaza
exhausted,  and  must  of  course  supply  themselves  anew.  The
inhabitants  of  Ma'an  likewise,  on  the  east  of  Wady  el-'Arabah,
about  the  time  of  the  passing  of  the  Syrian  Haj  to  and  from
Mecca,  buy  up  provisions  of  aU  kinds  at  Gaza  and  Hebron,  and
sell  them  at  a  great  profit  to  the  pilgrims. '  The  bazars  in  Gaza
seemed  well  supplied  with  wares  ;  far  better  indeed  than  those
of  Jerusalem.

Gaza  is  among  the  earhest  of  the  Canaanitish  cities  men-
tioned in  the  old  Testament  and  became  afterwards  celebrated
as  one  of  the  five  cities  of  the  five  lords  of  the  Philistines.
Joshua  extended  his  conquests  to  Gaza,  but  did  not  vanquish
this  remarkable  people  ;^  and  although  the  tribe  of  Judah,  to
whose  lot  it  fell,  subdued  the  city,  yet  they  appear  to  have  held
it  but  a  short  time  ;  and  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  soon  not
only  regained  possession  of  their  own  territory,  but  also  increased
in  strength,  and  at  length  extended  their  jurisdiction  in  turn  over
the  Israelites.*  After  forty  years  of  oppression,  Samson  ap-
peared as  the  champion  and  avenger  of  his  people  ;  and  Gaza
becomes  renowned  as  the  scene  of  his  later  deeds  and  of  his  fall.
Here  too  he  drew  do^Ti  upon  himseK  and  the  assembled  multi-
tude the  temple  of  Dagon  ;  so  that  the  dead  which  he  slew  at
his  death,  were  more  than  they  which  he  slew  in  his  life."*
After  continual  wars  imder  the  Judges  and  with  Saul  and
David,  the  Philistines  appear  to  have  been  subdued  by  the  lat-
ter ;  and  Gaza  became  the  border  of  Solomon's  kingdom  on
this  side.*  Yet  they  gave  trouble  to  the  following  Jewish  kings  ;
and  Hezekiah  at  length  smote  them  imto  the  borders  of  Gaza.'

The  situation  of  Gaza  on  the  great  route  of  the  military  ex-
peditions, which  the  monarchs  of  Egypt,  and  those  of  Syria  and
the  east,  afterwards  imdertook  against  the  dominions  of  each
other,  necessarily  exjwsed  it  to  the  calamities  of  war  and  to  fre-
quent change  of  masters.  To  the  Egyptians,  Gaza  '  the  strong,'
was  the  key  of  Palestine  and  Syria  ;  and  no  conqueror  could

-  Burckhardt  Travels  in  Svria,  p.  436.  «  Jodg.  1,  18.    3,  3.    13,  1.

Volaey  IL  pp.  314,  315.— The  caravan  »  Jadg.  c.  16.

route  between  Ma'an  and  Gaza  passes  near  *  1  Sam.  c.  4-6.  14,  .'>2.  31,  1  sq.  2

Wady  Miisa,  and  strikes  the  fountain  el-  Sam.  5,17  sq.  8,  1.  21,  15  sq.  1  K.  4,  24.

Weibeh  in  the 'Arabah.  '  2  Chr.  21,  16.  26,6.  28,18.  2  K.

'  Gen.  10,  19.  18,  8.

•  Josh.  10,  41.    11,  22.    13,  3.
ii.  378.  379

Mat  21.]

HISTORICAL  NOTICES.

41

well  pass  by,  until  this  city  had  submitted  to  his  power.  Thus
one  of  the  Pharaohs  (proijably  Necho)  subdued  it  in  the  time
of  Jeremiah  ;  and  Cambyses.  during  bis  expedition  to  Egypt,  is
reported  to  have  deposited  here  his  treasures.'  Gaza  opposed
itself  for  five  months  to  the  progress  of  Alexander  the  Great  ;
but  was  finally  takea  by  storm,  its  brave  defenders  slaughtered
at  their  postsj  their  wives  and  children  sold  as  slaves,  and  the
city  repeopled  with  inhabitants  drawn  from  the  surrounding
country.*  During  the  wars  of  the  Maccabees,  Gaza  continued
to  be  a  place  of  strength  ;  it  was  fortified  by  the  Syrian  Bac-
chides,  its  suburbs  burned  by  Jonathan,  and  the  city  itself  cap-
tured by  Simon. ^  Alexander  Jannaeus  at  length  destroyed  Gaza
about  96  B.  C.  after  a  siege  of  a  year ;  but  it  was  again  rebuilt
with  other  cities  by  the  Roman  general  Gabinius.''  Augustus
gave  it  to  Herod  ;  and  after  his  death  it  was  assigned  to  Syria.*
About  A.  D.  65,  during  the  government  of  the  procurator  Ges-
sius  Floras,  Gaza  with  other  cities  was  again  laid  in  ruins  by  the
rebellious  Jews.'  Yet  this  destrucrion  was  probably  partial,  and
could  have  been  but  temporary  ;  for  there  exist  coins  of  Gaza
struck  in  honour  of  Titus,  Adrian,  and  the  following  emperors  :
which  show  at  least  that  the  city  was  still  a  place  of  impor-
tance, very  soon  after  the  destraction  of  Jerusalem."

From  these  details  it  seems  to  follow,  that  the  expression  in
the  book  of  Acts,*  which  might  at  first  appear  to  imply  that
Gaza  was  then  "  desert,'*'  is  more  probably  to  be  referred  to  the
particular  road  from  Jerusalem  to  Gaza,  on  which  the  Evangelist
was  to  find  the  eunuch,  viz.  the  southern  road  leading  from  Eleu-
theropolis  to  Gaza  through  the  desert,"  or  region  without
villages,  as  is  the  case  at  the  present  day.'

A  Christian  church  appears  to  have  been  early  planted  ?t  Gaza  ;
its  bishop  SHvanus  is  menrioned  by  Eusebius  as  a  martyr  under
Diocletian  about  A.  D.  285  ;  and  among  the  names  of  other  bish-
ops enumerated,  not  less  than  six  are  found  in  the  subscriptions
of  councils,  as  late  as  to  that  of  Jerasalemin  A.  D.  536.'"  Yet

»  Jer.  47,  1.    Pomp.  Mela  1.  11.

^  Arrian  Exp.  Alex.  2.  26,  koI  atre^ttyov
rdyrts  aurov  naxoiifVii,  aj  (Kotnoi  ira-
X^iTiiy  •  ircuSas  Si  koI  ywauKas  i^ijvSparo-

{uvouc/ffoj  Ik  Twy  repioiKuv,  (Kpriro  oaa
s  rest  only  on

289.    It  seems  also  to  be  the  .«ame  hill  the  ex.iggerated  testimony  of  Arabs.  Tb»t

which  Voluey  describes  near  a  village  Htri  of  Voluey  certainly  does,
ii.  390'  391

May  22.]

TELL  EL-HAST.  'aJLAN.

49

round  pear  Hiij,  on  its  way  to  join  Wady  Simsim.  Tliis  latter
Wady,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  drain  of  all  the  region  round  Beit
Jibrin  and  Tell  es-Safieh  ;  and  having  received  the  Hasy,  bends
off  northwest  by  the  village  of  Deir  Esneid,  and  forms  the  river
of  Askelon.'

We  heard  nothing  at  the  time  of  any  vUlage  or  ruin  called
el-Hasy,  as  reported  by  Volney  but  a  deserted  site  of  that
name  is  marked  in  our  lists  along  with  Huj  and  'Ajlan.  It  is
therefore  probably  not  far  distant  from  the  TeU.  In  the  days
of  Saladin  and  Eichard,  this  place  is  mentioned,  in  connection
with  the  march  of  their  armies,  under  the  name  of  Elhissi  and
Alhassi  ;  and  is  said  to  be  near  water,  and  not  far  remote  from
the  mountains  of  Abraham  or  Hebron.^

We  now  left  Tell  el-Hasy  at  Sf  o'clock,  and  came  in  half  an
hour  directly  to  'Ajlan  N.^W.  ascending  gradually  from  the
valley.  On  the  way  we  fell  in  with  a  troop  of  seven  gazelles
feeding.  Here  is  a  site  of  ruins  much  resembling  Um  Lakis  in
appearance  ;  a  low  round  hUlock  covered  with  scattered  heaps
of  unhewn  stones.  The  name  alone  identifies  it  with  the  Eglon
of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  there  seems  to  be  nothing  in  the
position  to  contradict  this  evidence.  Eglon  was  situated  in  the
plain  of  Judah,  apparently  not  very  far  distant  from  Lachish.^

Leaving  'Ajlan  at  8.25,  we  bent  our  course  E.  by  S.  towards
the  village  of  es-Sukkariyeh.  On  the  way  the  muleteers  killed
a  large  black  snake,  six  feet  long  ;  the  only  one  we  saw  in  Pal-
estine.^ The  day  proved  exceedingly  warm  and  very  uncomfort-
able ;  the  hot  wind  coming  from  behind  us.  Our  eyes  and
faces  were  filled  all  day  long  with  small  gnats  rising  from  the
wheat  fields  ;  and  large  flies  troubled  our  animals,  lilce  swarms
of  bees.  From  the  dr}-  fields  here  and  there  whirlwinds  of  dust
frequently  arose,  reminding  us  of  those  we  had  formerly  seen  in
the  deserts  of  the  south.

We  reached  es-Sukkariyeh  at  twenty  minutes  past  9  o'clock.
Like  Huj,  it  had  recently  been  built  up  by  the  governor  of
Gaza,  Sheikh  Sa'id,  upon  former  foundations,  and  was  considered
as  his  property.  A  large  house  of  stone  had  been  erected  for
himself ;  and  several  other  houses  are  also  of  stone.  The  name
of  the  village,  which  signifies  "  the  Sugary,"  cannot  of  course
be  ancient  ;  but  tradition  knows  no  other.    It  existed  already  in

'  See  above,  p.  35.  this  stands  in  direct  contradiction  with

'  See  above,  p.  48,  n.  Josh.  12,  12.  15.    15,  35.  39.— From  'Aj-

'  Bohaeddin  Vit.  Saladin,  pp.  228,  229,  Ian,  Bureir  bore  W.    'Ariik  es-Suweidan

231,  233.    Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  IV.  p.  N.  12°  W.    Beit  'Aflfa  N.  3'  W.    Tell  el-

508,  513.  Hasy  S.  5°  E.

♦  Josh.  10,  34.  36.    15,  39.— Ensebius  '  At  8.55,  at  a  high  point  in  the  road,

and  Jerome  make  Eglon  identical  with  Summeil  bore  N.  21°  E.    Tell  es-S.ifieh

Adullam,  and  place  it  twelve  miles  east  of  N.  32  '  E.    Filujy  N.  36' E.  es-.Sukkari-

Eleutheropolis ;  Onomast.  art.  Eglon.   But  yeh  E.

Vol.  II.— 5  ii.  391-393

50

FROM  GAZA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  XL

the  fifteenth  century  ;  and  seems  to  imply  the  former  cultiva-
tion of  the  sugar  cane  in  the  vicinity. ' — In  one  place  is  a  small
enclosure  of  large  squared  stones,  apparently  of  ancient  work-
manship. Several  marble  columns  and  a  Corinthian  capital,
were  also  strewed  upon  the  ground.  In  Sheikh  Sa'id's  house
likewise,  many  large  square  stones  of  former  structures  have
been  built  in.  The  place  seems  to  be,  without  much  question,
an  ancient  site  ;  but  I  am  unable  to  assign  to  it  any  scriptural
name  with  even  a  tolerable  degree  of  probability.*  From  Suk-
kariyeh,  TeU  es-Safieh  bore  N.  27=  E.

We  were  delayed  here  for  half  an  hour,  in  procuring  a  guide
for  el-Kubeibeh  and  Beit  Jibrin.  We  found  great  difficulty,  for
the  first  time,  in  persuading  any  one  to  accompany  us  for
money  ;  although  many  persons  were  lounging  about  the  vil-
lage without  occupation.  Indeed,  we  had  finally  to  appeal  to
the  Sheikh,  and  obtained  a  man  only  by  his  order.  The  obsta-
cle seemed,  in  this  case,  to  be  sheer  indolence  ;  the  men  were  too
lazy  to  take  the  trouble  even  to  earn  money  so  easily.

Starting  again  at  ten  minutes  before  10  o'clock,  we  took  the
road  to  el-Kubeibeh.  Just  out  of  the  A-illage  of  Sukkariyeh  we
passed  the  large  public  well,  where  a  camel  was  drawing  water
by  a  Sakieh  ;  while  large  flocks  and  herds  were  waiting  around.
Our  course  was  about  E.  by  N.  The  country  soon  became  more
hilly,  and  rocks  began  occasionally  to  appear.  The  crops  of
grain  were  however  good.  In  one  field,  as  we  approached  Ku-
beibeh,  nearly  two  hundred  reapers  and  gleaners  were  at  work  ;
the  latter  being  nearly  as  numerous  as  the  former.  A  few  were
taking  their  refreshment,  and  offered  us  some  of  their  "  parched
corn."  In  the  season  of  harvest,  the  grains  of  wheat,  not  yet
fully  dry  and  hard,  are  roasted  in  a  pan  or  on  an  iron  plate,  and
constitute  a  very  palatable  article  of  food  ;  this  is  eaten  along
with  bread,  or  instead  of  it.  Indeed,  the  use  of  it  is  so  common
at  this  season  among  the  labouring  classes,  that  this  parched
wheat  is  sold  in  the  markets  ;  and  it  was  among  our  list  of  arti-
cles to  be  purchased  at  Hebron,  for  our  further  journey  to  Wady
Musa.  The  Arabs,  it  was  said,  prefer  it  to  rice  ;  but  this  we
did  not  find  to  be  the  case.  The  whole  scene  of  the  reapers  and
gleaners,  and  their  "  parched  com,"  gave  us  a  lively  representa-

•  F.  F.nbri  and  Breydenbaoh  with  their  Sukkariyeh  is  also  mentioned  by  Mojr  ed-

party,  in  travelling  from  Hebron  to  Gaza  Din  in  Hd^t ;  Fundgr.  des  Orients  II.  p.

in  A.  D.  U83,  spent  the  night  .at  a  Khan  142.

in  the  plain  near  a  village  called  Znckaria       '  Es-Sukkariyeh  is  abont  2i  hours  W.

(Sukkariyeh).    See  F.  Fabri  in  Reissb.  S.  W.  of  Beit  Jibrin.    If  the  hitter  be  ttiken

des  li.  Landes  p.  289.    Breydenbach  also  as  Eleutheropolis,  then  this  distance  (but

speaks  of  the  Kh;in,  but  gives  no  name  ;  not  the  direction)  would  correspond  well

ibid  p.  186.    They  probably  travelled  the  enongh  with  the  position  of  Lachish.  See

usual  road  by  Beit  .Jibrin;  of  which  place  p.  47,  above,
however  neither  makes  any  mention. —
ii.  393,  394

Mat  22.]

BEIT  JTBRIS'.  CAVEBXS.

51

tion  of  the  story  of  Ruth  and  the  ancient  harvest-home  in  the
fields  of  Boaz.'

We  passed  el-Kubeibeh  at  twenty  minutes  past  11  o'tlock,
situated  on  a  stony  barren  hiU  ten  minutes  on  our  right.  It  is
another  vdlage  bmlt  up  by  the  governor  of  Gaza  on  former  foun-
dations ;  but  there  seemed  to  be  nothing  to  mark  it  particularly
as  an  ancient  site.  Our  course  now  lay  more  to  the  left,  north-
east over  the  low  lulls  to  Beit  Jibrin  ;  which  place  we  reached
at  half  past  twelve,  descending  into  the  southern  valley  from  the
southwest.  TVe  spread  our  carpets  under  the  same  oHve  tree
as  on  our  former  visit ;  and  after  a  limeh  laid  ourselves  down  to
enjoy  a  short  siesta.

On  awaking,  we  found  ourselves  surrounded  by  a  circle  of
people,  to  the  number  of  a  dozen  or  more,  who  seemed  to  con-
sider themselves  quite  at  home  in  our  company.  They  proved
to  be  men  from  Beit  Jala,  friends  and  neighbours  of  our  guide,
who  had  come  down  to  hire  themselves  out  during  the  harvest  in
the  plain  ;  their  own  harvest  in  the  mountains  being  two  or
three  weeks  later.  There  were  said  to  be  few  places  of  importance
in  the  plain,  where  some  of  the  men  of  Beit  Jala  were  not  now
to  be  found  ;  a  fact  which  speaks  well  for  their  industrious  hab-
its. They  all  gathered  around  us,  and  accompanied  us  wherever
we  went.  The  Sheikh  of  the  village  was  now  at  home,  and
came  to  us.  He  was  an  intelligent  man.  and  of  his  own  accord
pr-jposed  to  show  us  several  antiquities  in  the  vicinity,  which
we  had  omitted  to  see  on  our  former  visit.  Moimting  his  sleek
mare,  and  accompanied  by  several  men  of  the  village,  and  by
the  whole  posse  of  our  friends  from  Beit  Jala,  he  led  the  way  to
several  places  of  no  httle  interest,  which  certainly  deserve  the
further  attention  of  travellers  and  antiquarians.

"We  went  first  to  some  caverns  on  the  southwest  side  of  the
Wady  leading  up  to  Santa  Hanneh,  near  the  path  by  which  we
had  approached  from  Kubeibeh.  These  are  artificial  excava-
tions, having  partly  the  character  of  those  we  had  seen  near
Deir  Dubban,  but  of  much  more  careful  workmanship.  Besides
domes,  there  are  here  also  long  arched  rooms,  with  the  walls  in
general  cut  quite  smooth.  One  of  these  was  nearly  a  hundred
feet  in  length  ;  having  along  its  sides,  about  ten  feet  above  the
level  of  the  floor,  a  line  of  ornamental  work  like  a  sort  of  cor-
nice. On  one  side,  lower  down,  were  two  niches  at  some  dis-
tance apart,  which  seemed  once  to  have  had  images  standing  in
them  ;  but  the  stone  was  too  much  decayed  to  determine  with

'  Ruth  2,  8,  "Then  said  Boaz  nnto   parched  com,  and  she  did  eat,  and  was
Rnth. — Go  not  to  glean  in  another  field,    sufficed  and  left."    Of  the  vinesrar  men-
neither  go  from  hence,  bnt  abide  here  last    tioned  in  the  same  verse  we  heard  nothing,
by  my  maidens."  Verse  14,  '-And  Aie    See  the  whole  chanter,
sat  beside  the  reapers ;  and  he  reached  her

ii.  394-396

52

FROM  GAZA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec,  XI.

certainty.  These  apartments  are  all  lighted  hy  openings  from
ahove.  In  one  smaller  room,  not  lighted,  there  was  at  one  cor-
ner what  looked  like  a  sarcophagus  hollowed  out  of  the  same
rock  ;  but  it  was  too  much  broken  away  to  enable  us  to  speak
positively.  The  entrance  to  the  whole  range  of  caverns,  is  by  a
broad  arched  passage  of  some  elevation  ;  and  we  were  surpidsed
at  the  taste  and  skill  displayed  in  the  workmanship.

The  Sheikh  now  took  us  across  the  same  valley  to  other
clusters  of  caverns  in  the  northern  hill  ;  more  extensive  indeed
than  the  former,  occupying  in  part  the  bowels  of  the  whole  hill ;
but  less  important  and  far  less  carefully  wrought.  These  con-
sist chiefly  of  bell-shaped  domes  lighted  from  above,  like  those
at  Deir  Dubban  ;  though  some  are  merely  high  arched  cham-
bers excavated  in  the  face  of  the  rock,  and  open  to  the  day.
The  rock  is  here  softer,  and  very  many  of  the  domes  are  broken
down.  The  Sheikh  related,  that  one  chamber  before  unknown
having  recently  fallen  in,  he  thinking  there  might  be  treasure  in
it,  sent  down  a  man  to  explore  it  ;  but  he  found  only  a  human
skeleton.  In  one  of  these  caverns  was  a  small  fountain  ;  and  near
by  were  two  short  inscriptions  in  very  old  Cufic,  which  my  com-
panion copied.  They  seem  however  to  have  been  the  work  of
casual  visitors  ;  and  afford  no  explanation  of  the  age  or  object
of  the  excavations.'

We  now  struck  down  to  the  chtirch  of  Santa  Hanneh,  pass-
ing on  the  way  the  well  already  described  as  lying  northeast  of
the  ruin.'^  On  inquiring  of  the  Sheikh,  whether  there  was  any
living  fountain  in  the  vicinity,  he  said  that  according  to  their
tradition,  the  well  in  the  valley  half  way  towards  the  town,^  was
once  a  fountain,  whose  waters  overflowed  and  ran  along  the  val-
ley ;  but  in  order  to  obtain  more,  they  dug  it  deeper  and  walled
it  up  ;  so  that  the  water  now  no  longer  rises  to  the  top.  It  is
called  Um  Judei'a.  This  circumstance,  as  we  shall  see,  is  of
some  historical  importance.

We  next  bent  our  course  towards  the  Tell  on  the  south  of
the  valley,  where  from  the  accounts  of  the  Arabs  there  seemed
to  be  a  prospect  of  finding  ruins.  At  its  foot,  just  out  of  the
valley,  we  passed  several  excavated  tombs.  I  entered  one,  de-
scending by  a  few  steps  ;  and  found  it  to  be  about  fifty  feet  long
by  fifteen  or  twenty  broad,  with  deep  niches  on  each  side  and  at
the  end  for  dead  bodies.  The  others  were  similar  externally.
The  Tell  itself,  consisting  of  chalky  limestone,  is  rather  a  strik-
ing object  in  this  part  of  the  country  ;  a  truncated  cone  with  a
flat  circular  plateau  on  the  top,  some  six  hundred  feet  in  diame-
ter.   On  this  plat  are  no  traces  of  foundations,  except  a  few  on

'  See  Kote  XXXIII,  end  of  the  volume.       '  Page  26.
»  Page  26.
ii.  300,  397

IUt  22.]

BEIT  JIBRIN.  CAVERNS.

53

the  southwest  part.  But  towards  the  southeast  and  especially
on  a  lower  plateau  or  projection  of  the  hill  on  that  side,  there
are  many  foundations  of  walls  and  buildings  ;  yet  no  hewn
stones,  nor  any  remains  of  the  superstmctures.  There  would
seem  to  have  been  here  an  ancient  site  ;  the  materials  of  whose
buildings  may  perhaps  have  been  absorbed  in  the  later  erections
of  Beit  Jibrin.

But  the  most  remarkable  spot  of  all  remained  yet  to  be  vis-
ited. This  was  another  series  of  immense  excavations  on  the
southern  end  of  the  same  hill,  below  the  traces  of  foundations
just  described.  Lighting  several  candles,  we  entered  by  a  nar-
row and  difficult  passage  from  a  pit  overgrown  with  briers,  and
found  ourselves  in  a  dark  labyrinth  of  galleries  and  apartments,
aU  cut  from  the  sohd  rock,  and  occupying  the  bowels  of  the  hill.
Here  were  some  dome-shaped  chambers  as  before  ;  others  were
extensive  rooms,  with  roofs  supported  by  columns  of  the  same
rock  left  in  excavating  ;  and  all  were  connected  with  each  other
by  passages,  apparently  without  order  or  plan.  Several  other
apartments  were  still  more  singular.  These  were  also  in  the
form  of  tall  domes,  twenty  feet  or  more  in  diameter,  and  from
twenty  to  thirty  feet  high  ;  they  were  entered  by  a  door  near  the
top,  from  which  a  staircase  cut  in  the  same  rock  wound  down
around  the  wall  to  the  bottom.  We  descended  into  several  of
these  rooms  ;  but  found  nothing  at  the  bottom,  and  no  appear-
ance of  any  other  door  or  passage.  We  could  discover  no  trace
of  inscriptions  ;  nor  any  thing,  indeed,  which  might  afford  the
slightest  clue  for  unravelling  the  mystery,  in  which  the  history
and  object  of  these  remarkable  excavations  are  enveloped. — Near
by  were  said  to  be  other  similar  clusters,  which  our  time  did  not
permit  us  further  to  explore.

Such  was  the  further  amount  of  information  which  we  ob-
tained at  Beit  Jibrin  on  this  our  second  visit.  The  question
naturally  now  came  up  again.  Whether  this  was  to  be  regarded
as  the  site  of  Eleutheropolis  ?  The  massive  ruins  in  the  village,
the  fine  church  of  Santa  Hanneh,  and  the  immense  and  singular
excavations  which  we  had  now  explored,  testify  sufficiently  to
the  existence  here  of  a  great  and  important  city  ;  more  impor-
tant indeed,  by  far,  than  any  other  in  the  whole  tract  between
the  coast  and  the  cities  of  the  mountains.  We  had  also  now
passed  through  the  whole  region  north  and  west  of  Beit  Jibrin,  in
which,  if  not  here,  Eleutheropolis  must  have  stood  ;  and  that
without  finding  the  slightest  trace  of  any  site,  which  could  even
with  the  remotest  probability  be  referred  to  that  ancient  city.
All  these  circumstances  tended  strongly  to  produce  upon  our
minds  an  impression  of  the  identity  of  EleutheropoHs  with  Beit
Jibrin  ;  but  as  they  were  not  in  themselves  decisive,  we  preferred

Vol.  II.— 5*  ii.  397-399

54

FROM  GAZA  TO  HEBHON.

[Sec.  XI.

still  to  suspend  our  judgment,  and  prosecute  our  inquiries  yet
further.

From  Beit  Jibrin  two  roads  lead  to  Hebron.  The  easier  and
more  usual  one  goes  up  the  left  hand  valley  by  the  village  of
Terknmieh.  On  or  near  this  road  we  were  told  of  a  place  now
called  Beit  Nusib  ;  in  which  name  it  was  easy  to  recognise  the
Nezib  of  the  plain  of  Judah,  situated  according  to  Eusebius
nine,  and  according  to  Jerome  seven  miles  from  Eleutheropolis
towards  Hebron.'  The  other  road  passes  up  the  southern  valley
by  Santa  Hanneh  ;  and  on  this  was  said  to  be  a  village  called
Idhna,  which  could  be  no  other  than  the  Jedna  of  Eusebius
and  Jerome,  lying  on  the  way  to  Hebron,  six  Roman  miles
from  Eleutheropolis.  The  distance  of  Beit  NQsib  and  Idhna,
and  especially  the  latter,  would  therefore  furnish  a  decisive  test
as  to  the  probable  identity  of  Eleutheropolis  with  Beit  Jibrin  ;
and  we  accordingly  determined  to  take  the  road  leading  by
Idhna.  The  village  ed-Dawaimeh  was  also  spoken  of ;  and
having  received  the  impression  that  it  lay  on  the  way  to  Idhna,
we  concluded  to  proceed  thither  for  the  night.

The  valley  in  which  Santa  Hanneh  stands,  has  its  head  a
few  minutes  above  the  church  ;  and  beyond  the  water-shed
towards  the  south,  is  a  small  plain,  formed  by  the  junction  of
two  Wadys,  one  coming  down  from  the  E.  S.  E.  and  the  other
shorter  one  from  the  S.  S.  E.  This  point  of  junction  is  ten
minutes  from  the  church,  or  half  an  hour  from  Beit  Jibrin.
The  outlet  of  this  little  area  is  towards  the  west,  passing  off
south  of  the  TeU  towards  the  western  plain.  We  descended
fi-om  the  caverns  under  the  Tell  into  the  little  plain  ;  and  at  half
past  4  o'clock  proceeded  on  our  way  up  the  southern  valley  S.
20°  E.  for  forty-five  minutes.  The  Sheikh  accompanied  us  for  a
■considerable  distance  in  token  of  respect,  and  to  show  us  the
road  ;  and  then  clapping  spurs  to  his  fine  animal,  soon  disap-
peared down  the  valley.  The  hills  were  bushy  and  green.  For
a  part  of  the  way,  near  the  head  of  the  little  valley,  there  were
traces  of  an  ancient  road,  with  walls  in  several  places.  Here
were  also  several  rude  pillars  ;  and  one  weather-worn  column
might  well  have  been  a  Roman  milestone.

At  5f  o'clock  we  crossed  the  water-shed  at  the  head  of  this
valley,  and  immediately  began  to  descend  along  another  similar
Wady  running  S.  20°  W.  After  about  twenty  minutes,  it
enters  a  much  broader  Wady  coming  from  the  southeast,  which
then  bends  off  south  of  west,  and  passing  on  into  the  western
plain,  runs  by  Faliijy,  and  finally  unites  with  Wady  Simsim.
On  a  high  rocky  ridge  beyond  this  valley,  and  around  which  it
thus  bends,  stands  the  \'illage  of  Dawaimeh.    We  reached  it  at

'  Josh.  15,  43.    Onomast.  art.  Neetib.    See  p.  17,  above,
ii.  399,  400

Mat  22.]

DAWAIMEH.

55

5|  o'clock,  making  one  hour  and  three  quarters  from  BeitJibrin.
The  surface  of  the  hill  is  so  rocky  and  uneven,  that  for  some
time  we  could  not  find  a  place  to  pitch  our  tent.  At  length,
however,  after  passing  the  village,  we  came  upon  several  thresh-
ing-floors towards  the  south,  where  the  stones  had  been  cleared
away  ;  and  here  we  encamped  for  the  night.

On  inquiring  of  the  people  respecting  Idhna,  we  were  not  a
little  surprised  to  hear,  that  we  had  taken  a  wrong  road,  and
were  now  nearly  as  far  from  that  place  as  we  had  been  at  Beit
Jibrin.  The  right  road,  it  seemed,  passed  up  the  left  hand
Wady  from  the  little  plain  south  of  Santa  Hanneh  ;  while  we
had  followed  the  other  valley.  The  mistake  was  owing  to  the
well  meant  officiousness  of  our  guide  ;  who  hearing  us  inquire
respecting  Idhna  and  Dawaimeh,  and  wishing  to  show  us  both
places,  had  first  brought  us  hither,  intending  to-morrow  to  take
Idhna  in  our  way  to  Hebron.  This  circuit  was  of  course  likely
to  frustrate  the  whole  purpose  of  our  visit  to  Idhna  ;  and  we
were  not  a  little  disappointed.

The  hiU  on  which  Dawaimeh  stands,  is  one  of  the  highest  in
the  surrounding  tract.  It  affords  a  -view  of  several  villages  and
sites  towards  the  east  among  *he  hills,  and  also  on  the  higher
mountain ;  while  on  the  west  an  elevated  ridge  shuts  out  aU
view  of  the  great  plain.  On  this  ridge  stands  the  Wely  we  had
seen  from  Tell  el-Hasy.'

The  people  of  the  village  came  around  us  as  usual ;  and  we
found  here  also  several  Christians  from  Beit  Jala,  employed  as
labourers  in  the  harvest.  The  barley  harvest  was  just  at  an  end,
and  the  wheat  harvest  just  beginning  ;  so  that  the  treading
out  of  both  species  of  grain  was  going  on  at  the  same  time.
Camels  laden  with  sheaves  were  coming  in  as  we  arrived,  carry-
ing on  their  backs  almost  a  smaU  cart-load. — After  coffee  in  our
tent,  most  of  the  people  went  away  ;  but  the  Sheikh  remained.
We  were  not  much  disposed  to  like  him  ;  he  was  cringing  in  his
manner,  and  at  the  same  time  reserved  and  unaccommodating.
He  still  sat  and  sat,  until  dinner  was  served,  and  then  partook
of  our  meal ;  the  first  time  that  an  Arab  had  yet  eaten  ^^ith  us,
though  we  had  always  invited  them.

The  Sheikh  and  others  spoke  much  of  a  ruined  fortress
called  el-Burj,  of  which  we  had  already  heard,  situated  an  hour
or  two  south  of  Dawaimeh.  The  former  offered  to  give  us  a
guide  thither  in  the  morning  ;  and  we  concluded  on  the  whole
to  take  this  course,  and  return  at  a  later  period  directly  from

'  "We  obtained  at  Dawaimeh  the  follow-  N.  85=  E.  Kusbur  X.  72'  E.  Bukkar  N.
ing  bearings:  Beit'Anwa,  ruin,  S.  45 ■  W.  72'  E.  Beit  Ummar  X.  70'  E.  Idhna
Neby  Nuh  (Xoah)  near  Dura  on  the  moun-  N.  70'  E.  Wely  seen  from  Tell  el-Hasy
tain,  S.  70°  E.    Taijibehonthe  moontain    N.  75°  W.

iL  400-402

56

FROM  GAZA  TO  HEBRON,

[Sbc.  XI.

Hebron  to  Beit  Jibrin.  The  guide  was  accordingly  selected,
and  received  his  instructions  to  be  ready  at  early  dawn.  We
paid  eight  piastres  for  his  services  into  the  hands  of  the  Sheikh  ;
and  regarded  it  as  a  much  higher  price  than  usual,  it  being  indeed
the  wages  of  a  whole  day ;  while  less  than  half  a  day  would  be
occupied  by  the  man,  both  in  going  and  returning.

Here  as  elsewhere  men  were  set  to  watch  all  night  around
our  tent  ;  but  in  this  instance  their  charge  probably  extended
also  to  the  adjacent  threshing-floors.  Yet  the  Sheikh  took  good
care  not  to  burden  his  own  peoj^le  ;  but  laid  the  task  upon  the
poor  labourers  from  Beit  Jala.  No  pay  or  present  was  now  or
at  any  time  demanded  on  account  of  the  watch.  Our  guards
here,  however,  took  their  own  pay  in  grain  from  the  threshing-
floors,  which  they  parched  and  ate  during  the  night ;  solacing
themselves  with  this  favourite  article  of  harvest  food,  and  turning
their  watch  into  a  wake.

Wednesday,  May  2Zd.  We  rose  early  ;  and  just  as  we
were  mounting  to  set  oif  for  el-Burj,  the  guide  came,  and  with
him  the  Sheikh,  saying  he  could  not  go  with  us  unless  we  paid
him  a  larger  price.  As  this  was  a  barefaced  attempt  at  extor-
tion, I  decided  instantly  to  take  .the  road  back  to  Beit  Jibrin
and  so  to  Idhna,  in  order  to  determine  at  once  the  question  a8
to  Eleutheropolis.  Indeed,  we  did  not  regret,  either  now  or
afterwards,  that  this  occasion  had  intervened  thus  to  change  our
proposed  course.  We  demanded  back  our  money,  which  was  re-
paid with  evident  chagrin.  This  was  the  first,  and  I  think  the
only  instance  we  met  with  of  a  like  meanness  after  a  bargain
had  once  been  concluded  ;  for  however  variable  and  extravagant
an  Arab  may  be  in  his  previous  demands,  yet  when  an  agree-
ment had  been  actually  made,  we  usually  found  them  faithful
to  their  engagements.

Setting  off  at  once,  we  returned  by  our  road  of  last  evening
to  the  junction  of  the  two  Wadys  in  the  little  plain  south  of
Santa  Hanneh,  half  an  hour  from  Beit  Jibrin.  Here  turning
into  the  more  eastern  valley  at  Q\  o'clock,  we  followed  it  up  on
the  way  to  Idhna.  I  know  not  when  I  have  felt  more  the  ex-
citement of  suspense,  than  while  traversing  this  short  distance.
A  question  of  some  historical  moment  was  depending  on  the
circumstance,  whether  we  reached  Idhna  at  8  o'clock.  If  so,
our  researches  after  the  long  lost  Eleutheropolis  would  be  crowned
with  success  ;  if  not,  we  were  again  afloat,  and  certain  of  no
thing.

In  this  valley  also  there  were  occasionally  traces  of  an  an-
cient road,  skirted  by  walls  which  probably  enclosed  fields.
Our  general  course  all  the  way  to  Idhna  was  E.  S.  E.^E.  The
valley  became  narrower  as  we  advanced,  with  green  bushy  hills

iu  402,  403

May  28.]

IDHNA.

57

on  both  sides.  The  hills  round  about  had  evidently  once  been
terraced  for  cultivation  ;  but  the  tillage  is  now  confined  mostly
to  the  bottoms  of  the  valleys.  At  a  quarter  past  seven,  we
passed  a  well  in  the  valley,  and  the  ruins  of  a  village  called  Beit
'Alam,  on  a  low  mound  at  our  left.

Soon  after  this  we  saw  a  man  walking  before  us  with  a  gun  ;
a  suspicious  circumstance  in  these  days,  when  the  people  had  been
all  disarmed.  Sending  forward  a  man  to  reconnoitre,  we  found
he  was  a  peaceable  Fellah  from  Dura  in  the  mountains.  The  in-
habitants of  that  village,  in  their  quarrels  among  themselves,
had  recently  employed  fire  arms  ;  thereby  showing  to  the  gov-
ernment that  they  still  possessed  them,  although  they  had  form-
erly professed  to  give  them  all  up.  In  consequence  of  this,  the
governors  of  G-aza,  Jerusalem,  and  Hebron,  were  now  at  Dura,
demanding  from  the  inhabitants  their  arms.  Every  man  was
required  to  bring  in  a  gun  ;  no  matter  whether  he  possessed  one
or  not.  This  poor  fellow,  who  had  none,  had  been  searching
after  one  for  three  days  in  the  plain,  and  had  finally  purchased  a
miserable  old  thing  for  sixty  piastres.  He  was  now  returning
home  in  order  to  surrender  it  to  the  governors.

At  7.50  we  came  to  the  head  of  the  valley  ;  and  here  in
the  midst  of  a  rocky  tract  of  gradual  ascent  was  a  large  public
well.  The  stones  round  about  it  were  much  worn,  by  the  fric-
tion of  the  ropes  in  drawing  water.  It  now  wanted  but  ten
minutes  of  8  o'clock  ;  and  as  yet  nothing  was  to  be  seen  of
Idhna.  But  as  we  reached  the  top  of  the  ascent,  the  village  lay
before  us,  somewhat  lower  down  on  the  other  side  ;  and  precisely  at
8  o'clock  we  entered  the  place  and  dismounted  at  the  house  of  the
Sheikh.  We  thus  found  Idhna  to  be  just  two  hours,  or  six  Ro-
man miles,  from  Beit  Jibrin  ;  which  is  the  specified  distance  of
Jedna  from  Eleutheropolis.

At  a  later  period  we  visited  Beit  Nusib,  lying  near  the  other
road  from  Beit  Jibrin  to  Hebron,  not  far  from  Terkumieh.
This  latter  village  is  reckoned  at  two  and  a  half  hours  from
Beit  Jibrin,  and  Nusib  is  apparently  a  little  less  distant ;  cor-
responding well  to  the  account  of  J erome  respecting  Nezib,  that
it  lay  seven  Roman  miles  from  Eleutheropolis  towards  Hebron.

ELEUTHEROPOLIS.

I  have  thus  detailed  aU  the  circumstances  of  direct  evidence,
which  led  us  to  the  conviction,  that  Eleutheropolis  must  have
been  identical  with  Beit  Jibrin,  the  ancient  Betogabra.  The
latter  was  the  earlier  native  appellation,  for  which  (as  in  so
many  other  cases)  the  Greek  name  Eleutheropolis  was  officially
substituted  ;  yet  the  ancient  name  maintained  its  place  in  the

ii.  403-405

FROM  GAZA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  XL

mouths  of  the  people,  and  the  later  one  at  length  fell  into  disuse
and  was  forgotten.  An  exact  parallel  is  presented  by  the  cases
of  Lydda,  Emmaus,  Jerusalem,  and  several  other  cities  ;  which
after  having  been  for  centuries  officially  known  as  Diospolis,
Nicopolis,  and  -^lia,  afterwards  resumed  their  native  names,
while  the  others  sunk  into  oblivion.  In  these  and  similar  in-
stances, there  is  indeed  historical  testimony  to  the  identity  of  the
native  and  foreign  appellations  ;  while  in  the  case  of  Eleuthero-
polis  and  Betogabra,  it  happened  that  no  such  incidental  testimony
was  then  known  to  exist.  But  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  shall
see,  there  also  existed  none  more  direct  against  the  identity ;
and  the  accidental  silence  of  history  could  not  weigh  against
the  mass  of  positive  evidence.

Our  conviction  of  the  identity  of  Eleutheropolis  with  Beit
Jibrin,  was  derived  solely  and  exclusively  from  the  specifications
of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  respecting  the  distances  of  various
places  from  the  former,  the  sites  of  which  we  were  able  to  as-
certain.   These,  as  we  have  already  seen,  were  the  following  :

In  respect  to  these  places,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  dis-
tances specified  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  definitely  exact,  or  as
having  been  accurately  measured  ;  xmless  perhaps,  in  the  case
of  those  which  might  happen  to  lie  directly  upon  a  great  road.
Now  such  a  road  from  Eleutheropolis  to  NicopoHs,  let  the  former
have  lain  where  it  may,  certainly  did  not  pass  through  Beth-
shemesh  and  Zorah  ;  it  ran  without  doubt  among  the  hills  near
the  plain,  and  crossing  the  mouth  of  Wady  es-Surar,  passed
along  near  the  mountains  to  the  city  in  question.  At  the  tenth
mile  from  Eleutheropolis,  a  traveller  would  see  Beth-shemesh
and  Zorah  on  his  right  ;  one  in  the  mouth  of  Wady  es-SurS.r,
and  the  other  on  the  hill  farther  north. — To  J erusalem  there  ap-
pear to  have  been  two  roads.  One  seems  to  have  followed  the
Nicopolis  road  until  it  approached  Wady  es-Surar ;  and  then  turn-
ing through  the  hills  to  or  near  Beth-shemesh,  went  up  per-
haps through  the  Surar,  or  more  probably,  as  now,  by  way
of  Haris  ;  this  would  pass  at  or  near  Jarrauk,  which  could  not
well  have  been  seen  from  the  Nicopolis  road.  The  other  proba-
bly was  nearly  the  same  as  the  present  road  through  the  Wady
el-Musiirr     on  this  Socoh  would  be  visible  and  not  from  the

Zorah

Beth-shemesh
Jarinuk

on  the  way  towards  Nicopolis.
on  the  way  towards  Jerusalem,
on  the  way  towards  Hebron.

Socoh
Jedna
Nezib

7  or  9

ii.  405,  406

'  See  pp.  15,  20.

Mat  23.]

ELEtJTHEROPOLIS.

59

former. — From  Eleutberopolis  to  Hebron  tbere  must  also  bave
been  two  roads,  as  tbere  are  now  from  Beit  Jibrin  ;  for  from  no
conceivable  position  of  Eleutberopolis,  could  a  traveller  pass  by
or  even  see  both  Jedna  and  Nezib  on  one  and  tbe  same  route  to
Hebron  ;  inasmuch  as  they  both  lie  among  tbe  bills,  nearly  two
hours  apart  in  a  direction  from  north  to  south,  and  are  not  vis-
ible from  each  other.*

These  things  being  premised^  and  making  all  due  allowance
for  tbe  merely  approximate  specifications  of  Eusebius  and  Je-
rome, it  appears  from  our  routes  and  examination,  as  already  de-
tailed, that  the  space  actually  travelled  over  by  us,  in  connection
with  short  estimated  distances  from  the  first  four  places,  Zorah,
Betb-shemesh,  Jarmuk,  and  Socoh,  renders  it  certain  that  Eleu-
tberopolis could  not  have  lain  at  tbe  most  more  than  half  an
hour  further  north  or  further  south  than  Beit  Jibrin.*  In  like
manner  the  ascertained  distances  of  Jedna  and  Nezib  show,
that  it  could  have  lain  neither  further  east  nor  further  west  than
the  same  place.  Further,  we  bad  now  traversed  the  country  by
five  different  routes  (and  later  by  a  sixth)  on  the  north,  west,
south,  and  east  of  Beit  Jibrin,  anxiously  searcliing  out  every
trace  of  former  sites  ;  and  bad  found  nothing,  which  with  tbe
slightest  degree  of  probability  could  be- tortured  into  the  site  of
Eleutberopolis.  Indeed,  in  no  other  position  do  all  these  dis-
tances from  various  known  points  meet  at  all  ;  wliile  in  Beit
Jibrin  they  come  together  of  themselves,  and  all  the  other  cir-
cumstances likewise  correspond.^  Further,  the  Itinerary  of  An-
toninus places  Eleutberopolis  at  twenty-four  Koman  mDes  from
Askelon,  which  nearly  coincides  with  the  true  distance  of  Beit
Jibrin.*

Such  is  the  amount  of  the  direct  and  positive  topographical
evidence  in  favour  of  the  identity  of  Eleutberopolis  and  Beit
Jibrin  ;  and  in  the  absence  of  collateral  historical  testimony,  I
can  hardly  conceive  of  a  case  more  strongly  supported.  Future
travellers,  by  more  exact  measurements,  may  add  to,  or  modify
in  some  degree,  this  evidence  ;  but  I  have  no  apprehension  that
the  main  result  will  ever  be  disturbed.

•  There  are  doubtless  also  corruptions
in  the  Onomasticon.  Thas,  according  to
Eusebius,  Nezib  was  nine  miles  from  Eleu-
theropolis,  while  Jerome  gives  it  at  seven,
which  appears  to  be  correct. — In  respect  to
Jedna  the  specification  of  six  miles  rests
on  the  authority  of  Eusebius ;  Jerome's  ar-
ticle reads  as  follows :  "  Jedna,  in  deserto
ab  Eleutheropoli  lapide  pergentibns  Gttie-
bron."  Here  "lapide"  is  without  any  ad-
junct, and  tbe  word  "  deserto "  should
doubtless  be  read  "  sexto,"

»  Pages  22,  27.

'  Thus  if  the  site  of  Eleutberopolis  were
to  be  assumed  at  Kudna,  then  Socoh  be-
comes less  than  six,  and  Jedna  more  than
nine  miles  distant ;  the  latter  besides  not
then  being  on  any  direct  road  to  Hebron.
So  too  of  any  other  position.

*  See  above  p.  27  sq.  Antonin.  Itin.  ed.
Wess.  p.  200.  Roland  Pal.  p.  420.  The
same  Itinerary  sets  Eleutberopolis  at  xx
Roman  miles  from  Jerusalem,  which  should
probably  read  xxx  ;  an  x  having  been  lost.
This  would  correspond  well  with  the  actual
distance.

ii.  406-408

60

FBOM  GAZA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  XL

Let  MS  look  now  at  the  notices  of  Eleutheropolis  which  have
come  down  to  us  in  ancient  writers,  and  compare  them  with
those  of  Betogabra.  Not  indeed  in  the  hope  of  thus  decidedly
tracing  the  identity  of  the  two  ;  for  the  slight  link  wliich  might
connect  them  in  the  chain  of  historical  evidence, — a  single  lihe
upon  the  page  of  history, — was  unfortunately  omitted  or  had
since  been  lost  ;  but  in  order  to  see  whether  there  is  any  thing
which  militates  against  this  identity  ;  and  if  not,  to  see  further,
whether  this  very  silence  and  the  attendant  circumstances  do  not
tend  indirectly  to  confirm  the  same  hypothesis.

The  earliest  mention  of  Betogabra,  as  we  have  seen,  is  by
Ptolemy  in  the  beginning  of  the  second  century  ;  and  again  in
the  Peutinger  Tables,  probably  in  the  reign  of  Alexander  Sev-
erus,  about  A.  D.  230.'  Whether  the  name  Eleutheropolis
already  existed  in  the  days  of  Ptolemy  we  do  not  know  ;  but
before  the  construction  of  the  Tables,  this  name  is  found  upon
coins  of  the  city  inscribed  to  Julia  Domna,  the  wife  of  Sep-
timius  Severus,  and  dated  in  the  eighth  and  ninth  years  of  the
reign  of  that  emperor,  corresponding  to  A.  D.  202  and  203.
The  emperor  had  been  in  Palestine  about  that  time  (A.  D.  202),
and  had  conferred  privileges  and  immunities  on  various  cities.'
Among  them  Eleutheropolis  appears  to  have  shared  his  favour,
and  thus  testified  its  gratitude.  Another  coin  of  the  same  city,
struck  in  honour  of  Caracalla,  the  next  emperor,  is  also  extant.^

The  earliest  writer  who  mentions  Eleutheropolis,  is  Eusebius
in  his  Onomasticon  about  A.  D.  330  or  later,  followed  by  Je-
rome near  the  close  of  the  same  century.  In  their  day  it  was
an  episcopal  city  of  importance  ;  and  was  so  well  known,  that
they  assumed  it  as  the  central  point  in  southern  Palestine,  from
which  to  determine  the  position  of  more  than  twenty  other
places.  The  renown  and  the  very  name  of  the  greater  central
city  have  long  since  passed  away  ;  whde  many  of  these  minor
places  still  remain,  and  have  afibrded,  in  their  turn,  to  strangers
from  a  new  world,  the  means  of  determining  the  site  and  re-
establishing the  claims  of  the  ancient  metropolis.

In  that  age  this  city  was  indeed  the  metropolis  of  the  adja-
cent country,  which  is  frequently  spoken  of  as  the  region  of

"  Ptolemsens  4.  16,  Jndaea.  Reland  Pa*  the  able  essay  of  the  Abb6  Belley,  "  Snr  les

laest.  pp.  461,  421.  Medailles  des  villes  de  Diospolis  et  d'Eleu-

'  Spartian.  in  Severe,  cap.  1 6,  17.    Bel-  theropolis,"  A.  D.  17.54,  in  Memoires  de

ley  p.  431.    See  the  next  note.  VAcadcniie  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles-Let-

*  See  a  description  of  these  three  coins,  tres,   Tom.  XX\7.  p.  429  sq. — On  the

(one  of  which  is  in  the  collection  of  Sir  reverse  of  these  coins  the  city  styles  itself

Hans  Soane,)  in  Mionnet  Me6pous  yap  iToKvav^pwrrovs  ir<(Afij  of  William  of  Tyre ;  Gesta  Dei  per  P'ran-

Tipilixaxrav  ■  Koi  yap'  Z\(vpdep6Tro\ty  iravT^-  cos  p.  1014. — A  comparison  of  this  last

Xoii  ad  aoiKT\rov  idj}Kay,  Tracav  fKirop^i,-  I.atin  Notitia  with  the  Greek  one  of  Nilus

(rai/T(S  •  aWa  Ka\ ' hvKakwva  ical  Ya^av  jcal  (Reland  p.  220)  shows  that  in  the  seventh

'S,ap((palav  xal  irfpas  irSKfii  Sfivus  ('i\Hv-  place  of  each,  the  Greek  has  JiUutheropo-

aavTo.    "Depopulati  sunt  frequentissiraas  /js,  and  the  Latin  Beit  Gcrbcin.   This  af-

urbes  nonpaucas;  Eleutheropolini,  ubductis  fords  a  strong;  corroborative  testimony  to

in  captivitatem  universis,  dcsertam  fcccre.  the  identity  of  the  two ;  but  is  not  of  itself

Ascalonem,  Gazam,  et  Sariphosam,  aliusque  decisive.    See  Raumer's  Pal.  ed.  3,  p.  168^

civitates,  violenter  diripueraut."    So  Ste-  Biblioth.  Sao.  1844,  p.  218,  219,

ii.  411,  412

Mat  23.]

ELEUTHEROPOLIS.

63

the  eighth  century,  before  the  destruction  of  the  city.  At  any
rate,  the  crusaders  found  the  place  in  ruins  ;  and  if  not  wholly
deserted,  yet  at  least  it  had  long  ceased  to  be  an  episcopal  see.
They  rebuilt  the  fortress  ;  and  its  subsequent  history  I  have
already  recounted.'  At  that  time  the  name  and  position  of
Eleutheropohs  were  so  thoroughly  forgotten,  that  Cedrenus,  in
the  last  half  of  the  eleventh  century,  held  it  to  have  been  the
same  with  Hebron.*

On  comj)aring  the  preceding  notices,  it  is  to  be  observed,
that,  with  one  apparent  exception  hereafter  to  be  considered,  all
the  writers  who  mention  Betogabra,  make  no  allusion  to  Eleu-
theropolis  ;  whUe  all  those  who  so  often  speak  of  the  latter,  are
silent  as  to  Betogabra.  Indeed,  the  latter  name  is  found  only
quite  early  in  Ptolemy  and  the  Peutinger  Tables,  or  again  quite
late  in  the  two  Latin  Notitise.  The  Greek  name,  as  appears
from  the  coins,  had  been  adopted  before  A.  D.  202  ;  but  the
subsequent  mention  of  Betogabra  in  the  Tables,  shows  that  this
more  ancient  appellation  was  still  generally  current.  In  the
fourth  century,  when  Constantine  had  adorned  Jerusalem  with
splendid  churches,  and  Palestine  became  the  abode  of  thousands
of  foreign  monks  and  ecclesiastics,  all  using  the  Grreek  language,
it  was  natural  that  the  Greek  name  of  this  episcopal  city  should
obtain  the  ascendency.  Accordingly  we  hear  no  more  of  Beto-
gabra until  this  ecclesiastical  authority  had  been  crushed  by  the
Muhammedan  conquest,  and  the  ancient  name  found  a  more
ready  utterance  upon  the  lips  of  a  people  speaking  a  kindred
tongue.    The  already  suggested,  is  entirely  parallel  to

those  of  Diospolis,  Nicopolis,  and  jElia  or  Jerusalem  itself.

The  exception  above  aUuded  to,  where  the  names  of  Beto-
gabra and  Eleutheropolis  appear  to  be  once  mentioned  by  the
same  writer,  is  the  expression  "  Betogabra  of  Eleutheropolis,"  to
which  reference  has  already  been  made.^  Tliis  expression,  in
view  of  the  evidence  which  has  since  come  to  hght,  can  only  be
regarded  ^s  originally  a  gloss,  transferred  afterwards  from  the
margin  into  the  text.  In  this  way,  the  expression  wliich  at
first  probably  meant  nothing  more  than  "  Betogabra  or  Eleu-
theropolis," assumed  its  present  form  "  Betogabra  of  Eleuthero-
polis." The  examples  of  various  readings  arising  from  like
glosses  in  the  manuscripts  of  the  New  Testament  and  other  an-
cient writings,  are  too  numerous  and  well  known,  to  admit  a
question  as  to  the  propriety  of  applying  the  same  principle  for
the  solution  of  this  case  ;  and  further,  this  gloss  appears  to  be

'  Pages  27,  28.  >  'Ev  Biiboyavpy  rr/s  'E\€vdepoTr6\eais.

'  Geo.  Cedreni  Historiar.  Compend.  See  p.  28,  above.  The  Latin  version  of
Pari-;  ir>47,  Tom.  I.  p.  33,  ^ajTrerai  Hervetus  has  "Betagabre  Exeutheropolis;"
(t)  2op  ja)  iy  Xffipwv,  Tjris  vvy  'EKeu^epSvo-  Acta  Sanctor.  Jan.  Tom.  IL  p.  614,
\ts  KaKurai.  Note  b.

ii.  412-417

i54  FROM  GAZA  TO  HEBRON.  [Sec.  ^.

the  only  shadow  of  historical  testimony,  which  might  tend  to
excite  a  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  Eleutheropolis  with  the
present  Beit  Jibrin.'

Another  ancient  tradition  connects  itself  also,  in  some  de-
gree, with  the  position  of  Eleutheropolis  ;  I  mean  that  respect-
ing the  miraculous  fountain,  springing  out  of  the  jaw-bone  of
an  ass  with  which  Samson  smote  the  Philistines.*  Josephus,  in
relating  the  same  event,  says  the  fountain  sprang  out  of  a  rock,
and  the  place  in  his  day  still  bore  the  name  of  the  "  Jaw-bone  ; "
though  it  may  be  doubtful  whether  he  does  anything  more  than
merely  copy  the  words  of  Scripture.'  All  this  has  no  connection
with  Eleutheropolis.  Nor  is  the  language  of  Jerome  much  more
definite,  who  in  tracing  the  journey  of  Paula  from  Jerusalem  or
Bethlehem  to  Egypt,  makes  her  pass  by  way  of  Socoh  to  the  foun-
tain of  Samson  ;  around  which  he  then  loosely  mentions  the  Ho-
rites  and  Gittites,  and  the  names  of  several  other  cities.^  By
the  Horites  he  probably  meant  Eleutheropohs,^  and  the  tradition
appears  to  have  been  current  in  his  day,  that  this  fountain  of
Samson  was  in  that  region.  Somewhat  more  definite  is  the  tes-
timony of  Antoninus  Martyr,  not  long  before  the  Muhammedan
conquest ;  in  travelling  from  Jerusalem  to  Askelon  and  Gaza,
he  came  to  Eleutheropolis,  where  the  fountain  of  Samson  was
stni  pointed  out.*  All  this  however  only  shows  that  the  foun-
tain was  held  to  be  in  the  vicinity  of  that  city.

No  further  mention  of  this  fountain  occurs  before  the  age
of  the  crusades  ;  nor  do  any  of  the  Frank  or  Arabian  historians
of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  appear  ever  to  have
heard  of  the  fountain  of  Samson,  or  of  Eleutheropolis.  Yet  a
wandering  tradition  respecting  both  the  fountain  and  city,  would
seem  to  have  maintained  itself  in  the  Greek  church  even  out  of
Palestine  ;  for  in  the  twelfth  century  the  historian  Glycas  re-
lates, that  Samson's  fountain  was  to  be  seen  in  his  day  in  the
suburbs  of  Eleutheropolis.  But  the  value  of  this  tradition  is
shown  by  the  fact,  that  a  century  earlier,  Cedrenus  had  declared

'  For  the  "  vicus  Betagabseoram  "  which
has  been  supposed  to  lie  the  same  with
Betog.ibra,  see  Note  XXXIV,  at  the  end
of  the  volume.

»  Judg.  15,  18.  19.

'  Antiq.  5.  8.  9,  6  Qths  mrf^v  Kari.  ri-
vos  trerpas  ivlricriv  r/Suau  Jtol  iroAA^v  •  Sbfv

ixixpi  Tov  Sfvpo  rovro  Ktytrai.  So  the
Heb.  Tib,  Lehi,  i.  q.  Jaw-bone,  Judg.  15,
19.

*     Transibo  ad  iEgyptum ;  et  in  So-
choth  atque  apnd  fontem  Samson,  quenj
de  molarl  maxillae  dente  produxit,  subsis-
tam  parumper ;  et  arentia  ora  coUuam,  ut
ii.  417,  418

refocillatus  videam  Morasthira,  sepulchrnm
quondam  Micliasa!  Prophetae,  nunc  Eccle-
siam.  Et  ex  latere  derelinquam  Chorreos,
et  Gettheos,  Maresa,  Idumajam,  et  La-
chis,"  etc.  Hieron.  Ep.  8(>,  Epitaph.  Paulse,
0pp.  Tom.  IV.  iL  p.  677.  ed.  Mart.

'  He  elsewhere  speaks  of  the  Horites  as
inhabiting  Eleutheropolis.  Comm.  in  Obad.
vs.  1.    Sec  pp.  68,  69,  below.

•  Antoniiii  MartjT.  Itin.  30,  32,  "  Veni-
mus  in  civitatem  quae  dicitur  Eliotropolis
(al.  Heliopolis)  in  loco  nbi  Sampson,  etc. —
Qui  fons  usque  in  hodiernum  dinem  loca
ilia  irrigat ;  nam  in  loco  nbi  surgit  fui-
mus."

Mat  23.]

ELEUTHZBOPOLIS.

65

Eleutlieropolis  to  be  the  same  vrith  Hebron.*  From  the  same
legendary  source  apparently,  Marinus  Sanutus  in  the  fourteenth
century  derived  a  notice  of  the  same  fountain,  but  not  of  the
city.  He  makes  a  water  ran  from  Bethsur  first  west  and  then
south ;  where,  after  being  joined  by  a  stream  from  the  north
from  the  fountain  of  the  Jaw-bone,  it  flows  west  to  the  sea  near
Askelon.-  Now  the  Bethsur  of  that  day  was  at  the  present
fountain  of  St.  Philip  in  Wady  el-Werd  which  indeed  flows
west  to  the  great  "Wady  es-Surar.  This  again  rans  in  a  south-
westerly direction  to  the  plain  ;  entering  the  sea,  however,  not  at
Askelon,  but  near  Yebna.  Hence  whatever  position  be  assigned
to  the  foimtain  on  the  testimony  of  Sanutus,  it  lying  north  of
Wady  es-Surar,  can  never  have  been  less  than  ten  Eoman  miles
distant  from  EleutheropoHs.

Thus  the  testimony  to  the  existence  of  Samson's  fountain
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Eleutheropolis,  which  at  first  sight
seemed  so  explicit,  becomes  on  a  nearer  view  quite  indefinite.
Of  this  however  we  were  not  aware  at  the  time,  and  therefore
inquired  the  more  diligently  after  the  fountains  throughout  the
whole  region,  in  the  hope  of  being  thus  able  to  discover  a  trace
of  Eleutheropolis.  But  we  could  neither  find,  nor  hear  of,  a
single  Kving  spring  or  ranning  brook  throughout  the  district  in
which  that  city  must  have  lain.  The  nearest  and  only  approach
to  it,  was  in  the  large  well  called  Um  Judei'a,  half  way  between
Beit  Jibrin  and  the  ruined  church  of  Santa  Hanneh,  which,  ac-
cording to  the  tradition  of  the  inhabitants,  was  once  a  running
fountain.*  This  testimony  is  at  least  as  definite  and  good,  as
that  on  which  rests  the  proximity  of  the  ancient  foiintain  to
Eleutheropolis  ;  and  furnishes,  so  far  as  it  goes,  another  proof
of  the  identity  of  that  city  with  Beit  Jibrin.

I  have  now  done  with  Eleutheropolis ;  and  if  the  reader  (as  I
fear)  shall  regard  the  investigation  as  prolix  and  tedious,  I  beg
him  to  bear  in  mind,  that  the  subject  is  one  of  some  historical
importance,  and  has  never  before  been  discussed  by  any  one  who
had  visited  the  spot.

Such  was  the  evidence  on  the  strength  of  which  I  formerly
ventured  to  assume  the  identity  of  Eleutheropolis  with  Beit
Jibrin  ;  a  conclusion  as  to  which  I  have  yet  to  learn,  that  any
scholar  has  ever  taken  exception.  Yet  there  was  still  wanting
some  decisive  historical  testimony,  to  show  that  the  two  names

'  MicL  Glycse  Annales,  Par.  1660,  p.  ei  jnngitnx  fom  invoeantit  de  maxilla,  \e-

164,  71  toioiJtt)  rtfY^  Mnoj  •ia  is  iere  i.  q.  monumentum

•  Onomast.  art.  Arboch  ('ApKti).    The  sepulchrum ;  see  Wesseling's  note  on  the

church  described  by  Jerome  in  the  same  passage.

article,  was  at  the  Terebinth ;  Eusebius       '  Antoniui  Mart.  Itin.  30.

does  not  mention  it.

Vol.  II.— 7*  ii.  436  437

78  HEBRON.  [Sec.  XL

stadium  from  ancient  Hebron  towards  the  east,  and  surrounded
by  a  low  wall. '  In  the  latter  half  of  the  eighth  century,  St.  Wil-
libald  passed  here  on  his  way  from  Gaza  to  J erusalem,  and  men-
tions the  sepulchres  of  the  patriarchs  at  a  place  called  the
"  Castle  of  Aframia."*  In  this  corrupt  reading  we  may  recog-
nise the  first  trace  of  the  "  Castle  of  St.  Abraham,"  the  name
by  which  Hebron  was  generally  known  in  the  age  of  the  cru-
sades, and  in  allusion  to  which  it  is  still  called  among  the  Arabs
el-Khulil.  In  like  manner  Sfewulf,  about  A.  D.  1103,  speaks
of  the  monuments  of  the  patriarchs  as  surrounded  by  a  strong
castle.^

Thus  far  we  find  no  mention  either  of  a  church  or  mosk
within  the  enclosure  ;  unless  it  be  the  above  notice  of  a  Basi-
lica," by  Antoninus  Martyr,  before  the  Muhammedan  conquest.
This  seems  however  merely  to  refer  to  the  exterior  structure  ;
for  certainly  Christians  and  J ews  would  not  be  found  occupying
a  church  together.  Ali  Bey  indeed  describes  the  present  mosk
as  having  formerly  been  a  Greek  church  ;  remarking  at  the
same  time,  that  the  body  of  it  is  Gothic*  But  here  is  an  in-
consistency ;  no  Greek  church  has  pointed  arches,  which  were
first  introduced  by  the  Saracens  and  imitated  by  the  Latins.
Hence,  if  the  latter  assertion  of  AK  Bey  be  correct,  the  edifice
may  not  improbably  have  been  built  as  a  church  by  the  Lat-
ins, when  they  erected  Hebron  into  a  bishopric  in  A.  D.  1167.'
The  historians  of  that  age  do  not  indeed  mention  the  building
of  a  church  on  that  occasion  ;  but  neither  do  they  speak  of  the
Latin  church  at  Neby  Samwil,  as  to  which  however  there  can
be  no  question.  The  Arabian  historian  of  J  erusalem  and  He-
bron, describes  the  mosk  as  having  a  large  dome  between  two
smaller  ones  towards  the  east  and  west  ;  and  speaks  of  a  pulpit
with  carved  work  in  wood,  bearing  date  A.  H.  484  (A.  D.  1091)  ;
which  however  was  first  brought  hither  by  Saladin  after  the
capture  of  Askelon  in  A.  D.  1187.'

Thus  it  appears  to  me,  we  may  rest  with  confidence  in  the
view,  that  the  remarkable  external  structure  of  the  Haram  is

■  "Horum  locus  Sepulchrorum  quadrato  '  Will.  Tyr.  20.  3.  Le  Qnien  Or.  Christ,
hnmili  i-ircumvenitur  muro ; "  Adamnanus  III.  p.  1270.  William  of  Tyre  says  ex-
ex  Arcullo  2.  10.  The  epithet  kumili  was  pressly,  there  had  never  been  a  Greek  bi-
probably  added  from  some  misapprchen-  shop  at  Hebron,  but  only  a  prior.  Mejr
dion  on  the  part  of  Adamnanus  himself  ed-Din  about  A.  D.  1496  refers  tlie  mosk

'  "  Et  inde  tunc  ibat  ad  castellum  Afra-  to  the  times  of  the  Greeks  ;  by  whom

mia ;  ibi  rcquiescunt  tres  patriarchae,"etc.  he  most  probably  means  the  crusaders.

Hodccpor.  21.  p.  377.  lb.  13.  p.  387.  ed.  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.  p.  375.    Benjamin  of

Mabillon.  Tudela,  who  was  here  after  A.  D.  1160,

'  "  Hebron — in   cujus  orientali  parte  says  the  tombs  had  been  built  up  by  the

monuiiienta  sanctorum  patriarcharum  an-  Christians  ;  Itin.  p.  76  sq.

tiquitus  facta  castello  fortissimo  circumcin-  '  Mejr.  ed-Din  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.

guntur."    S^wulf  Peregrinat.  p.  269.  p.  376.

*  Travels  II.  p.  232.

ii.  437-439

Mat  24  ]

THE  CASTLE.  WATER-SKINS.

79

indeed  the  work  of  Jewish  hands,  erected  long  before  the  destruc-
tion of  the  nation,  around  the  sepulchre  of  their  revered  progen-
itors, "  the  Friend  of  God"  and  his  descendants.'  The  cave  of
Machpelah  is  described  in  Scripture  as  at  "  the  end  of  the  field,"
overagainst  Mamre,  the  same  as  Hebron  ;^  and  all  the  later
writers  above  quoted,  speak  of  the  sepulchres  of  the  patriarchs
as  at  or  in  Hebron,  not  near  it.  Here  then  the  "  Father  of
the  faithful,"  as  also  Isaac  and  Jacob,  rested  from  their  wan-
derings 1

Just  at  the  left  of  the  principal  entrance  of  the  Haram,  is  a
small  hole  in  the  massive  wall,  through  which  the  Jews  are  per-
mitted at  certain  times  to  look  into  the  interior.  Here  several
Jewish  women  were  reading  prayers  and  waiUng  ;  although  the
hole  was  now  closed  by  a  shutter  from  within.  I  spoke  to  some
of  them  in  German  ;  but  they  were  all  from  Spain,  and  we  could
hold  no  communication.

A  little  north  of  the  Haram,  on  the  main  street  leading  to
it,  is  a  castle  or  citadel,  not  high,  but  with  massive  walls  of  great
Btrength  ;  a  part  of  which  had  been  thrown  down  and  were  now
lying  in  ruins.  This  was  said  to  have  been  occasioned  by  an
earthquake.  It  may  perhaps  with  more  probability  be  referred  to
the  troops  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  in  1834  ;  since  an  earthquake
powerful  enough  to  overturn  walls  so  massive,  would  hardly  have
failed  to  leave  behind  other  traces  of  its  devastations. — Near  by
the  Haram,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  same  street,  the  gateway
of  a  Khan,  or  some  building  cf  the  kind,  bears  an  inscrip-
tion with  the  date  of  A.  H.  679  (A.  D.  1280),  recording  that  it
was  erected  by  order  of  the  Egyptian  Sultan  Seif  ed-Din.

In  passing  along  the  skirts  of  the  town  on  the  hill  side  north
of  the  Haram,  we  came  upon  a  large  manufactory  of  water-skins,
occupying  an  extensive  yard  with  several  tanner's  vats.  These
are  merely  the  skins  of  goats  stripped  off  whole,  except  at  the
neck  ;  the  holes  at  the  legs  and  taU  being  sewed  up.  They  are
first  stuffed  out  full  and  strained  by  driving  in  small  billets  and
chips  of  oak  wood  ;  and  are  then  fiUed  with  a  strong  infusion  of
oak  bark  for  a  certain  time,  until  the  hair  becomes  fixed  and  the
skin  sufficiently  tanned.  This  constitutes  the  whole  process.
Not  less  than  fifteen  hundred  skins  were  \jmg  thus  stuffed,  in
rows  about  the  yard.  They  are  sold  at  different  prices,  from  fif-
teen up  to  forty  piastres.  This  establishment  is  private  pro-
perty.

The  bazar  is  on  a  street  not  far  north  of  the  Haram.  We
were  struck  with  the  abundance  and  large  size  of  the  raisins ;
finer  indeed  than  we  saw  anywhere  else  in  the  east ;  and  also
with  the  excellence  and  cheapness  of  the  fruits  in  general.  The

>  James  2,  23.

•  Gen.  23,  9.  17.  19.    Comp.  36,  27.

u.  439  440

80

HEBRON.

[Sec.  XI.

large  delicious  oranges  of  Yafa  were  selling  here  eight  or  ten  for
a  single  piastre.  The  butchers'  stalls  attracted  our  notice  by
the  abundance  of  mutton  hung  out  before  them  ;  the  fatness
and  apparent  delicacy  of  which  would  do  credit  to  an  English
farmer.  In  other  respects,  the  bazars  were  not  well  supplied  ;
and  portions  of  them  stood  empty  and  desolate  in  consequence
(it  was  paid)  of  the  decay  of  trade,  after  the  storming  of  the  town
in  1834.

In  the  dark  narrow  lanes  near  the  north  end  of  the  main
quarter,  are  the  manufactories  of  glass  for  which  Hebron  has
long  been  celebrated.'  We  looked  in  upon  some  of  these,  and
found  the  processes  in  general  much  the  same  as  elsewhere,
though  more  rude.  The  aspect  of  these  estabhshments  reminded
me  much  of  Pittsburg  ;  though  they  are  on  a  far  inferior  scale.
The  articles  manufactured  consist  almost  solely  of  small  glass
lamps,  many  of  which  are  exported  to  Egypt  ;  and  rings  of  col-
oured glass,  worn  by.  females  on  the  arms.  We  had  seen  great
quantities  of  these  for  sale  in  Jerusalem  ;  and  several  large
crates  of  rings  and  lamps  were  now  lying  in  the  streets,  ready  for
loading  on  camels  for  transportation.

Eeturning  to  our  tent,  we  found  there  several  visitors  from
Jerusalem.  From  them  we  learned,  that  on  the  day  of  our  de-
parture proclamation  had  been  made  through  the  streets,  that
the  city  would  be  shut  up  on  the  following  day  ;  which  was  done
accordingly.  They  and  many  others  had  left  their  homes  ;  and
were  now  wandering  about  in  the  neighbouring  towns  and  vil-
lages.

About  11  o'clock,  we  went  out  to  pay  our  respects  to  Elias
and  his  family  under  the  great  oak.  Just  as  we  left  the  town,
two  camels  escorted  by  a  few  soldiers  came  in  from  DAra,
loaded  with  the  miserable  spoils  in  the  shape  of  old  and  broken
fire  arms,  extorted  from  the  people  of  that  place  by  the  three
governors.*  Our  road  was  the  same  by  which  we  had  arrived
yesterday,  lying  between  two  walls,  and  leading  through  rich
fields  and  vineyards.  The  general  character  of  these,  as  well  as
the  variety  and  abundance  of  other  fruits  which  grow  around
Hebron,  such  as  figs,  pomegranates,  apricots,  quinces,  and  the
like,  has  already  been  alluded  to,  in  connection  with  our  former
visit.'  We  could  now  observe  more  nearly  the  peculiar  manner
of  training  the  vines.  They  are  planted  singly  in  rows,  eight  or
ten  feet  apart  in  each  direction.  The  stock  is  suffered  to  grow
up  large  to  the  height  of  six  or  eight  feet,  and  is  then  fastened

■  These  are  mentioned  in  tbe  1.5th  cen-       '  See  above,  p.  57.
tury  as  already  flourishing.   Guni])ent)erg's       '  See  thr  account  of  our  first  visit  to

Journal,  A.  D.  1449,  Reissb.  p.  44.').    Fe-  Hebron,  Vol.  I.  p.  214.
lix  Fabri  in  A.  D.  1483,  ibid.  p.  288.

ii.  440-442

May  24.]

TIS'EYARDS.

THE  OAK.

81

in  a  sloping  position  to  a  strong  stake,  and  the  shoots  suffered  to
grow  and  extend  from  one  plant  to  another,  forming  a  hne  of
festoons.  Sometimes  two  rows  are  made  to  slant  towards  each
other,  and  thus  form  hy  their  shoots  a  sort  of  arch.  These
shoots  are  pruned  away  in  autunm.

The  vineyards  belonging  to  the  city  are  very  extensive,
reaching  almost  to  Teffiih,  and  also  for  some  distance  towards
Dhoheriyeh,  and  covering  the  sides  of  nearly  all  the  hills.  The
lodges  of  stone,  which  serve  for  the  watchmen,  and  also  in  part
for  the  families  of  Hebron  during  the  ^-intage,  have  been  before
mentioned.'  The  vintage  is  a  season  of  hilarity  and  rejoicing
to  all ;  the  town  is  then  deserted,  and  the  people  Kve  among  the
vineyards  in  the  lodges  and  in  tents.  The  produce  of  these
vineyards  is  celebrated  throughout  Palestine.  No  wine  however
nor  'Arak  is  made  from  them,  except  by  the  Jews  ;  and  this
not  in  great  quantity.  The  wine  is  good.  The  finest  grapes  are
dried  as  raisins  ;  and  the  rest  being  trodden  and  pressed,  the
juice  is  boUed  down  to  a  syrup,  which  under  the  name  of  Dibs^
is  much  used  by  all  classes  wherever  vineyards  are  found,  as  a
condiment  with  their  food.  It  resembles  thin  molasses  ;  but  is
more  pleasant  to  the  taste.

The  venerable  oak  (Sindian)  to  which  we  now  came,  is  a
splendid  tree  ;  we  hardly  saw  another  like  it  in  all  Palestine,
certainly  not  on  this  side  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon.  Indeed
large  trees  are  very  rare  in  this  quarter  of  the  country.  The
trunk  of  this  tree  measures  twenty-two  and  a  half  feet  around
the  lower  part.  It  separates  almost  immediately  into  three
large  boughs  or  trunks  ;  and  one  of  these  again,  higher  up,  into
two.  The  branches  extend  from  the  trunk  in  one  direction  forty-
nine  feet  ;  their  whole  diameter  in  the  same  direction  being
eighty-nine  feet,  and  in  the  other  at  right  angles  eighty-three
and  a  half  feet.  The  tree  is  in  a  thrifty  state,  and  the  trunk
sound.  It  stands  alone  in  the  midst  of  a  field  ;  the  ground  be-
neath is  covered  with  grass  and  clean  ;  there  is  a  well  with  water
near  by  ;  so  that  a  more  beautiful  spot  for  recreation  cotild  hard-
ly be  found.

I  am  not  sure  whether  this  is  the  tree  which  Sir  John  Maunde-
ville  saw  near  Hebron,  of  which  he  relates  that  it  was  green  in
Abraham's  day,  but  dried  up  at  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  cruci-
fixion, like  aU  the  other  trees  then  in  the  world.'  It  seems  to
be  mentioned  by  Belon  in  the  sixteenth  century,  as  a  terebinth  ;
and  is  described  as  such  by  writers  in  the  following  century.^

•  ToL  I.  p.  213.

*  This  L5  the  Hebrew  word  signi-
fying '  honev,'  and  also  '  svrnp  of  grapes.'

'  Travels  p.  68.  Lond."  1839.

*  Belon  Observat  Paris  1.588,  p.  32-L
Qnaresmins  Elncidat.  Terrse  Sanct.  IL  p.
783.  Jlorone  L  p.  306.  Von  Troilo  Ori-
ent. Kcisebeschr.  p.  325.  Dresd.  1676.

iL  -Wi  443

82

HEBRON.

[Sec.  XI.

But  tMs  is  not  a  terebinth  (Butm) ;  nor  is  there  any  large  tree  of
that  species  in  the  vicinity  of  Hebron.  Least  of  all  can  this  be
either  the  tree  of  Abraham  or  its  successor  ;  for  his  terebinth
probably  stood  more  towards  Jerusalem,  and  had  already  disap-
peared in  the  days  of  J erome. '

Here  we  found  EHas  and  his  family  spending  the  day,  and
enjoying  themselves  beneath  the  wide  spreading  shade  of  the
noble  tree.  The  party  consisted  of  himself,  his  wife,  her  sister  a
young  woman  about  eighteen,  their  little  son  four  or  five  years
old,  a  young  man,  one  of  the  secretaries  of  the  governor  of
Jerusalem,  and  two  servants.  They  had  brought  with  them  a
rope,  and  suspended  it  as  a  swing  from  the  branches  of  the  tree.
The  two  men  were  lounging  at  their  ease  upon  carpets,  smoking
and  occasionally  tasting  'Arak,  which  was  presented  in  a  small
shallow  bowl.  The  young  guest  was  a  man  of  more  intelligence
and  good  sense  than  the  host.  A  fire  was  kindled  not  far  ofi",
at  which  the  mistress  and  servants  seemed  to  be  engaged  in
cooking  ;  while  the  sister  and  child  were  playing  and  swinging.
We  took  our  seats  upon  the  carpets  ;  pipes  were  offered  and
'Arak  presented  and  tasted  freely  by  the  others  ;  coffee  was  not
brought.  The  guest  joined  in  the  sports  of  the  sister  and  child  ;
pursuing  each  other,  swinging,  laughing,  and  romping.

After  about  an  hour  a  servant  came  from  the  town,  bringing
a  warm  breakfast  in  a  tray  upon  his  head,  thickly  covered  over
with  large  thin  sheets  of  the  common  bread  of  the  country.
Soon  after  came  the  wife's  mother,  who  had  remained  at  home  to
prepare  the  food.  She  was  mounted  on  a  fine  gray  mare  ;
which,  while  yet  at  some  distance,  took  a  start  and  came  up  the
field  and  steep  banks  at  full  speed  ;  the  lady  sitting  on  both
sides,  and  exhibiting  no  mean  skill  in  eastern  horsemanship.
She  was  an  active  lively  elderly  woman,  and  seemed  to  be  the
life  and  soul  of  the  family.  We  joined  the  men  in  breakfasting
by  ourselves  ;  after  we  had  finished,  the  women  sat  down  apart
at  some  distance.  Such  is  the  oriental  custom,  even  among
Christians.  These  females,  and  especially  the  elder,  were  not
wanting  in  intelligence,  though  they  had  never  been  taught  to
read.  They  wore  no  veils,  and  exliibited  no  particular  shyness
before  strangers.  They  were  however  from  Damascus  ;  where
the  Christian  females  are  understood  to  enjoy  more  freedom,  than
in  many  other  parts  of  the  east. — We  spent  here  a  couple  of
hours  ;  and  then  returned  to  our  tent.

In  the  course  of  the  afternoon,  I  went  out  upon  the  eastern
hills,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  view  of  the  country  around,  and
thus  being  able  to  connect  Hebron  with  some  of  the  points  wo
bad  fonncrly  visited  or  seen.    But  the  prospect  towards  the

'  Soe  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  216.    Onomast  arts.  Drys,  Arboch,
ii  443-445

Mat  25.]

BREAKFAST.     THE  JEWS.

83

east  and  north  was  limited  by  higher  hills  near  at  hand,  so  that
I  was  compelled  to  return  disappointed  in  my  hope.  The  sum-
mit of  this  ridge  is  crowned  with  vineyards  ;  as  is  also  that  of
the  western  hiUs  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  valley.

Painfiil  as  was  the  delay  to  which  we  were  here  subjected,  we
yet  had  enough  to  occupy  our  time  in  writing  up  our  journals,
and  arranging  our  materials  and  plans  for  further  inquiries.  We
were  also  amused  with  the  proceedings  of  the  people  round
about  us.  The  fine  grassy  slope  on  which  we  were  encamped,
besides  the  cemetery  on  the  north,  was  occupied  towards  the
south  by  threshing-floors,  where  the  various  processes  of  thresh-
ing, or  rather  treading  out  the  grain,  were  continually  going  on.
The  wheat  harvest  here  in  the  mountains  had  not  yet  arrived  ;
but  they  were  threshing  barley,  'Adas  or  lentiles,  and  also
vetches,  called  by  the  Arabs  Kersenna,  which  are  raised  chiefly
for  camels.  The  various  parcels  had  apparently  lain  here  for
several  days  ;  the  people  would  come  with  their  cattle  and  work
for  two  or  three  hours,  and  then  go  away.  Some  had  three  ani-
mals, some  four  ;  and  once  I  saw  two  young  cattle  and  a  don-
key driven  round  together.  In  several  of  the  floors  they  were
now  winnowing  the  grain,  by  tossing  it  up  across  the  wind  with
a  fork.  Here  we  needed  no  guard  around  our  tent.  The  owners
of  the  crops  came  every  night  and  slept  upon  their  threshing-
floors  to  guard  them  ;  and  this  we  had  found  to  be  universal  in
all  the  region  of  Gaza.  We  were  in  the  midst  of  scenes  pre-
cisely like  those  in  the  book  of  Ruth  ;  where  Boaz  winnowed
barley  in  his  threshing-floor,  and  laid  himself  down  at  night  to
guard  the  heap  of  corn.^

Friday,  May  25th.  We  had  this  morning  some  ground  for
hope,  that  we  might  be  able  to  set  off  in  the  course  of  the  day.
This  hope  too  proved  vain  ;  though  it  encouraged  us  for  the  mo-
ment.

We  went  early  to  call  on  the  chief  Eabbi  of  the  Jews.
Finding  a  young  Jew  before  our  tent,  and  inquiring  of  him  the
way,  he  said  the  Eabbi  was  his  master,  and  went  with  us.  The
J ewish  dwellings  are  in  the  northwest  part  of  the  main  quarter
of  the  town.  We  were  received  at  the  entrance  by  a  Spanish
Jew  of  middle  age,  with  a  remarkable  bright  eye  and  good  coun-
tenance ;  and  ushered  by  him  through  a  long  series  of  passages,
into  a  small  but  very  neat  room,  with  a  divan  around  the  waUs,
and  the  windows  looking  out  upon  the  western  hills.  Every-
thing here  was  perfectly  clean  ;  the  walls  and  passages  white-
washed ;  and  the  whole  appearance  far  neater  than  anything  I  had
yet  seen  of  eastern  life.  The  old  Rabbi  soon  came  in,  blind  of  one
eye  and  having  a  long  white  beard.    My  companion  had  already

'  Ruth  3,  2-14.

ii.  445,  446

84

HEBRON.

[Sec.  XL

seen  him  here  in  1835.  He  was  a  subject  of  Austria,  from
Venice  ;  and  was  the  same  old  man,  for  whom  our  countryman
Mr  Stephens  had  procured  a  passport  and  protection  from  the
Austrian  consul  at  Beirut  in  1836.  He  now  seemed  sincerely-
grateful  for  this  favour,  and  rejoiced  to  hear  once  more  some
tidings  of  the  stranger  who  had  thus  been  his  benefactor.'  The
manner  of  the  two  men  was  very  kind,  without  being  ostenta-
tiously so.  Sherbet  and  coffee  were  brought ;  and  they  pressed
us  to  breakfast,  which  we  declined.

As  we  sat  conversing,  we  saw  the  cavalcade  of  the  three  gov-
ernors coming  in  from  Dura,  descending  the  western  hill  beyond
our  tent ;  in  all  about  twenty-five  persons,  mounted  on  beautiful
horses,  gaily  caparisoned.  It  was  said,  that  they  were  about  to
pass  on  to  Carmel  ;  but  they  stopped  for  the  day  in  Hebron.

We  saw  here  none  of  the  Jewish  women,  except  in  passing
the  open  doors  of  different  rooms  where  they  were  sitting  ;  they
greeted  us  kindly.  Those  whom  we  had  met  yesterday  at  the
Haram,  and  indeed  all  we  had  yet  seen  in  Palestine,  were  habited
in  white, — a  long  piece  of  white  stuff  like  a  veil  or  shawl  thrown
over  the  head,  drawn  together  under  the  chin,  and  hanging  down
to  the  feet.  Many  of  the  Arab  women  dress  in  the  same  manner
when  they  go  out ;  but  they  wear  a  face-veil  to  conceal  their
features,  which  the  Jewish  females  do  not.  The  appearance  of
the  latter  was  neat  and  prepossessing.  Indeed,  so  far  as  concerns
their  general  condition  of  thrift,  cleanliness,  and  welfare,  the
Jews  of  Hebron  seem  to  be  far  better  off,  than  their  brethren  in
Jerusalem  or  elsewhere  in  the  Holy  Land.

As  we  were  about'  to  take  leave,  the  two  Kabbis  of  their  own
accord  led  us  into  the  synagogue,  situated  under  the  same  roof.
It  is  a  poor,  but  neat  room,  furnished  with  benches  ;  in  it  was
now  a  school  of  six  or  eight  boys.  The  manuscripts  of  the  Old
Testament  are  kept  in  two  cupboards  or  presses  on  one  side.
Like  all  Hebrew  manuscripts,  they  are  written  upon  long  rolls
of  parchment,  at  each  end  of  which  a  rod  is  fastened,  so  that
they  may  be  rolled  backwards  or  forwards  as  a  person  reads  ;  the
columns  being  perpendicular  to  the  length  of  the  roU.  In  the
first  cupboard  were  six  or  eight  manuscripts  enclosed  in  cases
standing  upright.  The  rods  are  inserted  into  holes  in  the  top
and  bottom  of  the  case  ;  and  extend  up  through  the  top,  where
they  are  ornamented  with  large  silver  knobs  not  made  fast.
The  rolls  are  read  as  they  stand  in  the  cases,  without  being  taken
from  the  cupboard.  The  manuscript  is  thus  wound  off  from  one
rod  to  the  other  as  the  reader  advances  ;  the  rods  being  far
enough  apart  to  leave  a  column  imrollcd  between.  The  oth-
er cupboard  was  also  full  of  rolls  ;  some  of  them  in  cases  cov-

'  Incidents  of  Travel  in  Egypt,  etc.  IL  p.  167  eq.

ii.  446-448

Mat  26.]

THREE  GOVERNORS.

85

ered  over  with  silver  or  embroidery.  These  were  said  to  be  pres-
ents from  wealthy  Jews  in  Europe. — We  bade  adieu  to  these
kind  friends  with  feelings  of  respect ;  and  were  highly  gratified
by  our  visit.

We  now  repaired  to  the  top  of  the  western  hiU,  in  the  hope
of  obtaining  a  view  of  the  country  around.  In  this  we  were
more  successful  than  I  had  been  yesterday  upon  the  eastern  ridge  ;
and  from  the  watchtower  of  a  vineyard  some  distance  south  of
the  road  to  Dhoheriyeh,  a  prospect  opened  towards  the  east  and
south  and  west,  which  was  very  extensive  and  satisfactory.
Towards  the  north  and  northeast  we  could  see  little  or  nothing.
Before  us  Beni  Na'im  and  Yukin  were  visible  near  at  hand ;
while  in  the  distance  we  could  distinguish  Kerak  very  clearly.
Further  south  the  atmosphere  was  hazy  ;  or  we  might  perhaps
have  been  able  to  make  out  Mount  Hor.  Carmel  and  the  adja-
cent region  were  in  full  view.  We  could  also  mark  the  course
of  the  great  valley,  which  had  formerly  been  on  our  right  as  we
approached  Beni  Na'im,'  and  into  which  the  valley  of  Hebron
enters.  It  passes  along  southwest  on  the  north  of  Yutta  and  to
the  left  of  Dhoheriyeh,  towards  the  region  of  Beersheba,  where
it  apparently  forms  one  of  the  main  branches  of  Wady  es-Seba'.
Behind  us,  towards  the  west  and  southwest,  was  a  sea  of  rocky
hills  ;  on  one  of  which  we  could  distinjiuish  the  village  of  Dho-
heriyeh.  We  took  here  several  important  bearings,  which  are
given  in  the  note  below.*

The  presence  of  three  such  dignitaries  as  the  governors  of
Gaza,  Jerusalem,  and  Hebron,  could  not  but  naturally  occasion
some  stir  in  such  a  town  ;  and  accordingly  their  movements  and
actions  were  the  object  of  general  observation.  They  too  seemed
not  unwilling  to  make  an  impression  of  their  dignity  and  impor-
tance. At  the  mid-day  hour  of  prayer,  we  could  perceive  them
from  our  tent  proceeding,  not  to  the  Haram,  but  to  an  open  plat-
form adjacent  to  the  west  side  of  the  lower  pool,  near  which
they  lodged,  where  they  performed  their  devotions  in  public,  sur-
rounded by  a  crowd  of  idlers.  Although  we  were  not  in  general
much  disposed  to  seek  intercourse  -with  authorities,  yet  as  we
were  now  going  into  a  part  of  the  country  where  the  Egyptian
government  was  less  known  and  less  felt,  we  thought  it  best  to
lay  before  the  governor  of  Hebron  our  Firman  from  the  Pasha,
and  inform  him  of  our  purpose,  in  order  that  in  case  of  accident
he  might  not  throw  off  the  responsibility,  by  saying  we  had  gone

•  See  above, VoL  L  p.  489.  Yukin  S.  61°  E.    Kerak  S.  -50'  E.  Peak

'  Bearings  from  the  hill  west  of  He-  in  the  mountains  of  Moab  near  Khanzireh,

bron:  The  Haram  below  us,  half  a  mile  S.  37'  E.    Carmel,  the  tower,  S.  8=  E.

distant,  N'.  67"  E.    Beni  Na'im,  estimated  Dhoheriyeh  S.  54°  \V,

distance  one  hour  and  a  halfj  N.  82°  E.

Vol.  II.— 8  ii.  448,449

86

HEBRON.

[Sec.  XL

■without  his  knowledge.  In  the  course  of  the  afternoon,  "we  there-
fore sent  our  servant  with  the  Firman  to  his  excellency  of
Hebron,  preparatory  to  paying  our  respects  to  him  in  person.
The  servant  soon  came  back,  saying  that  the  three  governors
were  still  together,  but  could  not  read  the  Firman  ;  it  being  in
Turkish,  and  they  having  no  Turkish  secretary  with  them.
They  were  however  ready  to  receive  us.

We  accordingly  repaired  to  the  house  where  they  lodged^  in
the  western  quarter  of  the  town,  near  the  lower  pool ;  but  found
them  at  dinner.  We  were  nevertheless  ushered  into  the  apart-
ment where  they  were  eating,  after  putting  off  our  shoes  ;  and
taking  our  seats  at  the  side  of  the  room,  had  leisure  to  observe
the  scene  before  us,  which  was  not  in  the  slightest  degree  inter-
rupted by  our  entrance.  The  house  was  not  large.  The  room
was  a  common  one  of  the  country,  about  twenty  feet  square ;
the  ceiUng  rising  into  one  of  the  usual  small  domes  upon  the
roof  above  it.  The  stone  floor  was  nearly  covered  with  small
carpets  of  various  sizes,  qualities  and  colours  ;  while  a  few  cusli-
ions  were  scattered  in  different  parts  along  the  walls.

The  governor  of  Gaza,  Sheikh  Sa'id,  was  the  father  of
Sheikh  Mustafa,  governor  of  Jerusalem  ;  while  the  governor  of
Hebron,  whose  name  we  did  not  learn,  is  subordinate  to  him  of
Jerusalem.  Of  course  the  principal  personage  was  Sheikh
Sa'id,  a  fine  jolly  elderly  Mussulman,  with  good  natured  intelli-
gent features,  and  an  air  of  decision,  not  inconsistent  with  an
evident  hking  for  the  enjoyment  of  good  cheer.  His  son.  Sheikh
Mustafa,  was  tall  and  slender,  with  a  very  fine  and  prepossessing
countenance  ;  the  Franks  indeed  complained  of  him  as  uncourt-
eous,  but  one  would  not  expect  it  from  his  physiognomy.  The
Sheikh  of  Hebron  had  a  more  vulgar  and  almost  forbidding
aspect.

They  were  dining  in  the  true  oriental,  and,  as  it  would  seem,
official  style.  A  very  large  circular  tray  of  tinned  copper,
placed  upon  a  coarse  wooden  stool  about  a  foot  high,  served  as
the  table.  In  the  centre  of  this  stood  a  large  tray  or  dish  with
a  mountain  of  pillaw,  composed  of  rice  boiled  and  buttered,  with
small  pieces  of  meat  strewed  through  and  upon  it.  This  was  the
chief  dish  ;  although  there  were  also  other  smaller  dishes,  both
of  meat  and  vegetables.  Around  this  table  ten  persons,  includ-
ing the  three  governors,  were  seated,  or  rather  squatted  on  their
feet.  Each  had  before  him  a  plate  of  tinned  copper  and  a
wooden  spoon.  Some  used  the  spoon,  without  the  plate  ;  but
the  most  preferred  to  eat  with  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  without
the  aid  of  either  spoon  or  plate.  Tliey  all  seemed  earnestly  en-
gaged, and  took  no  notice  of  any  interruption.  When  at  length
any  one  had  finished,  he  immediately  rose,  and  went  and  washed

a.  449-451

Mat  25.]

THBEE  GOVERNORS.

87

his  hands,  by  having  vrater  poured  upon  them  in  an  adjacent
room.  The  vacant  place  at  table  vras  immediately  filled  by  a
new  comer.  The  Sheikh  of  Gaza  outsat  them  all ;  but  at  last
turned  round  and  greeted  us  kindly.  He  was  the  only  one  who
did  not  leave  his  place  to  wash  ;  but  had  the  water  brought  to
him  where  he  sat.  An  old  Derwish  from  Bagdad  was  also  pres-
ent, now  on  his  return  from  Mecca  ;  he  had  made  use  of  his
spoon,  and  did  not  wash  at  all.

Sheikh  Sa'id  now  drew  back  to  the  middle  of  that  side  of
the  room  where  we  were  sitting,  opposite  to  the  entrance,  so  that
we  were  now  on  his  left.  His  colleagues  took  their  seats  on  his
right  ;  the  old  Derwish  sat  down  near  us  on  our  left  ;  ten  or
twelve  other  persons  were  seated  around  the  room  ;  while  many
were  continually  passing  in  and  out.  Sheikh  Sa'id  was  em-
phatically the  great  man,  gave  all  the  orders,  and  led  the  whole
conversation  ;  his  colleagues  sitting  in  such  a  position,  that
they  could  not  address  us,  nor  we  them.  A  poor  ragged  peasant
now  came  in  with  perfect  unconcern,  presented  himself  before
Sheikh  Sa'id,  uncovered  his  wounded  shoulder,  and  begged
charity.  The  Sheikh  instantly  sent  him  out  ;  at  the  same  time
ordering  a  garment  to  be  given  him.  This  is  one  of  the  traits
of  oriental  society  and  government,  that  the  highest  are  thus
entirely  accessible  to  the  lowest.  Coffee  was  now  brought,  and
presented  first  to  the  three  Sheikhs,  then  to  us,  and  afterwards
to  the  rest.  There  was  a  good  deal  of  conversation  in  the  room  ;
the  old  Derwish  made  inquiries  about  the  new  world  ;  he  began
at  length  a  sort  of  homily  upon  the  vanity  of  wealth  and  power,
in  which  he  was  rather  unceremoniously  cut  short  by  Sheikh
Sa'id,  and  soon  left  the  room.

The  Sheikh  confirmed  the  intelligence  we  had  heard,  that
Jerusalem  was  shut  up  ;  but  said  an  order  had  since  been  re-
ceived from  the  head-quarters  at  Aleppo,  to  impose  no  quaran-
tine upon  the  city  at  large,  but  only  upon  the  houses  where  the
plague  should  actually  exist.  He  supposed  that  the  gates  would
be  immediately  opened.  This  was  welcome  news  to  us  ;  but
the  latter  part  at  least  did  not  turn  out  to  be  true.  He  further
said,  that  there  was  now  no  danger  whatever  in  going  to  Wady
Musa,  and  made  not  the  slightest  objection  to  our  undertaking
the  journey,  but  rather  gave  it  his  sanction.  "We  too  were  dis-
posed to  regard  the  present  as  a  favourable  moment  for  accom-
plishing our  object ;  for  the  visit  of  the  governors  to  this  region
would  of  course  be  known  among  the  Bedawin,  and  prevent  for
the  time  any  hostile  incursion  from  the  Arabs  east  of  the  Dead
Sea  and  Ghor ;  the  only  source  from  which  any  danger  was  to  be
apprehended  to  travellers.  The  conversation  of  Sheikh  Sa'id
showed  him  to  be  a  man  of  quickness  and  good  sense  ;  and  it

iL  451,  452

88

HEBRON.

[Sec.  XI

was  probably  this  union  of  intelligence  and  honhommie,  that  had
obtained  for  him  the  confidence  of  Muhammed  Aly,  and  the
powerful  influence  which  he  now  wielded  over  the  ancient  terri-
tories of  Judah  and  Edom.'

We  returned  after  an  hour.  As  we  were  now  expecting  to
set  off  early  the  next  morning,  we  went  to  take  leave  of  EHas,
whom  we  found  at  home  lounging  on  his  divan.

The  following  data  for  the  population  of  Hebron  were  given
us  by  Ehas,  who  had  the  best  opportunity  of  knowing  the  truth.
According  to  him,  there  were  at  the  time  fifteen  hundred  taxable
Muhammedans,  and  forty-one  J ews  who  paid  taxes,  besides  some
two  hundred  Jews  who  had  European  protections.  He  himself
was  the  only  Christian  in  Hebron  ;  nor  are  there  any  others  in
the  whole  district.  Not  less  than  seven  hundred  and  fifty  Mus-
lims had  been  taken  as  soldiers,  and  about  five  hundred  were
killed  during  the  rebellion  of  1834.  He  estimated  the  whole
population  at  ten  thousand  souls  ;  which  is  perhaps  not  very
much  larger  than  the  true  number.

The  trade  of  Hebron  received  a  heavy  blow  in  1834,  in  con-
sequence of  the  part  which  the  people  took  in  the  rebellion  of
that  year,  and  the  subsequent  sacking  of  the  place  by  the  Egyp-
tian troops.  From  this  shock  it  had  not  yet  recovered.  Many
of  the  glass  lamps  and  trinkets  manufactured  here,  are  exported
to  Egypt ;  as  well  as  large  quantities  of  Dibs  and  raisins.  The
cities  too  of  the  middle  and  south  of  Palestine  appear  to  draw
their  suppHes  of  all  these  articles  chiefly  from  Hebron.  Not-
withstanding the  immense  vineyards,  neither  wine  nor  'Arakj  as
we  have  seen,  is  made  for  exportation.

I  have  formerly  alluded  in  general  terms  to  the  antiquity  of
Hebron,  and  to  some  of  the  circumstances  of  its  early  history.*
It  is  doubtless  one  of  the  most  ancient  cities  still  existing  ;  hav-
ing been  built,  as  the  sacred  writer  informs  us,  "  seven  years
before  Zoan  in  Egypt  ; "  and  being  mentioned  in  Scripture  still
earlier  than  Damascus.^  Its  most  ancient  name  was  Kirjath-
Arba,  '  City  of  Arba,'  so  called  from  Arba  the  father  of  Anak
and  the  Anakim,  who  dwelt  in  and  around  Hebron.*    The  town

'  The  subsequent  fortunes  of  Sheikh  to  Damascus  to  awnit  in  prison  the  plea-

Sa'id  show,  that  he  might  have  done  well  sure  of  the  p^vernment.    Both  father  and

to  listen  to  the  homily  of  the  old  Derwish,  son  were  still  in  prison  in  June  1840.

upon  the  vanity  of  wealth  and  power.    In  "  Vol.  I.  p.  213  sq.

the  year  1839,  as  I  am  informed,  he  was  '  Num.  13,  22.    Gen.  13,  18  ;  comp.

deposed  from  his  government  on  a  charge  15,  2.

of  mal-administration  and  corrupt  prac-  *  Gen.  23,  2.    Josh.  14,  15.    15,  13.

tices;  his  large  possessions  seized  ;  and  he  21,  11.    Judg.  1,  10.  etc.    In  connection

himself  thrown  into  prison  at  'Akka,  and  with  this  name,  we  have  a  curious  instance

subjected  to  the  bastinado,  until  he  gnawed  of  the  origin  of  a  false  tradition.    The  pas-

the  flesh  of  his  own  arms  in  agony.   At  sage  in  Josh.  14,  15,  reads  literally  thus :

the  same  time,  his  son,  Sheikh  Mustafa,  "And  the  name  of  Hebron  before  was

was  also  deposed  at  Jerusalem,  and  sent  (Kirjath-Arba)  the  city  of  Arba,  a  great

ii.  452-454

Mat  25.]

STATISTICS.  HISTORY.

89

itself  appears  also  to  have  been  called  Mamre,  probably  from  the
name  of  Abraham's  friend  ;  while  the  terebinth  of  Mamre  is
placed,  by  a  tradition  older  than  Josephus,  at  some  distance
from  the  town  towards  Jerusalem.'  The  ancient  city  lay  also  in
a  valley  ;  and  the  two  pools,  one  of  which  at  least  is  as  early  as
the  time  of  David,  serve  unquestionably  to  identify  the  modern
with  the  ancient  site.*

Here  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  Hved  and  walked  with
God  ;  and  here  they  were  all  entombed.  From  Hebron  or  its
neighbourhood  Jacob  and  his  sons  went  down  by  way  of  Beer-
sheba  to  Egypt  to  meet  and  dwell  with  Joseph.'  After  the  re-
turn of  the  Israehtes  from  Egypt,  the  city  was  taken  by  Joshua,
and  given  over  to  Caleb,  who  drove  out  the  Anakim  from  the
region  ;*  it  was  afterwards  made  one  of  the  six  cities  of  refuge,
and  assigned  to  the  Levites  and  priests.'  Hebron  became  at
length  the  royal  residence  of  David,  where  he  reigned  for  seven
and  a  half  years  over  Judah  ;  and  here  too  he  was  anointed  king
over  all  Israel.'  It  was  also  at  Hebron,  that  Absalom  raised
the  standard  of  rebellion.^  This  was  likewise  one  of  the  places
fortified  by  Rehoboam ;  and  after  the  exUe  the  returning  Jews
dwelt  again  in  the  city  and  surrounding  villages.'

The  name  of  Hebron  does  not  occur  any  further  in  the  Old
Testament,  and  not  at  all  in  the  New  ;  but  we  learn  from  the
first  book  of  Maccabees  and  Josephus,  that  it  came  into  the
power  of  the  Edomites,  who  had  taken  possession  of  the  south
of  Judah,  and  was  recovered  from  them  by  Judas  Maccabaeus."

man  among  the  Anakim."  But  as  the
Hebrew  word  SS'iX  (Arba)  also  signifies
four,  and  the  word  for  man  (CTX)  Adam,
is  likewise  used  as  a  proper  name,  some  of
the  Jewish  Rabbins  ia  this  verse  took  Kir-
jath-Arba  in  the  meaning  'city  of  the
four,'  and  read  likewise  '  Adam  the  great '
instead  of  '  a  great  man  ; '  then  '  the
four '  were  held  to  be  the  patriarchs  Adam,
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  who  were
supposed  to  be  all  buried  here.  The  same
conceit  Jerome  doubtless  derived  from  his
Jewish  teacher:  "Arbee,  id  est,  quatnor;
CO  quod  ibi  quatuor  patriarchse  Abraham,
Isaac  et  Jacob  sepulti  sunt,  et  Adam  mag-
nus,  ut  in  libro  Jesu  scriptum  est ;  "  Ono-
mast.  art.  Arboch.  Comm.  in  Matth.  27,
33.  Hence  the  Vulgate  likewise  reads  in
the  same  verse  :  "  Adam  maximus  ibi  inter
Enacim  situs  est."  See  Bochart  Phaleg,
ed.  Villem.  p.  300. — A  tomb  of  Adam  was
shown  here  with  those  of  the  other  patri-
archs in  the  seventh  century  (Adamnanus
2.  10) ;  and  from  this  source  probably
came  the  later  traditions,  which  connect
the  creation  of  Adam  with  Hebron.

'  Mamre  is  expresslv  said  to  be  Hebron,
Gen.  23,  19.  35,  27. '  Comp.  14,  13.  24.
The  terebinth  of  Mamre,  (Engl,  version
less  correctly,  plain  of  Mamre,)  seems  to
be  distinguished  from  Hebron  or  Mamre
itself,  Gea  13,  18.  18,  1.  See  Vol  I.
p.  216  and  n.  I.  Reland  Pal.  p.  711  sq.
For  the  market  which  existed  there,  and
the  sale  of  the  captive  Jews  under  Adrian,
see  above,  VoL  I.  p.  369.  P^eland  pp.  714,
715.

'  Gen.  37,  14  "  the  vale  of  Hebroa"  2
Sam.  4,  12.

^  Gea  37,  14.    46,  1  sq.

*  Josh.  10,  36.  37.  14,  6-15.  15,  13.
14.    Judg.  1,  20.

'  Josh.  20,  7.    21,  11.  13.

^  2  Sam.  2,  1^.  11.  1  K.  2,  11.  2
Sam.  5,  1.  3.

'  2  Sam.  15,  9.  10.

»  2Chr.  11,  10.    Neh.  11,  25.

'  1  Mace.  5,  65.  Joseph.  Ant.  12.  8.  6.
For  this  invasion  of  the  Edomites,  and  their
subsequeat  subjection  by  John  Hyrcanus,
see  above,  p.  69.

Vol.  II.-8*

ii.  454. 455

90

HEBRON.

[Sec.  XL

It  was  afterwards  seized  by  the  rebel  Simon  Giorides  ;  but  re-
captured and  burnt  by  Cerealis  an  oflScer  of  Vespasian.*  In
the  same  connection,  Josephus  describes  the  tombs  of  the  patri-
archs as  existing  there  in  his  day  ;  and  both  Eusebius  and  Je-
rome, and  all  subsequent  writers  who  mention  Hebron,  down  to
the  time  of  the  crusades,  speak  of  it  chiefly  as  containing  these
sepulchres  ;  under  which  they  probably  refer  more  particularly
to  the  ancient  massive  exterior  walls  described  above,  as  being
apparently  remains  of  Jewish  antiquity.*

In  the  course  of  time,  this  remarkable  external  structure,
enclosing  the  tombs  of  Abraham  and  the  other  patriarchs,  came
to  be  called  the  "  Castle  of  Abraham  ; "  and  by  an  easy  transi-
tion, tliis  name  was  afterwards  applied  to  the  city  itself.  We
have  already  seen  the  earliest  trace  of  it  in  a  notice  pf  St.  Wil-
libald  in  the  eighth  century  ;^  and  in  the  time  of  the  crusades,
the  names  of  Hebron  and  the  Castle  of  St.  Abraham,  were  used
interchangeably.^  Hence,  as  Abraham  is  also  distinguished  among
the  Muhammedans  by  the  appellation  el-Khfilil,  the  Friend,  i.  e.
of  God,  this  latter  epithet  passed  over  among  them  into  a  name
of  the  city  ;  and  they  now  know  Hebron  only  as  el-Khulil.^

Soon  after  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  by  the  crusaders,  He-
bron appears  also  to  have  fallen  into  their  hands,  and  in  A.  D.
1100  was  bestowed  as  a  fief  by  Godfrey  of  Bouillon  upon  Ger-
hard of  Avenues.^  Seewulf,  two  years  after,  describes  it  as  in
ruins."  We  hear  not  much  more  of  it  in  the  history  of  those
times.  In  two  of  the  expeditions  of  king  Baldwin  I,  into  the
region  southeast  of  the  Dead  Sea,  in  A.  D.  1100  and  1116,  he
is  said  to  have  passed  by  Hebron  in  going  or  returning  ;  and  the
same  was  perhaps  the  case  in  the  other  similar  expeditions  of
the  same  sovereign  in  A.  D.  1115,  and  in  that  of  Baldwin  III,
in  A.  D.  1145.*    In  A.  D.  1167,  Hebron  was  raised  to  be  a

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  4.  9.  7,  9.  Abraham,  are  referred  by  other  writers  of

'  Onomast.  art.  Arboch.    See  the  other  the  same  asre  to  Hebron  ;  Gesta  Dei  p.

notices  down  to  the  time  of  the  cmsades,  580.    Will.  Tyr.  10.  8. — William  of  Tyre

pp.  77,  78.     See  also  the  general  ac-  speaks  only  of  Hebron,  e.  g.  8.  1.  ib.  10.

connt  of  the  Haram,  pp.  75-79.  8.  ib.  15.  6.  etc.    Abulfeda  has  Beit  He-

'  See  p.  78.  hn'tn ;  Tab.  Syr.  ed.  Koehler  p.  87.  Comp.

*  Edrisi  mentions  Hebron  only  under  Mejr  ed-Din  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.  p.  140.
the  name   "  Kabr  Ibrahim,"  Abraham's  Abulfeda  describes  here  the  "  Mesjid

sepulchre :  ed.  Jaubert  p.  338.    Albert  Ibrahim  el-Khulil,"  Tab.  SiiT.  p.  87.  n.

Aqneiisi.e  (in  Gesta  Dei)  uses  only  the  Schnltcn's  Index  in  Vit.  Salad,  art.  Beit-

name  "  Castellum  seu  Praesidium  ad  St.  Sjebrinitm.     So  too  Ibn  Batuta  p.  19.

Abraham,"  7.  15,  41,  43.  ib.  10.  32.  ib.  12.  See  also  d'Herbelot  BibHoth.  Orient,  arts.

22.  (Comp.  Gesta  Dei  p.  604.)    In  this  Abrahavi  and  Khalil.    Comp.  James  2,

last  passage,  indeed,  he  seems  to  distinguish  23.

the  "  Prajsidium  ad  St  Abraham  "  from  the       '  Albert.  Aq.  7.  15.    Wilken  Gesch.

valley  of  Hebron;  and  in  7.  41  he  places  der  Kr.  II.  p.  44.

the  former  near  the  Dead  Sea;  eo  that  it       '  Peregrinat.  p.  269.

is  verj"  possible  he  may  have  thought  it  to       "  For  the  first  of  these  military  expedi

be  a  diflcrcnt  place  from  Hebron.    Yet  the  tions,  A.I).  1100,  see  Albert.  Aq.  7.  41,

tame  facts  which  he  here  relates  of  St.  43.    Fulcher  Carn.  23.  p.  405.  Gui-

ii.  455-457

Mat  25.]

HISTORICAL  NOTICES.

91

Latin  episcopal  see,  and  Kainald  appointed  bishop  ;  there  had
before  been  here  only  a  Greek  priory.'  The  title  of  bishop  of
Hebron  continued  for  some  time  in  the  Romish  church,  and  four
other  bishops  are  mentioned,  one  of  them  as  late  as  A.  D.  1365.'
But  this  was  merely  nominal ;  for  after  the  capture  of  Jerrusa-
lem  by  Saladin  in  A.  D.  1187,  Hebron  also  reverted  to  the
Muhammedans,  and  has  ever  since  remained  in  their  possession.
The  church  which  the  Christians  had  built  or  at  least  decorated,
within  the  structure  around  the  tombs  of  the  patriarchs,  now
became  a  mosk,  and  was  honoured  with  presents  from  the
Sultan.^

Thus  far  there  is  nothing  to  excite  a  doubt  as  to  the  identity
of  the  site  of  the  ancient  and  modem  city.  Arculfus  near  the
close  of  the  seventh  century,  found  the  place  without  walls,  ex-
hibiting only  the  vestiges  of  an  ancient  desolated  city  ;  although
a  multitude  of  people  yet  lived  there  in  miserable  dwellings
scattered  in  the  valley,  partly  within  and  partly  without  the
ruins  of  the  former  walls.*  Yet  Benjamin  of  Tudela,  after
A.  D.  1660,  affirms,  that  the  ancient  city  was  situated  on  a
mountain,  and  was  then  desolate  and  deserted  ;  the  city  of  that
day  being  in  the  valley.*  Brocardus,  a  century  later,  repeats  this
account,  with  more  particulars  ;  according  to  him,  the  ancient
city  was  on  the  hill  north  of  the  slope  on  which  we  encamped,
three  bow-shots  west  of  north  from  the  modern  town,  where
nothing  was  then  visible  except  large  ruins.'  This  story  is
copied  by  writers  of  the  following  centuries  ;  and  the  idea  seems
to  have  become  current,  that  the  ancient  city  lay  upon  the  hUl.'^
Yet  none  of  the  travellers  of  the  fourteenth,  fifteenth,  and  six-
teenth centuries,  speak  of  any  ruins  there,  on  their  own  knowl-
edge.

We  were  not  aware  of  this  old  report  at  the  time  of  our
visit  ;  and  therefore  did  not  examine  the  hill  in  question.  My
companion  has  since  informed  me,  that  according  to  his  impres-
sion, the  site  of  a  former  village  was  spoken  of  on  that  hill,

bert  7.  36.     WilL  Tyr.  10.  8.     Wilken  denbach  in  Reissb.  p.  133.  Quaresmius

Ctesch.  der  Kr.  II.  pp.  88,  89. — For  that  in  II.  p.  771  sq.  Znallart.  Viagg;.  p.  233.  Von

A.  D.  1116,  see  Alb.  Aq.  12.  22.    Wilken  Troilo  p.  321,  Dresd.  1676.  "The  site  upoij

ib.  p.  403.    Comp.  WilL  Tvt.  11.  29.— For  the  hill  i.?  alluded  to  (bnt  not  ruins)  by  F.

the  two  others,  see  WDJ.  Tyr.  11.  26.  Fabri  in  Reissb.  p.  287 ;  and  also  bv  Baum-

"Wilken  ib.  p.  402.    WilL  Tyr.  16.  6.    Wil-  garten  p.  78.— But  Maundeville,"  Lud.  de

ken  ib.  III.  i.  p.  208.  Suchem,  and  William  of  Baldensel,  who  all

'  WUl.  Tyr.  20.  3.    Jac.  de  Vitr.  57.  passed  through  Hebron  in  the  fourteenth

'  Le  Quien  Oriens  Chr.  IH.  p.  1270.  century;  as  well  as  Stephen  von  Gumpen-

'  E.  g.  the  carved  pulpit ;  Mejr  ed-Din  berg,  F.  Fabri,  and  Mejr  ed-Din,  who  mi-

in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  IL  p.  375.    See  above,  nutely  describe  it  near  the  close  of  the

p.  78.  fifteenth ;  and  also  Belon  who  was  here

*  Adamnanus  ex  Arcnlfo  2.  8.  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth ;  make
'  Itin.  p.  76.  no  allusion  to  any  other  site  than  that  of

•  Brocardus  c.  9.  p.  185.  the  present  town.

^  Bj  Marinus  Saiiutus,  p.  248.  Brey-

ii.  457, 458

92

HEBRON.

[Sec.  XL

Bimilar  to  several  others  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hebron  ;  but
with  the  remark  that  there  w^re  no  remains  there  of  importance.
Had  we  then  known  the  circumstances  above  related,  we  should
certainly  have  gone  upon  the  hill,  and  ascertained  the  facts .
for  ourselves.  The  later  researches  of  friends'  show  conclusively,
that  there  is  nothing  on  that  hill  to  counterbalance  the  mention
of  "the  valley  of  Hebron"  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  and  the
strong  evidence  of  the  ancient  pools.*

In  the  fourteenth  century,  pilgrims  passed  from  Sinai  to
Jerusalem  directly,  through  the  desert,  by  Beersheba  and  He-
bron.' In  the  following  century,  this  route  was  abandoned  for
that  by  Gaza  ;  yet  the  pilgrims  sometimes  took  Hebron  in  their
way,  or  visited  it  from  Jerusalem.*  Writers  of  that  period  de-
scribe here  an  immense  charitable  establishment  or  hospital,
situated  near  the  Haram,  where  twelve  hundred  loaves  of  bread,
besides  oil  and  other  condiments,  were  daily  distributed  to  all
comers,  without  distinction  of  nation  or  religion.'  The  annual
expenses  were  said  to  amount  to  twenty-four  thousand  ducats  ;
of  which  two  thousand  were  derived  from  the  vUlage  of  Summeil
in  the  western  plain.'  Hebron  continued  to  be  occasionally  vis-
ited by  travellers,  down  to  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth
century  ;  although,  before  that  time,  it  seems  no  longer  to  have
been  generally  resorted  to  by  pilgrims. But  from  that  period
onward  until  the  present  century,  no  Frank  traveller  appears  to
have  found  his  way  to  the  city  of  the  Patriarchs.

Morison  relates,  in  A.  D.  1698,  that  a  few  years  before,  a
French  (Frank  ?)  merchant  on  a  visit  to  Hebron,  being  mounted
on  a  spirited  horse,  rode  over  and  killed  a  child  in  the  streets.
Although  he  made  shift  to  escape  the  rage  of  the  people  by
flight,  yet  such  was  the  excitement  and  the  hatred  caused  by

'  So  Rev.  S.  Wolcott,  in  Biblioth.  Sac.
1843,  p.  59,  60.

'  See  pp.  88-90.  A  remark  of  Je-
rome may  seem  at  first  to  favour  the  site
upon  the  hill,  and  perliaps  gave  rise  to  the
story  ;  Quaest.  in  Gen.  xxxv.  27,  "  pro
Arbce  in  Septuaginta  campum  habet,  quum
Chcbron  in  monte  sita  est."  But  this  ex-
pression "in  monte  "  stands  here  by  way  of
antithesis  to  a  plain,  and  is  therefore
equally  applicable  to  a  high  hill-side  ;  in
■which  sense  it  would  also  be  true  of  the
present  town.  The  ancient  city  was
doubtless  larger  and  extended  further  up
the  sides  of  the  valley.

'  So  Maundeville,  L.  de  Suchem,  W.  de
Baldensel.

*  Gumpeuberg  was  here  in  A.  D.  1449  ;
Breydenbuch  and  F.  Fabri  in  1483,  on  their
way  to  Gaza ;  Baumgarten  in  1 507,  com-
ing from  Gaza ;  Bclou  about  1548 ;  etc.
ii.  458-400

'  Gumpenberg's  Journal  in  Reissb.  p.
445.  F.  Fabri  ib.  pp.  288,  289.  Mcjr  ed-
Din  in  Fundgr.  des  Orients  II.  p.  377.
This  last  writer  says  there  were  three  dis-
tributions of  bread  and  the  hke  daily  ;  in
the  morning  and  at  noon  to  the  inhabi-
tants only;  and  in  the  ailerAoon  to  oU
comers.

•  F.  Fabri  1.  c. — For  the  error  which
converts  Sfimmoil  into  St.  Samuel,  ond
the  greater  blunder  of  Breydenbach,  see
above  p.  33,  and  Note  XXXI,  end  of  the
volume.

'  Zualliirt  speaks  of  Hebron,  probably
without  having  seen  it ;  p.  233.  So  too ,
Cotovicus,  p.  241  sq.  Quaresmins  of>-
pears  to  have  been  there,  II.  p.  769  sq.
Von  Troilo  visited  it  in  1666,  p.  319  sq.
But  both  Surius  and  Doubdan,  who  were
earlier  than  he,  and  strictly  pilgrims,  make
no  mention  of  Hebron.

Mat  25.]

HISTORICAL  NOTICES.

93

this  accident  against  the  Christians,  that  from  that  time  no
traveller  had  ventured  to  approach  the  place.'  It  is  not  unlikely
that  some  accident  of  this  kind  may  have  alarmed  the  fears  of
the  monks,  and  led  them  to  dissuade  travellers  from  going  tliith-
er  ;  hut  their  timidity  was  probably  still  more  wrought  upon,
by  the  restless  and  warlike  disposition  of  the  people  of  Hebron,
and  their  continual  feuds  with  the  inhabitants  of  Bethlehem  and
other  neighbouring  callages  ;  they  being  of  the  Keis  jjarty,  and
the  latter  of  the  Yemen.*  Hasselquist  in  17.51  mentions,  that
five  or  six  years  before,  "  the  inhabitants  of  Bethlehem  and
Hebron  carried  on  such  a  war  as  destroyed  the  greatest  part  of
the  best  inhabitants  of  both  villages  ;  and  the  neighbourhood  of
Bethlehem  was  entirely  laid  waste. Even  so  late  as  1807,
All  Bey  fell  in  with  "  a  band  of  Christian  shepherds,  who  were
going  to  Jerusalem,  to  lay  a  complaint  against  the  Mussulman
shepherds  of  Hebron,  who  had  carried  off  a  part  of  their  cattle.
They  had  with  them  two  camels,  which  they  had  taken  from  the
Mussulmans  as  reprisals."*  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  not
surprising,  that  the  influence  of  the  monks  should  have  been
successfully  exerted,  to  restrain  travellers  from  extending  their
excursions  towards  the  south  beyond  the  pools  of  Solomon.

In  the  present  century,  Seetzen  was  the  first  to  lay  open
again  the  way  to  Hebron  in  1806  ;  he  travelled  from  here  to
Mount  Sinai  through  the  desert,  making  however  a  circuit
almost  to  Gaza.'  He  was  followed  the  very  next  year  by  All
Bey.'  Then  another  interval  of  eleven  years  elapsed,  before  the
^isit  of  Irby  and  Mangles  and  their  party  in  1818,  as  they
passed  this  way  on  their  route  to  Wady  Miisa.^  Thirteen  years
later,  in  1831,  Poujoulat  made  an  excursion  hither  from  Jerusa-
lem, as  did  Monro  in  1833.'  Then  came  the  rebellion  of
1834  ;  in  which  the  people  of  Hebron  and  the  whole  region
round  about  bore  a  conspicuous  part,  and  brought  down  upon
themselves  a  heavy  retribution.  They  were  among  the  last
to  hold  out  ;  and  when,  after  quelling  the  disturbances  at
Nabulus,  Ibrahim  Pasha  marched  southwards  with  his  troops,
the  rebels  gave  him  battle  not  far  fi-om  Solomon's  pools,  and
were  defeated.'  They  retired  and  entrenched  themselves  in
Hebron ;  but  Ibrahim  pressed  forward,  carried  the  place  by
storm,  and  gave  it  over  to  sack  and  pillage.  Many  were  slain  ;
and  the  Jews  especially  are  reported  to  have  sufiered  the  most

»  Relation  Historique  p.  480.  *  Ali  Bey's  Travels,  II.  p.  230.

'  See  above,  p.  17.     Quaresmins  re-  '  See  his  letter  in  Zach's  Monatl.  Cor-

lates,  that  in  his  day  (about  1620)  Tekoa  resp.  XVII.  p.  132  sq.

was  seldom  visited  for  a  similar  reason  :  '  Travels  II.  pp.  230,  231.

"Non  facile  possumus  Thecuam  ire,  prop-  '  Trav.  p.  342  sq.  [104.]  Legh,May  7,  8.

ter  ibi  et  in  \-ia  iuhabitantes  et  discurren-  *  Correspond.    d'Orient  V.  p.  211  sq.

tos  Arabes."    Vol.  II.  p.  .687.  Summer  Ramble,  I.  p.  232  sq.

»  Reise  nach  PaList  p  170.  »  See  above,  Vol  L  p.  217.

ii.  460.  461

94

HEBRON,

[Sec.  XL

crael  outrages  from  tne  Drutal  soldiery.'  Many  of  the  rebels
escaped  and  fled  to  Kerak  on  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea  ;  they
■were  pursued  by  Ibrahim  and  his  troops  ;  and  that  place  too  was
taken  and  laid  in  ruins.  These  events  inflicted  a  heavy  blow
on  Hebron,  from  which  it  had  not  yet  recovered.*

This  war  removed  aU  obstacles  in  the  way  of  travellers.  My
companion  was  at  Hebron  in  1835,  with  other  American  friends  ;
and  since  that  time,  the  city  has  every  year  been  more  or  less
visited  by  travellers,  with  as  much  facility  as  any  other  part  of
Palestine. — In  1839,  Hebron  was  for  a  short  time  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  rebel  Abd  er-Rahman  of  Dura.

'  Stephens'  Incidents  etc.  IL  p.  165.  I'an  1823  a  I'an  1838,  Paris  1839.  pp.  73-

Paxton's  Letters  from   Palest,  p.    142.  85.    The  narative  is  written  in  an  Egyp-

Lond.  tian  spirit,  with  several  topographical  bltin-

'  See  some  notices  of  this  war  in  Men-  ders.
gin's  Histoire  Sommaire  dc  I'Egypte  etc.  de
ii.  461,  462

SECTION  XII.

FROM  HEBRON 'to  WADY  MUSA  AND  BACK,

On  our  departure  from  Jerusalem,  we  had  left  a  letter  to  be
forwarded  to  Elias  in  Hebron,  requesting  him  to  send  word  to  the
Sheikh  of  the  Jehahn,  and  have  him  waiting  for  las  with  camels,
when  we  should  arrive  on  the  23d  of  May.  This  letter  never
reached  its  destination  ;  and  we  were  thus  subjected  to  the  dis-
appointment and  delay  already  described.  Our  first  care  in
Hebron  was,  to  despatch  a  messenger  to  the  camp  of  the  Jehalin
beyond  Carmel.  This  service  Elias  undertook  to  perform  for  us  ;
and  informed  us,  that  he  had  sent  a  man  the  same  evening.
As  the  distance  was  not  more  tban  three  or  four  hours,  we
thought  we  might  reasonably  expect  the  camels,  so  as  to  set  off
the  next  afternoon,  at  the  latest.  But  the  morrow  (Thursday)
came  and  went,  without  any  tidings  either  from  the  Jehalin  or
of  the  messenger.

The  following  morning,  Friday,  as  we  were  sitting  after
breakfast  in  our  tent,  we  were  somewhat  surprised  to  see  the  head
Sheikh  of  the  Jehahn,  Defa'  Allah,  whom  we  had  formerly  met
at  the  encampment  of  the  Ta'amirah,  riding  up  to  our  tent  ac-
companied by  a  single  man  on  foot.  It  turned  out,  however,  that
he  had  come  from  Dura,  where  he  had  been  for  several  days  with
the  governors  of  Gaza  and  Jerusalem.  He  was  merely  passing
through  Hebron  on  his  way  home  ;  and  seeing  our  tent,  called
to  pay  us  a  visit.  He  had  of  course,  seen  or  heard  nothing  of
our  messenger.  We  now  made  a  bargain  with  him  in  the  pres-
ence of  Elias,  for  five  camels  to  Wady  Musa  and  back  ;  to  go
by  way  of  the  south  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  Wady  el-'Arabah,
and  return  by  the  more  direct  route  over  Semu'a.  The  price  of
the^amels  was  to  be  two  hundred  and  forty  piastres,  or  twelve
dollars  each.  There  were  to  be  five  men,  all  armed  ;  one  of
whom  was  to  be  a  responsible  person,  either  the  head  Sheikh
himself  or  one  of  his  brothers  ;  and  for  these  we  were  to  furnish
provisions.  Had  we  chosen  to  go  and  return  by  the  direct  route,
the  price  would  have  been  ten  dollars  for  each  camel.    It  seemed

ii.  4C3,  464

96

FROM  HEBRON  TO  WADY  MUSA.

[Sec.  Xn.

to  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  Defa'  Allah,  -which  route  we
took  ;  there  was  not  the  slightest  hint  of  any  more  danger  on
the  one  than  on  the  other  ;  nor  indeed  was  danger  to  be  appre-
hended on  either,  excepting  from  casual  predatory  parties,  which
might  be  crossing  the  Ghor  or  'Arabah.  We  took  the  fifth
camel  for  the  sake  of  a  supply  of  water  in  the  Ghor  ;  and  there-
fore concluded  to  take  also  our  second  servant,  whom  we  had  in-:
tended  to  leave  at  Hebron  till  our  return.

The  Sheikh  now  left  us,  expecting  on  his  way  home  to  meet
the  camels  coming  to  us.  But  the  day  again  wore  off  in  expec-
tation and  in  disappointment.  It  turned  out  afterwards,  that  the
messenger  said  to  have  been  sent  by  Elias,  had  never  reached  the
encampment ;  so  that  the  camels  had  to  be  collected  from  the
distant  pastures,  and  all  the  preparations  made,  after  the  return
of  the  Sheikh.  This  was  enough  to  occupy  Arab  dilatoriness
for  the  remainder  of  the  day  ;  and  consequently,  the  camels  did
not  set  off  for  Hebron  until  the  next  morning. — There  was  rea-
son to  suppose,  that  no  messenger  had  ever  been  sent  by  Elias,
notwithstanding  his  assurances  ;  he  had  perhaps  directed  his  ser-
vant to  send  a  man,  and  given  himself  no  further  trouble  in  the
matter.  This  and  other  instances  of  shuffling  conduct,  pre-
vented all  confidence  in  the  man  ;  and  left  only  a  painfal  im-
pression, in  respect  to  the  sole  representative  of  the  Christian
name  in  Hebron.  Had  he  performed  what  he  undertook,  we
should  not  have  lost  a  day ;  or  had  he  frankly  said  he  had  not
sent  or  could  not  send,  we  should  have  taken  other  measures,
and  have  improved  our  time  to  visit  Beni  Na'im,  or  Siisieh,  or
other  places  in  the  vicinity.  As  it  was,  two  days  were  compar-
atively lost  to  us  ;  and  we,  during  the  whole  interval,  subjected
to  that  "  hope  deferred  which  maketh  the  heart  sick."

Saturday,  May  26th.  This  morning  was  the  coolest  we  had
long  felt ;  the  thermometer  at  sunrise  standing  at  43°  F.  The
camels  arrived  at  9  o'clock.  But  we  found  they  had  been  has-
tily collected  ;  were  without  proper  furniture  ;  and  were  indeed
intended  only  to  transport  us  to  the  territory  of  the  tribe,  where
we  were  to  stop  over  the  Christian  Sabbath.  Defa'  Allah  also
made  his  appearance,  and  assured  us,  that  we  should  afterwards
have  dromedaries  and  better  camels  ;  indeed  some  delay  was  oc-
casioned by  purchasing  saddles  and  other  funiiture  in  Hebron.
We  deposited  with  Elias  a  portmanteau  containing  our  papers
and  books,  and  such  articles  as  we  did  not  need  upon  the  jour-
ney ;  and  he  afterwards  came  to  bid  us  adieu.  All  these  partic-
ulars, and  the  loading  of  the  camels,  occupied  what  seemed  to
our  im])atience  no  little  time.

At  length,  at  twenty  minutes  past  IX  o'clock,  we  set  off,
keeping  at  first  down  the  valley,  which  soon  bends  more  to  the

ii.  464,  4G5

May  26.]

PREPARATIONS.  DEPARTURE.

97

S.  S.  W.  where  we  left  it,  to  cross  obliquely  the  eastern  hill.
Descending  afterwards  gradually  through  a  rocky  tract  for  nearly
half  an  hour,  we  passed  the  great  Wady  into  which  that  of
Hebron  enters,  and  which  then  bears  the  name  of  Wady  el-Khulil.
It  is  here  an  open  valley  among  the  rocky  hills. — I  had  soon
found  that  my  camel,  which  had  been  assigned  to  me  as  having
a  stuffed  saddle,  had  also  a  most  intolerable  gait,  the  worst
indeed  I  had  ever  encountered.  I  immediately  exchanged  with
one  of  our  servants,  and  thus,  after  five  minutes  delay,  obtained
the  easiest  camel  I  had  yet  mounted.

The  way  continued  over  a  broken  tract,  approaching  the  open
plain  or  basin  on  the  west  of  Ziph  and  Carmel.  At  ten  minutes
before  one  we  passed  a  well ;  and  having  now  come  out  upon  the
open  country,  we  reached  at  1  o'clock  the  foot  of  TeU  Zif,  where
we  had  formerly  fallen  into  our  present  road  in  travelling  from
Beni  Na'im.  The  road  and  country  from  this  point  to  Carmel,
have  already  been  described.'

We  reached  Carmel  at  2.25,  in  just  three  hours  from  Hebron  ;
here  we  stoi-)ped  for  fifteen  minutes  to  water  the  camels.  Pro-
ceeding on  our  way  at  2.40,  we  passed  on  the  west  of  Ma'in,  not
far  from  the  foot  of  the  hiU  ;  and  began  soon  to  ascend  the
mountain  ridge  beyond,  along  the  bed  of  a  small  Wady.'
Another  road  equally  direct  to  ez-Zuweirah  goes  on  the  left  of
Ma'in  ;  we  had  taken  the  present  one  in  order  to  encamp  near
water.  An  hour  from  Carmel  brought  us  to  the  top  of  the  ridge
at  3.40  ;  from  which  looking  back,  Ma'in  bore  N.  8°  W.  and
Yutta  N.  30°  W.

We  now  began  to  descend  by  a  similar  Wady  on  the  other
side ;  and  a  wide  prospect  soon  opened  before  us,  over  the  coun-
try towards  the  Dead  Sea  and  on  the  south.  An  eminence  was
pointed  out  near  Zuweirah,  bearing  S.  20°  E.  The  course  and
chasm  of  the  Dead  Sea  were  distinctly  visible  ;  but  not  the
water,  which  lies  too  low.  The  extensive  tract  we  now  over-
looked, had  much  of  the  general  character  of  that  around  Beer-
sheba  ;  with  which  indeed  it  is  connected,  stretching  off  in  that
direction  around  the  southwestern  termination  of  the  long  ridge
which  we  were  now  crossing.  This  tract  has  apparently  a  lower
level  than  the  enclosed  plain  behind  us  around  Carmel ;  the  de-
scent of  the  mountain  on  this  side  being  greater  than  the  ascent
from  the  north.  The  country  in  general  is  not  fertile  ;  though
it  is  in  some  parts  used  for  tUlage,  and  affords  tolerable  pastur-
age.   The  grass,  which  earlier  in  the  season  had  been  good,  was

'  See  above  Vol.  I.  pp.  492,  493.    With       "  For  Carmel,  Maon,  and  the  country

camels,  our  rate  of  travel  by  the  hour  had  around,  see  above, Vol.  I.  pp.  493-498.  The

now  of  course  become  again  nearest  2  geo-  mountain  ridge  is  also  mentioned.  Vol.  I.  pp.

graphical,  2^  English,  or  2|  Roman  miles.  490,  494.

Vol.  II.— 9  ii,  465-467

98

FROM  HEBRON  TO  WADY  MUSA.

[Sec.  Xn.

now  dried  up  ;  and  very  few  shrubs  or  trees  appeared  throughout
the  whole  region.

This  is  the  country  of  the  Jehalin,  who  were  now  gathering
in  their  scanty  wheat  harvest.  The  tract  belonged  anciently  to
the  south  of  Judah,  lying  beyond  the  mountainous  district  of
that  tribe,  and  extending  so  as  to  comprise  Beersheba  and
Kadesh.' — The  main  encampment  of  the  Jehalin  was  at  this
time  high  up  on  the  southeast  side  of  the  mountain,  on  a  small
shelf  or  terrace  of  cultivated  land,  overlooking  the  wide  plain.
It  lay  at  some  distance  on  the  right  of  our  road  ;  and  we  first
saw  it  at  4|  o'clock.  We  passed  along  on  a  course  about  S.  S.
E.  among  occasional  fields  of  grain  in  the  shallow  Wadys,  where
the  reapers  were  at  work  ;  and  encamped  at  a  quarter  before  5
o'clock  near  a  small  threshing-floor  belonging  to  the  Jehalin.
Not  far  off  was  a  reservoir  of  rain  water.

Thus  far  we  had  only  three  men,  one  of  whom  was  Sheikh
Salim  ;  but  here  we  were  to  be  fitted  out  with  a  new  set  of
camels,  with  every  thing  in  proper  order  for  the  journey.  It
was  not  yet  so  late  but  that  we  received  many  ■visits  ;  and  found
that  although  encamped  in  the  desert,  we  were  not  Ukely  to
lack  an  abundance  of  company.  The  encampment  of  the  Jeha-
lin was  in  full  view  on  the  mountain  towards  the  northwest  at
the  distance  of  an  hour  or  more,  consisting  of  seventy  or  eighty
black  tents  arranged  in  a  large  circle.  There  was  said  to  be  one
other  smaller  encampment,  which  we  did  not  see.  The  whole  tribe
belongs  to  the  Keis  party,  and  was  said  to  muster  about  one  hun-
dred and  fifty  men.  None  of  them  can  read  or  write  ;  nor  have
thej^  any  one  to  lead  them  in  their  worship  ;  nor  do  they  assem-
ble for  prayer  on  Friday,  the  Muhammedan  sabbath.  On  being
told  that  the  Ta'amirah  have  a  Khatib,  they  said  the  Ta'amirah
were  Fellahin  ;  implying  that  of  the  real  Bedawin  none  learn  to
read. — The  tribe  paid  last  year  to  the  government  a  tribute
(Miry)  of  thirty  purses.  They  are  obliged  also  often  to  furnish
camels  for  the  public  service  ;  for  which  they  had  only  in  one
case  been  paid.  The  animals  were  once  taken  to  Damascus,  and
the  service  credited  as  part  of  their  tribute.

The  Jehahn  had  at  this  time  twenty-two  horses  and  about
two  hundred  camels.  The  horses  of  course  belonged  to  the
Sheikhs  ;  of  the  camels,  the  chief  Sheikh  owned  twenty-five  or
thirty.  There  is  no  living  water  within  the  territory  of  the
tribe,  except  at  Kurmul.  The  cistern  near  wliich  we  were  en-
camped, was  large,  and  excavated  in  a  rocky  ledge,  with  a  hole
above  like  a  well.  There  had  formerly  been  an  opening  below*
on  the  side  ;  but  this  was  now  stopped  with  large  stones  laid  in
mortar.    When  the  cisterns  become  exhausted  later  in  summer,

'  Josh.  16,  21-32  ;  comp.  vs.  48-60.

ii,  4G7  468

Mat  27.]

THE  JEHALIN.

99

they  have  no  resource,  hut  to  remove  their  flocks  and  other  ani-
mals to  the  vicinity  of  Kurmul ;  where  they  water  in  common
with  the  Ka'abineh.'  At  this  season  of  the  year,  their  flocks
were  watered  every  two  days,  and  the  camels  once  in  three  days.
As  a  matter  of  course,  they  are  exceedingly  careful  of  the  supply
in  their  cisterns  ;  and  a  man  received  a  sharp  rebuke  in  our  pres-
ence from  the  Sheikh,  for  having  suffered  some  'Alawin  to  water
a  few  sheep  at  that  in  our  neighbourhood.

The  Jehahn  have  not  been  disarmed  ;  they  have  still  their
old  muskets  with  match  locks  ;  and  make  their  own  gunpowder.
The  nitre  they  obtain  from  the  dust  of  the  ruined  villages  in
their  country  ;  and  the  sulphur  from  the  shores  of  the  Dead
Sea.*  They  mingle  these  ingredients  with  pulverized  charcoal,
and  thus  obtain  a  very  coarse  and  inferior  powder  ;  which  how-
ever costs  them  nothing.  They,  as  well  as  the  Tiyahah,  are  at
war  with  several  tribes  on  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  viz.  the
Beni  Sukhr,  the  Baharat,  and  the  Sulit  ;  the  latter  dwelling
around  Hesban.  Not  many  months  before,  they  had  made  an
expedition  with  the  aid  of  the  Tiyahah  against  the  Suht,  by
way  of  the  south  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  ;  and  had  brought  away
forty-five  camels.  We  now  heard  more  of  the  similar  expedi-
tion which  we  had  met  in  Bethlehem,  and  learned  the  result.'
It  wa»  composed  of  eighty-six  horsemen,  of  whom  twenty-two
were  Jehalin  ;  and  the  main  body  passed  along  the  same  road
which  we  travelled  from  'Ain  Jidy  to  the  Jordan.  Crossing  the
river  opposite  Jericho,  they  fell  upon  the  encampment  of  their
enemies,  the  Suht,  by  surprise,  and  brought  away  a  hundred
camels.  We  learned  too,  that  the  visit  of  the  Sheikh  Defa'
Allah  at  Hebron  this  morning,  had  for  its  object,  to  bring  two
of  the  captured  camels  as  a  present  to  Sheikh  Sa'id  oi  Gaza  ;
whose  permission  they  had  obtained  before  setting  off  on  the
expedition.

Sunday,  May  2*Jth..  We  remained  all  day  encamped  ;  but
the  number  of  visitors  left  us  no  interval  of  quiet.  In  the
morning,  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  camels  were  driven  by  at
once  to  water.  We  were  afterwards  \4sited  by  Defa'  AUah,  by
the  second  Sheikh,  Miisa,  and  by  various  others.  The  former
was  said  to  have  seven  brothers,  all  of  whom  bore  the  title  of
Sheikh.  Indeed,  almost  every  man  who  passed  along,  claimed
to  be  a  brother  of  the  Sheikh,  and  owner  of  the  thresliins-floor
by  our  tent  ;  so  that  at  last  our  servants  made  it  quite  a  jest,  to
inquire  of  every  Arab  who  came  by,  if  he  was  the  Sheikh's
brother  and  owned  this  floor  ? — The  threshing-floor  was  very
small ;  and  was  watched  every  night.    Bound  about  it  were

»  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  499.  '  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  470.

»  See  Vol.  I.  p.  512.

ii.  46&-470

100

FROM  HEBRON  TO  WADT  MUSA.

[Sec.  XiL

lying  several  small  heaps  of  gleaned  "wheat.  The  gleaning  is
done  by  the  poor  ;  and  their  little  sheaves  were  deposited  here
for  safe  keeping,  tUl  they  could  beat  them  out.

Opposite  to  us  the  mountaras  of  Kerak  were  in  yiev?  ;  but
the  city  itself  was  not  visible.  We  heard  much  to  day  of  'Abdeh
in  the  desert  south  of  Beersheba  ;  but  the  accounts  were  quite
indefinite  ;  nor  could  we  learn  that  any  one  of  the  tribe  had
been  there.'  We  heard  also  of  several  ancient  names  in  this
region  of  the  south,  some  of  which  we  were  afterwards  able  to
ascertain  more  accurately.

Defa'  Allah  visited  us  again  at  evening,  and  informed  us,
that  there  were  at  his  encampment  five  of  the  Haweitat  from
the  vicinity  of  Ma'an,  who  had  been  to  Hebron  to  sell  a  flock  of
sheep,  and  were  now  returning.  As  their  way  would  he  near
Wady  Musa,  the  Sheikh  ad\ased  us  to  take  them  into  our  ser-
vice for  a  small  pay,  in  order  to  increase  the  strength  of  our
party.  This  we  were  willing  to  do,  not  so  much  on  this  account,
as  because  we  might  hope  to  gather  information  from  them  re-
specting their  country  ;  and  because  too  their  presence  might
secure  for  us  a  better  reception,  among  the  Arabs  of  that  region.
We  therefore  authorized  the  Sheikh  to  offer  ten  piastres  for  each
man  for  the  whole  time,  without  provisions.  Some  spoke  of
them  as  Haweitat,  and  some  as  'Alawin ;  the  latter  are  iiMeed  a
subdivision  of  the  former  ;  but  these  individuals  were  not  'Ala-
win  of  Sheikh  Husein's  tribe.

Monday,  May  28th.  We  rose  before  4  o'clock,  hoping  to
set  off  early.  Very  soon  the  grating  sound  of  the  hand-mill  was
heard  from  a  cave  not  far  off,  where  an  Arab  family  had  taken
up  their  abode  during  the  harvest."^  In  spite  of  our  hopes,  and
notwithstanding  all  our  former  experience,  our  patience  was  this
morning  not  a  httle  tried  by  the  dilatoriness  of  the  Arabs.  They
had  yesterday  made  the  fairest  promises,  that  they  would  come
with  the  camels  at  evening  and  sleep  at  our  tent,  in  order  to  be
ready  for  an  early  start  ;  yet  only  one  came  ;  and  it  was  nearly
7  o'clock  this  morning  before  they  all  arrived.  Then  nothing
was  ready.  The  saddles  had  to  be  put  in  order,  and  some  of
them  re-stuffed  with  straw.  Then  one  camel  had  to  be  shaved  ;
that  is,  the  hair  of  its  hps  and  fece  was  regularly  shaved  off
with  a  sharp  knife,  being  occasionally  lathered  with  spittle  ;  the
head  was  then  anointed,  apparently  on  account  of  some  disease.
It  seemed  also  not  yet  to  be  fixed,  who  should  go  with  us.  At
last  it  appeared  that  only  four  men  instead  of  five  were  going  ;
and  these  mere  camel  drivers,  no  one  of  whom  was  a  Sheikh  nor
a  responsible  person.  On  learning  this  we  declined  going  in  that
manner  ;  and  ordered  the  loading  of  the  camels  to  be  stopped.

>  See  Note  XXm,  end  of  Vol.  I.  '  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  486.

ii.  470  471  ,

Mat  28.]

FURTHER  PREPARATIONS.

101

At  length  Sheikli  Hussan,  who  had  come  to  see  us  off,  agreed
to  take  us  to  the  phice  where  Sheikh  Salim  (who  had  come  with
us  on  Saturday)  was  reaping  ;  and  if  the  latter  would  not  go,  he
promised  to  accompany  us  himself.  We  consented  to  the  four
men  the  more  readily,  because  the  five  Haweitat  or  'AlaAvia
had  accepted  our  offer  and  now  presented  themselves, — a  set  of
thievish-looking  ragamuffins  as  one  would  wish  to  see.  We  ac-
cordingly set  off  at  7^  o'clock,  and  travelling  south  for  fifteen
minutes,  came  to  the  field  of  reapers,  where  we  stopped  for
another  hour.  Here  it  was  finally  arranged,  that  Sheikh  Hussan
should  go  with  us  ;  and  leaving  his  gala  dress  and  his  sleek  mare,
and  sending  for  his  long  gun,  he  joined  us  on  foot  in  the  common
Arab  costume.  We  thus  mustered  nine  armed  men,  besides  our
two  servants  ;  who  also  felt  their  importance  somewhat  aug-
mented, by  being  now  regularly  intrusted  each  with  a  gun  and
pistol.

From  this  point  three  sites  of  ruins  were  visible,  viz.  Jenbeh,
at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  and  now  directly  under  the  encamp-
ment of  the  Jehalin  ;  el-Kuryetein'  also  at  the  foot  of  the  moun-
tain ;  and  el-Beytidh  on  a  low  hill  more  to  the  left.^  All  these
are  only  foundations  of  small  villages,  or  merely  caves.'  An-
other similar  site,  el-Khuneifit,  was  spoken  of  somewhere  on  the
left  of  our  road.

We  finally  set  off  at  a  quarter  before  9  o'clock,  on  a  course
nearly  due  south  through  the  rolling  plain,  along  a  small  shallow
Wady.  After  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  there  was  on  our  right
a  small  site  of  foundations  and  walls  of  round  stones,  called  et-
Taiyib,  with  the  remains  of  a  dam  in  the  Wady,  apparently  for
a  reservoir.  Here  too  a  hill  called  Tell  'Arad,  which  we  had
seen  for  some  time  in  the  S.  S.  W.  seemed  not  more  than  an
hour  distant  ;  a  barren  looking  eminence  rising  above  the  coun-
try around.  This  marks,  without  much  doubt,  the  site  of  the
ancient  city  Arad,  situated  in  the  south  of  Judah  ;  whose  in-
habitants drove  back  the  Israelites  as  they  attempted  to  pene-
trate from  Kadesh  into  Palestine  ;  but  were  afterwards  subdued
by  Joshua.*  The  Arabs  said  indeed,  that  there  were  now  no
ruins  upon  or  near  it,  but  only  a  cavern.  We  did  not  visit  it,
but  the  name  is  too  decisive  to  admit  of  question.^

'  El-Kuryetein,  '  the  two  cities,'  seems  '  They  bore  as  follows :  Jenbeh  N.  60°

to  suggest  the  Kerioth  (cities)  of  Josh.  15,  W.    el-Kuryetein  S.  75"  W.  el-Beyudh

25,  in  the  south  of  Judah  ;  unless  the  lat-  S.  40°  W.

ter  is  to  be  united  with  the  next  name  and  *  Judg.  1,  16.    Num.  21,  1.    Josh.  12,

read  Kerioth-Hezron,  as  Reland  suggests.  14,  comp.  10,  41.    The  English  version  and

Falsest,  pp.  700,  708.  also  Luther  in  Num.  21,  1,  read  'king

'  This  name  would  seem  to  correspond  Arad'  incorrectly  for  'king  of  Arad;'

to  the  '  Al-baid '  of  Irby  and  Mangles  ;  comp.  Josh.  12,  14.

Travels,  p.  348.    But  their  description  re-  '  Eusebius  and  Jerome  place  Arad  at

fers  the  latter  apparently  to  Kurmul.  20  Roman  miles  from  Hebron,  equal  to

Vol.       9*  ii.  471-473

102

FROM  HEBRON  TO  WADY  MUSA.

[Sec.  Xn,

Proceeding  on  the  same  course,  we  came  at  10^  o'clock  to
another  similar  site  of  rude  foundations  and  walls,  called  Ehdeib,
still  on  the  bank  of  the  shallow  Wady,  which  here  bears  the
same  name.  Fifteen  minutes  further  on,  the  Wady  turns  to  the
east,  and  runs  to  the  Dead  Sea,  which  it  enters  under  the  name
of  es-Seyal,  between  Birket  el-Khulil  and  Sebbeh.'  At  11
o'clock  we  passed  a  circular  space  blackened  by  fires  and  the
manure  of  animals,  and  marking  the  place  of  a  recent  encamp-
ment of  the  Dhullam.  These  Arabs,  in  the  spring,  pasture  in
this  tract  in  common  with  the  Jehalin  ;  their  proper  territory
lies  farther  west  towards  Beersheba,  where  both  they  and  the
Tiyahah  water  in  common. — We  were  now  gradually  ascending
a  broad  swell  of  land.  At  11.5  was  another  small  ruin,  called
el-Museik,  similar  to  those  before  mentioned.  "We  reached  the
height  of  the  swell  or  broad  ridge  at  11.50,  near  another  site  of
ruins,  and  a  mound  or  low  Tell  on  our  right,  called  Eiijeim  Se-
ISmeh.  Here  we  halted  for  half  an  hour  for  refreshment  and  to
survey  the  country.

We  had  here  an  extensive  view  of  the  district  through  which
we  had  passed,  as  far  back  as  to  the  mountain  ridge  we  had
crossed  on  Saturday,  which  extended  far  along  on  our  right  s
towards  the  southwest.'  Its  furthest  point  in  that  direction,  a
steep  low  bluff,  now  bore  about  west  ;  and  seemed  almost  to
close  up  the  plain  towards  Beersheba.  Yet  such  is  not  the
case  ;  for  the  Wady  es-Seba'  has  its  head  on  this  side  of  the
mountain,  in  the  district  around  Milh,  and  passes  off  around  the
bluff.  The  Tell  by  Milh  was  pointed  out ;  and  also  another  hill
near  a  place  called  'Ar'arah  ;  both  of  which  we  visited  on  our
return.^  Before  us,  the  country  exhibited  the  same  general  fea-
tures as  that  in  our  rear.*

Setting  off  again  at  12.20,  we  passed  in  ten  minutes  another
small  site  of  foundations,  called  Sudeid.  Our  course  was  now
in  general  about  southeast.  At  1  o'clock  Rujeim  Selameh  bore
N.  40°  E.  and  Tell  et-Tawaneh,  a  marked  point  near  Ma'in,  N.  5°
W.  The  country  continued  to  bear  the  same  general  character
as  that  we  had  traversed  ;  except  that  Ave  had  found  it  all  day
becoming  more  and  more  barren,  and  assuming  more  the  features

about  8  liours  with  camels;  Onomast.  art.  the  mountain  so.    On  tlie  north  side  of  it

Arath  {'Apani).    This  accords  well  witli  they  would  very  likely  have  called  it  in

our  present  distance  from  Hebron. — From  the  same  way  Jebel  Ma'in  or  Jebel  Kur-

tho  point  where  wo  now  were,  Beyiidh  mul.    We  could  not  find  that  the  ridge

bore  W.    Encampment  of  the  Jehalin  N.  had  a  distinct  name.
27"  W.    Jenbeh  N.  16"  W.  '  See  under  June  3d  and  4th.

'  See  above,  Vol.  I.  pp.  501,  502,  525.         *  Hero  at   Hujeim  Selameh  we  took

'  Lord  Lindsay  says,  the  Arabs  called  bearings :  Encampment  of  the  Jehillin  N.

this  rid^o  Jebel  el-Kuryct(nn  ;  Letters  Vol.  15  '  W.    Tell  'Ar.id  N.  55^  W.  cl-Milh

n.    His  Arabs  had  probably  been  speak-  about  W.    'Aj'arah  S.  70'  W.
ing  of  el-Kuryetcin  and  therefore  uamed
u.  473,  474

MAT2S.3

rPPEK  ZL"  WEI  RAH.

103

of  the  desert.  It  was  here  hilly  and  intersected  by  small  ra-
vines, but  without  precipices  ;  and  had  been  thinly  covered  with
a  slight  growth  of  grass,  now  dry.

At  ten  minutes  past  2  o'cLx;k,  we  reached  the  brow  of  the
first  descent  or  offset  towards  the  Dead  Sea,  a  steep  declivity  of
seven  or  eight  hundred  feet,  leading  down  to  another  broad  tract
BtiU  several  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Here  are  a
few  traces  of  rude  foundations,  the  site  of  a  former  village  called
ez-Zuweirah  el-Foka,  Upper  Zuweirah."  Leaving  the  camels
to  descend  by  the  usual  circuitous  p*ss.  we  struck  off  a  short
distance  to  the  right  along  a  ridge  projecting  somewhat  towards
the  southeast,  on  the  p>int  of  which  are  the  ruins  of  a  square
massive  tower,  once  probably  a  watchtower.  Here  a  wide  pros-
pect spread  itself  out  betore  ns,  over  the  southern  part  of  the
Dead  Sea  and  the  southern  Ghor  ;  in  which  we  at  once  recog-
nised all  the  features  that  had  alreadv  become  so  familiar  to  ns
at  'Ain  Jidy.'

Below  us,  stm  between  us  and  the  sea,  lay  the  broad  elevated
tract  above  mentioned,  thickly  studded  with  white  conical  hills
and  short  ridges  of  limestone  and  chalk  of  fentastic  shapes,  pre-
senting the  aspect  of  a  frightful  desert.  It  seemed  here  but  a
short  distance  across  this  tract  ;  but  from  the  foot  of  the  first
pass  we  travelled  nearly  four  hours,  and  encamped  without
reaching  the  shore.  Beyond  lay  TJsdum,  a  low  dark  ridge  run-
ning off  nearly  S.  S.  E.  along  the  shore,  and  then  turning  almost
southwest.  Here  the  long  penjisula  with  its  isthmus  was  on
our  left  ;  and  Sebbeh  could  not  have  been  far  distant,  though  it
was  not  now  visible,  nor  did  we  at  anv  rime  get  sight  of  it.
The  south  end  of  the  sea  lay  before  us  in  perfect  distinctness,
opposite  the  southeast  angle  of  Usdum  ;  and  we  could  now  mark
the  wet  and  slimy  surface  of  the  ground  along  the  Ghor,  which
had  deceived  us  at  'Ain  Jidy.-  Further  south,  the  Ghor  was
parrially  covered  with  vegetarion  ;  and  stiU  further  we  could
perceive  a  line  of  whitish  cliffs  crossing  it  obliquely,  with  which
we  afterwards  became  better  acquainted.  Beyond  these,  the
desert  tract  of  the  broad  sandy  valley  stretched  off  in  a  southerly
direction  beyond  the  limit  of  vision.  The  eastern  moimtains
were  now  very  distinct  ;  though  Kerak  was  not  %'isible,  being
hidden  by  intervening  peaks.  Yet  the  Wady  Kerak  or  ed-
Dera'ah  covdd  be  seen  coming  down  upon  the  isthmus,  and
covering  the  northern  side  of  it  with  verdure.^  Just  north  of
this  we  could  distinguish  a  smaU  ravine  caUed  Wady  Beni
Hemad.    South  of  the  isthmus,  nearly  opposite  to  us,  was

'  Compare  generally  the  description  of       '  See  above,  VoL  I.  p.  502.
diis  part  of  the  Dead  Se*  as  seen  from  the       '  See  above,  VoL  L  pp.  519.  520.
cUff  over  'Aia  Jidy ;  VoL  L  p.  501-503.

iL  474-476

104

FROM  HEBBON  TO  WADT  MUSA.

[Sec.  Xn.

Wady  el-Kuneiyeh  ;  while  a  little  beyond  the  southeast  corner
of  the  sea,  Wady  el-Kurahy  issues  from  the  mountains,  bearing
higher  up  the  name  of  Wady  el-Ahsy  ;  this  also  occasions  a
tract  of  verdure  in  the  Grhor.  Far  in  the  south,  among  the
eastern  mountains,  Sheikh  Hussan  thought  he  could  point  out,
though  somewhat  indistinctly,  the  peak  of  Mount  Hor.'

We  descended  by  a  shorter  and  steeper  route,  and  met  the
camels  just  as  they  also  reached  the  foot  at  3  o'clock.  Here  we
crossed  the  bed  of  a  torrent  running  to  the  right,  called  Wady
el-Jerrah.  Further  down  in  the  same  direction  it  receives  an-
other called  Wady  el-Fa'iya  coming  from  the  southwest*  and
then  turning  eastwards,  the  united  Wady  takes  the  name  el-
Muhauwat,  and  finds  its  way  down  to  the  sea  at  the  north  end
of  Usdum.  We  now  kept  on  southeast  across  the  tract  of  deso-
late chalky  hills  above  described,  mostly  along  a  winding  valley.
Nowhere  had  we  seen  a  more  hideous  desert.  After  a  long
and  tedious  ride  we  came  out  at  5.50  upon  the  brow  of  the
second  descent.  Here  is  another  steep  rocky  declivity,  also  of
not  less  than  seven  or  eight  hundred  feet.  The  path  keeps
mostly  along  a  ravine  in  the  rock  ;  .and  in  the  lower  part  is
quite  steep,  though  not  particularly  difficult.  The  ravine  is
the  head  of  Wady  ez-Zuweirah,  which  here  runs  off  directly
towards  the  Dead  Sea.  At  the  bottom  of  the  pass,  the  forma-
tion of  limestone  and  chalk,  through  which  we  had  passed,  gives
way  to  a  soft  chalk  or  whitish  indurated  marl,  in  horizontal  lay-
ers, washed  by  the  rains  into  pilasters  and  other  fantastic  shapes.
At  the  very  bottom,  which  we  reached  at  6.40,  just  where  the
Wady  runs  off  apparently  on  a  level  towards  the  sea,  stands  a
small  Saracenic  fort,  on  an  isolated  cUff  of  this  chalky  earth,  so
soft  as  to  be  easily  broken  off  with  the  hands.  It  is  entirely
surrounded  and  overlooked  by  other  similar  chalky  cUffs  of  much
greater  elevation.  The  Wady  is  here  narrow  ;  and  in  the  per-
pendicular wall  nearly  overagainst  the  fort,  a  chamber  with  loop
holes  is  excavated  in  the  soft  rock  at  some  height  above  the
ground.  Near  by  are  two  reservoirs  built  up  of  stone,  and  a
cistern,  all  now  dry  ;  but  our  Arabs  said  there  was  rain  water  in
a  ravine  higher  up.  This  spot  is  ez-Zuweirah  ;  in  distinction
from  which  the  other  is  called  "  the  Upper."

We  now  followed  down  Wady  ez-Zuweirah.    Through  its

'  From  this  high  point  at  cz-Zuweirah  E.    Peak  in  mountains  of  Moab  seen  from

el-F6ka,  tlie  various  places  visible  bore  as  Hebron  S.  52°  E.    Southeast  corner  of  the

follows :  Encampment  of  the  Jehalin  N.  Dead  Sea  S.  44°  E.    Southeast  angle  of

25'  W.    Tell  et-Tawiineh  near  Ma'in  N.  I''sdum  S.  41°  E.    Mouth  of  Wady  el-

10'  W.  North  end  of  the  peninsula  X.  70'  Kunihy  S.  40°  E.    Mount  Hor  about  S.

E.    Mouth  of  AVady  Beni  Hemad  N.  82°  The  lower  pass  of  ez-Zuweirah  before  na

E.    North  side  of  Isthmus  and  mouth  of  bore  S,  45^  E.

Wady  Kerak  N.  8.5°  E.    South  end  of  pe-       '  We  passed  near  the  head  of  Wady  el-

ninsula  and  south  side  of  Isthmus  S.  78°  Fa'iya  on  our  return ;  see  under  June  3d.

ii.  476,  477

Mat  28.]

PASS  OF  ZrWEIRAH,

105

narrow  opening  we  could  look  out  upon  tlie  sea  and  eastern
mountains,  on  which  the  setting  sun  just  now  threw  its  beams,
tinging  their  naked  sides  with  crimson  hues.  At  length  at  6.50
we  turned  aside  into  a  narrow  ravine,  called  Wady  en-Xejd,
coming  in  from  the  left  ;  and  encamped  for  the  night  in  one  of
the  wildest  spots  we  had  yet  visited,  shut  in  on  every  side  by
whitish  perpendicular  cliffs  of  indurated  marl.  Our  guides
sought  this  retreat,  in  order  that  our  tent  and  fire  might  escape
notice,  should  there  be  any  strangers  passing  along  this  way. —
We  here  acrain  encountered  the  cHmate  of  the  Ghor  and  Dead
Sea  ;  the  thermometer  which  at  sunrise  had  stood  at  52°,  bemg
now  at  80=  F.

This  double  pass  of  ez-Zuweirah,  which  we  had  now  de-
scended, was  first  visited  in  modern  times  by  Seetzen  in  A.  D.
1806,  who  ascended  it  on  his  way  fi-om  Kerak  around  the  south
end  of  the  Dead  Sea  to  Jerusalem,  though  he  does  not  name  it.'
In  A.  D.  1818,  Irby  and  Mangles  with  their  party  passed  on
this  route  from  Hebron  to  Kerak ;  and  describe  the  pass  and
fort,  which  they  call  el-Zowar."*  Since  that  time  until  this
year,  I  am  not  aware  that  it  had  been  visited  by  any  traveller.
It  must  of  course  have  been  the  road,  by  which  Ibrahim  Pasha
and  his  troops  passed  from  Hebron  to  Tufileh  and  Kerak  in
A.  D.  1834.

With  our  guides  of  the  Jehalin  we  were  better  pleased  than
we  had  anticipated.  From  M.  de  Bertou,  who  had  made  the
journey  with  them  a  few  weeks  before,  we  had  heard  only  com-
plaints of  their  vmaccommodating  spirit  and  extortions  ;  so  that,
although  our  previous  experience  had  already  taught  us  to  lay
the  fault  chiefly  at  his  own  door,  yet  we  had  not  expected  to
avoid  petty  vexations  and  a  general  want  of  fidelity.  In  all
this  we  were  favourably  disappointed  ;  although  the  strong  pre-
judice which  we  found  among  the  tribe  against  that  traveller,
with  whom  it  seems  they  had  been  throughout  on  ill  terms,  did
not  fail  at  first  to  operate  also  to  our  disadvantage.  Finding
that  my  companion  was  at  home  in  their  language  and  customs,
and  that  we  were  disposed  to  treat  them  as  men,  and  not  as
slaves,  their  jealousy  and  reserve  soon  wore  off  in  a  degree.  Yet
they  were  never  so  active  and  obliging,  nor  so  communicative,
as  our  good  Tawarah  ;  and  Sheikh  Hussan  was  not  to  be  com-
pared with  TuweUeb  or  Beshariih,  in  point  of  good  sense  or
general  information.  One  of  the  men,  Muhammed,  was  a
clownish  buffoon.  Indeed,  they  seemed  both  physically  and
mentally  to  be  a  heavier-moulded  race  than  the  Tawarah.
Their  camels  were  much  superior  to  those  of  the  peninsula.

'  Zach'3  Monad.  Corresp.  XVHL  pp.  »  Travels  pp.  3o0,  351.  [107.]  Legh
437.  438.    Keisen  I.  p.  429.  under  May  10th.

ii.  477-479

106

FROM  HEBRON  TO  WADT  MUSA.

[Sec.  Xn.

Our  attendants  of  the  Haweitat  proved  to  be  well  acquaint-
ed with,  the  country  south  of  Wady  Milsa  ;  they  were  at  first
reserved  ;  but  the  kindness  and  conversation  of  my  companion
Boon  dissipated  their  jealousy,  and  in  some  degree  won  their  con-
fidence. One  old  man,  who  seemed  to  be  their  leader,  was  fond
of  talking,  and  exhibited  more  shrewdness  of  mind  than  any  of
our  Arab  companions.

Tuesday,  May  29#A.  We  set  off  without  breakfasting,  ten
minutes  before  5  o'clock  ;  and  after  returning  from  the  side  val-
ley en-Nejd,  followed  down  Wady  ez-Zuweirah  running  south-
east, still  narrow,  rugged,  and  shut  in  by  perpendicular  cliffs  of
marl,  in  horizontal  layers  of  unequal  hardness.  The  path  lies
most  of  the  way  along  the  bed  of  the  Wady  ;  yet  at  one  place
the  latter  makes  a  circuit  towards  the  south,  while  the  road  as-
cends and  crosses  the  rocky  intermediate  point.  Here  was  the
last  descent  towards  the  shore  ;  and  just  as  we  reached  it  at  5\
o'clock,  the  sun  rose  over  the  eastern  mountains.  As  we  looked
down  through  the  narrow  opening  of  the  valley,  the  calm  glassy
waters  of  the. lake  became  liquid  gold  ;  and  the  verdant  shrubs
upon  the  shore,  tinged  with  sunny  hues,  gave  for  the  moment
an  impression  of  beauty  to  a  scene  in  itself  stern  and  desolate
as  death.  Ten  minutes  later  we  issued  from  the  mouth  of  the
Wady  upon  the  plain  along  the  shore,  here  of  considerable
breadth,  full  of  shrubs  with  Seyal  and  Turfa  trees,  which  we
also  found  along  the  bottom  of  the  valley  higher  up.'  Just  at
the  right  comes  in  Wady  el-Muhauwat  from  the  southwest
along  the  base  of  the  cliffs,  having  found  its  way  Aovm  through
the  mountains  jfrom  the  higher  tract  above  ;  it  is  here  broad  and
full  of  the  like  bushes  and  trees  ;  and  separates  the  north  end
of  Usdum  from  the  regular  chffs  of  the  coast.*

As  we  now  took  leave  of  ez-Zuweirah,  it  may  be  proper  to
remark,  that  neither  this  name,  nor  the  site,  has  any  relation  to
the  ancient  Zoar  ;  although  a  partial  resemblance  in  the  name,
might  at  first  be  supposed.  The  Hebrew  Zoar  contains  the  let-
ter 'Ain,  which  never 'falls  away  from  the  middle  of  a  word;
and  accordingly  Abulfeda  and  others  write  that  name  repeatedly
Zoghar,  and  speak  of  it  as  existing  in  their  day.'  The  city  of
Zoar  too  lay  in  sight  of  Sodom,  in  or  adjacent  to  the  plain,  so  as
to  be  exposed  to  the  same  destruction  which  overtook  the  other
cities  ;  and  so  late  as  the  time  of  J erome  it  had  a  Roman  gar-
rison and  many  inhabitants.*    But  the  present  ez-Zuweirah,

'  Irby  and  Mangles  mention  here  also  across  the  sea  and  sonth  of  the  isthmus,

the  Dnm  or  Nubk  ;  p.  .351.  [107.]  S.  80°  E.

'  From  the  mouth  of  Wady  cz-Zuweirah,       '  Abulfcd.  Tab.  Syr.  ed.  Kfililer  pp.  8,

the  southwest  extremity  of  the  peninsula,  9,  II,  12,  etc.    Ibn  el-Wardi  ibid.  p.  178.

as  here  seen,  bore  N.  30"  E.    Jebel  Jil'ad  Sec  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  2'>T>,  n.  2.
near  es-Sult  N.  24°  E.  Wady  el-Kuneiyeh,       «  Gen.  10,  19-21.    Hieron.  Onom.  art
ii.  479,  480

Mat  29.]

EZ-ZUWEIRAH,  USDTJM.

107

taking  even  tlie  lower,  (for  the  upper  is  wholly  out  of  the  ques-
tion,) lies  more  than  half  an  hour  distant  from  any  part  of  the  sea
or  plain  ;  is  entirely  shut  in  by  mountains,  so  as  to  be  nowhere
visible  from  the  plain  ;  and  exhibits  no  trace  of  any  dwellings,
except  the  small  modern  Saracenic  fort.  Nor  is  there  elsewliere
in  the  Wady,  or  at  its  mouth,  the  slightest  vestige  of  any  for-
mer site.  Further,  there  is  decisive  historical  testimony,  that
the  ancient  Zoar  lay  on  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  in  the  territo-
ries of  Moab.  I  am  therefore  disposed,  with  Irby  and  Mangles,
to  assign  its  position  to  the  mouth  of  the  Wady  Kerak,  where
the  latter  opens  upon  the  isthmus  of  the  long  peninsula.  In
that  spat  these  travellers  found  the  traces  of  an  extensive  an-
cient site.'

Our  course  now  became  about  S.  by  E.  and  led  us  across  the
broad  plain,  somewhat  inclining  towards  the  sea,  formed  by  the
Wady  el-Muhauwat,  and  thickly  covered  with  bushes  and  trees  as
described  above.  By  looking  up  this  Wady  we  could  perceive  that
Usdum  is  only  a  narrow  ridge,  like  a  huge  windrow  ;  while  the
tract  lying  between  it  and  the  western  cliffs,  from  which  we  had
descended,  is  filled  out  with  conical  hills  and  short  ridges  of
chalky  limestone,  like  those  of  the  higher  tract  we  had  traversed
yesterday.  W^e  reached  the  northern  extremity  of  Usdum  at
5.50  ;  tliis  lies  at  some  distance  from  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  the
space  is  covered  with  shrubs  ;  but  the  flat  shore  soon  trends
towards  it,  and  becomes  narrower  and  whoUy  desert.*  All  our
present  Arab  guides  gave  to  the  mountain  the  name  of  Khashm
Usdum  ;  the  former  word  signifying  "  cartilage  of  the  nose.'''^
The  road  continues  along  the  base  of  the  mountain,  here  run-
ning towards  the  S.  S.  E.  It  was  in  this  vicinity  that  Sheikh
Hussan  gave  us  the  information,  which  I  have  elsewhere  related,
respecting  the  appearance  of  bitumen  in  the  lake,  and  as  to  the
ford  from  this  part  of  the  western  shore  to  the  southern  side  of
the  peninsula,  by  which  he  himself  had  once  passed.^

At  6.10  a  heap  of  stones  lay  between  us  and  the  shore,  called
Um  Zoghal.^    Beyond  this,  the  ridge  of  Usdum  begins  to  exhi-

Bala,  "  habitatoribus  quoque  pr.  p.         sq.  Nouv.

and  thoir  party.  Aiiiiak-s  des  Voyages,  1839,  Tom  III.  p.

'  This  hj-pothesis  seems  first  to  have  264.

been  su!;;;Rstpd  by  Col.  Leake,  in  his  Pre-  '  See  Letronne's  paper  in  the  Journal  des

face  to  lUirckhardt's  Travels  in  Syria  etc.  Savans  Oct.  1835,  pp.  r>9C-G02.  Nouv.

Lond.  1822.  4.    Letronne  erroneously  as-  Ann.  des  Voyages,  ibid.  p.  2.'>7  ?q. —

cribcs  it  to  Ritter;  for  although  the  latter  The  observations  of  Moore  and  Hoke,  and

speaks  of  the  valley,  he  says  nothing  of  of  Schubert,  by  which  the  depression  of

the  Jordan;  Krdkunde  Th.  II.  pj).  217,  the  Dead  Sea  was  first  detected,  were  made

218.    Heil.  1818.    Letronne  in  journal  in  Mivruh  and  April  1837.

ii.  m-m

May  29.]

USDTTM.     THE  GHOR.

115

but  as  the  intervening  tract  of  marsliy  land  was  impassable  for
tbe  camels,  vre  were  compelled  to  keep  along  the  western  side  of
the  Ghor,  and  thus  make  a  large  circuit.

Leaving  the  corner  of  the  sea,  at  8^  o'clock,  we  proceeded
along  the  base  of  Usdum  on  a  course  at  first  southwest.  The
ground  all  along  was  moist  and  slippery,  sticking  to  our  shoes  as
we  walked  ;  and  the  naked  tract  on  our  left  was  full  of  salt
drains,  sluo;crish  and  dead.'  The  mountain  continued  all  the
way  to  exhibit  the  same  formation  ;  but  the  salt  is  here  less  ex-
posed than  along  the  sea.  Lumps  of  nitre  were  scattered  along
the  base  ;  of  which  we  picked  up  several,  one  as  large  as  the
fist.  We  reached  the  southern  end  of  the  ridge  at  9.25.  Here
and  stiU  further  south,  we  saw  drift  wood  lying  in  lines  as  thrown
up  by  the  sea  ;  showing  that  the  level  of  the  lake  must  some-
times be  not  less  than  ten  or  fifteen  feet  higher  than  at  present.
In  a  few  minutes  we  passed  a  purling  rill  of  beautifully  limpid
water,  coming  down  from  near  the  base  of  the  mountain  ;  it
proved  to  be  salt  as  the  saltest  brine,  though  without  any  bitter
taste.    Another  similar  rill  occurred  shortly  after.

^Yhe^e  the  ridge  of  Usdum  thus  terminates,  the  low  cliffs
and  conical  hills  of  marl,  which  we  had  seen  behind  it  from  the
mouth  of  Wady  ez-Zuweirah,  come  out  again  and  skirt  the
western  side  of  the  Ghor  ;  the  regular  limestone  mountains
lying  stiU  an  hour  or  two  further  back.  This  trending  off"  of
Usdum  of  course  again  increases  the  breadth  of  the  Ghor,  which
is  contracted  at  the  extremity  of  the  sea  ;  although  exclusive
of  the  marl  cliffs,  it  is  here  not  so  wide  as  at  'Ain  Jidy.  "We
now  kept  along  at  the  side  of  these  hills,  on  a  general  course
nearly  S.  S.  W.  Ten  minutes  fi-om  the  end  of  Usdum,  a  scat-
tered vegetation  again  commences  on  this  side  of  the  Ghor  ;  of
which  there  had  been  no  trace  along  the  whole  extent  of  the
mountain.  The  tract  towards  the  middle  still  continued  naked.
Small  Wadys  now  came  in  from  among  the  low  hills.  At  9.40
a  path  was  pointed  out,  leading  up  the  western  mountains  at
some  distance  south  of  Zuweirah  ;  it  is  called  Kukb  el-Em'az,
from  the  Wady  of  the  same  name  further  on.  Two  other  roads
still  further  south  were  said  to  come  down  into  the  Ghor,  called
el-Buweib  and  es-Suleisil ;  but  they  are  merely  Arab  paths,  not
used  by  caravans.  By  them  the  Arabs  DhuUam  and  Sa'idiyeh
descend  from  the  west,  to  winter  in  the  Ghor  and  el-'Arabah"

A  brackish  fountain  was  on  our  right  at  9.55,  called  'Ain  el-
Beida,  with  a  few  stunted  palm  trees  and  many  canes.  The
stream  which  flowed  from  it  was  too  salt  for  the  camels  to  drink.
At  10,^  o'clock  the  bed  of  a  torrent,  Wady  el-Em'az,  crossed
our  path,  coming  down  from  the  western  mountains  ;  and  beyond

'  Comp.  Anderson's  Report,  p.  182.

iL  492.  493

116

FROM  HEBRON  TO  WADT  MUSA,

[SecXIT.

it,  water  was  springing  up  in  several  places,  all  included  under
the  name  el-Beida.  Round  about  these  wet  spots  are  cane
brakes.  Indeed  the  tract  watered  by  all  these  fountains,  is  cov-
ered with  shrubs  and  bushes  ;  but  it  exhibits  nowhere  arable
soil,  and  was  now  in  many  places  Avhite  with  salt.  The  shrubs
were  chiefly  the  Retem,  Tamarisk,  Ghurkud,  and  the  like.  The
Ghurkud  was  growing  in  abundance,  as  around  other  brackish
fountains  ;  its  red  berries  were  now  just  ripe,  sweetish  and  yet
slightly  acidulous  to  the  taste,  very  juicy  and  pleasant,  and  quite
refreshing  to  the  heated  traveller.*

Opposite  to  this  part,  the  naked  portion  of  the  Ghor  seemed
to  end  ;  and  was  succeeded  by  a  broad  tract  of  shrubs  along  the
foot  of  the  southern  line  of  cliffs.  Two  or  three  large  drains,  ap-
parently coming  from  Wadys,  extended  further  up  ;  one  of  which
was  on  our  left  and  nearly  parallel  to  our  course.

We  were  now  approaching  the  southwest  corner  of  the  Ghor,
where  the  chalky  hills  on  our  right  sweep  round  to  meet  the  Hne
of  cliifs  on  the  south,  which  separate  the  Ghor  and  'Arabah.
These  latter,  as  here  seen,  appear  indeed  merely  as  an  extension
of  the  former  towards  the  southeast.  As  we  advanced,  the  drain
upon  our  left  proved  to  be  the  continuation  of  a  broad  valley  en-
tering the  Ghor  at  its  southwest  corner,  named  Wady  el-Fikreh.
It  comes  from  the  southwest  near  a  pass  of  the  mountains  called
es-Sufah  ;  and  its  wide  bed,  strewed  with  stones  and  furrowed
with  channels,  shows  that  it  occasionally  brings  down  large
masses  of  water.  In  this  Wady,  some  hours  above  and  not  far
north  of  the  pass  es-Sufah,  there  was  said  to  be  a  fountain  of  the
same  name,  with  palm  trees.*  Crossing  the  bed  of  the  Wady,
we  came  at  11  o'clock  to  the  precipitous  cliff  on  its  eastern  side,
which  here  forms  the  commencement  of  the  line  of  cliffs  nmning
obhquely  across  the  great  valley.^

We  now  turned  in  a  general  direction  S.  S.  E.  along  the  foot
of  the  cliffs.  They  are  of  chalky  earth,  or  indurated  marl,  of
the  same  general  character  as  the  sides  of  the  valley  ez-Zuwei-
rah,  and  the  conical  hills  back  of  Usdum  and  along  the  western
side  of  the  Ghor.  They  vary  in  height,  in  different  parts,  from
fifty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  The  face  of  the  cliffs,  though
very  steep,  is  not  jjerpendicular ;  and  they  are  much  furrowed
by  the  rains  ;  so  that  the  upper  part  presents  a  jagged  appear-
ance. AU  along  their  base  are  fountains  of  brackish  water,
oozing  out  and  forming  a  tract  of  marshy  land,  overgrown  with
canes  intermingled  with  shrubs  and  trees.    Tamarisks  and  the

'  See  a  description  of  the  Ghurkud,  Vol.  '  From  this  point  the  eastern  angle  of
L  p.  CG.  the  rUlrra  Usduin,  at  the  southwestern  cor-

"  We  saw  this  Wady  higher  up  on  our    uer  of  the  sea,  bore  N.  38°  E.
return,  June  2d.
ii.  493-495

Mav  29.]

THE  GHOR.     LI^'E  OF  CLIFFS.

117

Nubk  were  frequent  ;  and  occasionally  there  was  a  stunted  palm.
With  the  exception  of  a  few  naked  strips  along  brackish  drains,
the  whole  breadth  of  the  Ghor  was  here  occupied  with  this  spe-
cies of  verdure.  Around  these  and  all  the  other  fountains  we
passed  in  the  Ghor,  were  many  tracks  of  wild  swine  ;  they  were
said  to  abound  in  the  region,  though  we  saw  none.

Our  path  lay  along  the  very  base  of  the  chffs,  between  them
and  the  jungle,  above  the  foimtains,  in  order  to  avoid  the  mar.«hy
ground.  One  of  the  fountains,  to  which  we  came  at  llf  o'clock,
sends  forth  a  fine  gushing  stream  of  hmpid  water,  veiy  nearly
pure,  or  at  least  only  slightly  brackish.  A  broad  tract  of  jungle
lies  below.  It  is  called  'Ain  el-'Anis,  "  the  Bride's  Fountain,"
and  gives  its  name  to  all  the  others.  Here  we  halted  for  nearly
two  hours,  for  rest,  and  in  order  to  fill  the  water-skins  for  the  day
and  night.  We  sought  the  shade  of  the  bushes  ;  but  found  the
heat  very  oppressive  ;  the  thermometer  standing  at  92^  F.  In-
deed we  were  now  exposed  to  the  fiill  influence  of  the  scorching
climate  of  the  Ghor.'

Here  we  could  see  the  Wady  Ghurtindel  already  mentioned,
which  comes  down  from  the  eastern  mountains,  and  enters  the
Ghor  just  at  its  southeast  comer.  It  takes  its  name,  according
to  our  Arabs,  from  a  ruined  place  called  Ghurundel  near  its
head.  This  was  doubtless  the  ancient  Arindela,  an  episcopal
city  of  the  Third  Palestine,  mentioned  along  with  Areopohs  and
Charak  Moab.  The  names  of  its  bishops  appear  in  the  signa-
tures of  councils  ;  and  it  is  found  still  marked  as  a  bishop's  see
in  the  latest  Notitice  before  the  time  of  the  crusades.'^  Both
the  site  and  the  valley  escaped  the  notice  of  Burckhardt,  as  he
passed  through  the  mountains.  Irby  and  Mangles  visited  the
site,  but  do  not  mention  the  valley.  The  ruins  are  situated  on
the  slope  of  a  hill  near  a  spring  of  water,  and  are  of  considera-
ble extent.'

While  we  rested  at  'Ain  el-'Arus,  our  Haweitat  took  the  op-
portunity of  preparing  a  warm  breakfast.  They  had  brought
along  some  flour,  or  rather  meal,  of  wheat  and  barley  filled  with
chaff ;  of  which  they  now  kneaded  a  round  flat  cake  of  some

'  The  following  bearing  are  from  the  two  in  the  other ;  their  diameter  is  two

fountain 'Ain  el-'Arus  :  Southeast  angle  of  feet;  none  have  capitals.    There  are  also

Usdum  N.  20'  E.    Peak  of  the  mountains  near  to  this  spot,  fragments  of  columns  of

of  Moab  near  Khanzireh,  N.  75'  E.    "Wa-  three  feet  diameter ;  the  capitals  appear  to

dy  et-Tuf  leh,  mouth,  S.  60  "  E.    Wady  be  bad  Doric." — Burckhardt  found  only

Ghurundel,  mouth,  S.  35"  E.  the  southern  Wady   Ghurundel,  beyond

'  Keland  Palaest  p.   581.     Compare  Wadv  Mu.^a;  but  was  the  first  to  suggest

ibid.  pp.  21.5,  217,  223,  226,  533.    Le  the  identity  of  this  name  with  Arindela;

Quicn  Oriens  Christ.  III.  p.  727.  Travels  p.  iil.    The  northern  Ghurundel

'  Irhv  and  Mangles  p.  376  [115],  "To-  was  inserted  on  the  map  accompanying  his

wards  the  centre  of  the  ruins  are  the  re-  work,  from  the  informarion  of  Irby  and

mains  of  two  parallel  rows  of  columns,  of  Mangles,
which  three  are  standing  in  one  row  and

ii.  495;  49G

118

FROM  HEBRON  TO  WADT  MUSA.

[Sec.  Xn.

tliiclmess.  This  they  threw  into  the  ashes  and  coals  of  a  fire
they  had  kindled  ;  and  after  due  time,  brought  out  a  loaf  of
bread,  as  black  on  the  outside  as  the  coals  themselves,  and  not
much  whiter  within.  After  breaking  it  up  small  in  a  dish  while
still  warm,  they  mixed  with  it  some  of  the  butter  they  had
stolen,  and  thus  made  their  meal.  Such  is  the  manner  of  life
among  these  sons  of  the  desert ;  though  the  butter  was  a  luxury
by  no  means  common.  On  their  journeys^  coarse  black  un-
leavened bread  is  the  Bedawy's  usual  fare.*

At  1.35,  we  were  again  upon  the  way,  keeping  still  along
the  base  of  the  clitFs  on  a  general  course  S.  S.  E.  but  with
many  curves.  At  2.10  there  was  a  sort  of  angle  in  the  line  of
cliffs  ;  where  they  trend  in  general  more  towards  the  southeast,
but  j^et  with  a  hollow  sweep  towards  the  south.  Their  tops
continued  serrated  and  jagged,  from  the  beds  of  little  torrents
coming  down  from  the  'Arabah  above.  We  crossed  at  2.20  a
Wady  of  this  kind,  of  some  size,  called  el-Kuseib.

At  length  at  2.50,  we  reached  the  opening  of  the  long  ex-
pected Wady  el-Jeib,  through  which  we  were  to  ascend.  To
our  surprise,  it  turned  out  to  be,  not  the  mere  bed  of  a  torrent
descending  from  the  higher  plain  of  the  'Arabah,  but  a  deep
broad  Wady  issuing  from  the  south  upon  the  Ghor,  and  coming
down  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  between  liigh  precipitous
cliffs,  like  those  along  which  we  had  passed.  It  is  indeed  the
vast  drain  of  all  the  'Arabah  ;  which  has  thus  worn  for  itself  in
the  course  of  ages  a  huge  channel,  through  the  upper  jilain  and
the  offset  of  cliffs,  to  the  level  of  the  Ghor  below.*

We  found  here  the  peculiarity,  that  the  eastern  bank  of  this
great  Wady  el-Jeib  terminates  nearly  an  hour  further  south  ;
from  which  point  the  offset,  or  line  of  cliffs,  then  runs  north  of
east  to  the  eastern  mountains  at  the  mouth  of  Wady  Ghurundel,
leaving  before  us  a  wide  open  tract  belonging  to  the  Ghor.  The
water-courses  from  the  Wady  come  down  across  this  tract,  and
pass  on  through  a  space  without  shrubs  and  trees  to  the  marshy
flats  nearer  the  sea.

We  now  turned  up  along  the  western  bank  on  a  course  S.  S.
W.  and  at  3J  o'clock,  were  opposite  the  angle  of  the  eastern

'  Burckh.ardt  travelled  from  beyond  Wa-  '  From  the  point  where  we  now  stood,

dy  Jliisa  across  the  western  desert,  with  viz.  the  western  angle  of  the  cliffs  at  the

Haweitat  apparently  from  the  same  tribe  entrance  of  Wady  el-.Joib,  we  took  the  fol-

as  ours.    "  The  frugality  of  these  Beda-  lowing  bearings :  'Ain  el-'Arus  about  N.

win,"  he  says,  "  is  without  example  ;  my  30°  \V.    Southwest  end  of  Usdum  N.  15°

companions,    who  walked   at  least  five  W.    Southeastern  angle  of  Usdum  at  the

hours  every  day,  supported  themselves  for  corner  of  the  sea,  N.  15"  E.    Peak  in  the

four  and  twenty  hours  with  a  piece  of  dry  mountains  of  Moab  N.  Go"  E.    Wady  et-

hlack  bread,  of  about  a  pound  and  a  half  Tuf  ileh,  mouth,  N.  Hr>  '  E.    Mouth  of  \Va-

wcight,  without  any  other  kind  of  nourish-  dy  Ghun'mdel  and  southeast  corner  of  the

ment."    Travels  p.  439.  Ghor  S.  40'  E.
ii.  49C-498

Mat  29.]

WADT  EL-JUB.

119

bank  ;  whence  the  line  of  cliffs  rans  neafly  east  by  north  to  the
foot  of  the  mountains,  about  an  hour  distant.  Here  we  entered
the  Wady  itself,  in  this  part  not  far  from  half  a  mile  broad,
shut  in  between  perpendicular  walls  of  the  same  chalky  earth
or  marl,  from  one  hundred  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  high,
which  exclude  all  view  of  the  country  and  of  every  object
around.  The  banks  indeed  are  so  entirely  perpendicular,  that  it
would  be  next  to  impossible  to  ascend  out  of  the  valley  on
either  side.  The  broad  bed  of  the  Wady  is  very  level,  and  has
to  the  eye  but  a  slight  ascent  towards  the  south  ;  yet  it  bears
traces  of  an  immense  volume  of  water,  rushing  along  with  vio-
lence and  covering  the  whole  breadth  of  the  valley.  At  its
mouth  and  below,  the  bed  Is  covered  with  Tamarisks  (Turfa),
and  another  shrub  resembling  the  Eetem,  but  larger,  called  el-
Ghutlhah.^  These  bushes  simation ;
the  porphyry  entirely  disappeared  ;  and  the  Wadys  became  of
leas  rapid  descent.  Half  an  hoar  later,  we  came  oat  opon  the
Toeky  ridge  at  the  head  of  this  Wady  Kemela  ;  and  finind  oar-
sdres  upon  a  circular  plateau  or  basin,  once  partially  tilled,  sor-
roanded  fay  low  weather-worn  clif&  of  sandstone.

After  croaang  this  tract,  we  entered  from  it  at  11.20  a  chasm
in  the  eastern  range  of  cliiB^  called  es-1^ ;  tiioogh  it  has  little
lesemUanoe  to  the  Sik  of  Wady  Mtea.  The  bteadth  is  irregnhtf,
varying  fiom  fifky  to  some  two  hundred  feet ;  the  rocks  upon  the
sides  are  perpendicular,  and  perhaps  a  hnnidred  feet  in  hei^^
Its  course  is  about  S.  K  by  S.  The  bed  a  torrent  comes
down  throng  it ;  and  along  with  eome  slight  traces  of  tillage!,
it  WIS  crowded  with  a  luxuriant  growth  <4eanders,  jonipo^,
oak,  Betem,  and  also  of  Zaknikm,  a  shrub  smilar  in  size  and
appearance  to  the  (Meander.  Fire  minutes  befine  reaching  Ae
farther  end,  there  was  on  the  right  a  niche,  or  rather  a  large

>  Senmm  OUmmJer,  Sfn^  Hkt  Ba  HcfWi^  L  ^  KS.
i.  509,  510

Mat  31.]

DIBDIBA,  ETC.

127

tablet,  hewn  high  up  in  the  rock,  exhibiting  a  pedestal  in  relief,
with  two  slender  pyramids  or  obelisks  upon  it.  There  is  no  in-
scription ;  except  a  Greek  scrawl  in  red  paint,  now  illegible,  ap-
parently the  work  of  some  casual  visitor  in  by-gone  times.  The
tablet  may  not  improbably  have  been  intended  as  a  sepulchral
monument. '

We  emerged  from  the  Sik  at  o'clock  into  a  new  region,
called  Sutuh  Beida,  "  White  Plains,"  a  broad  uneven  open  tract
or  valley  running  south  by  west,  having  on  the  right  the  naked
sandstone  ridge  through  which  we  had  passed,  and  on  the  left,  a
high  sloping  mountain  ridge  without  precipices,  sprinkled  with
herbage  to  the  top.  On  this  declivity  are  traces  of  tillage  and
also  olive  trees,  around  the  little  village  of  Dibdiba,  not  far  up
the  side  ;  we  were  opposite  to  it  at  12  o'clock.  More  towards
the  south,  isolated  groups  of  sandstone  rocks  and  cliffs  are  scat-
tered in  the  open  tract ;  and  beyond  them  is  Wady  Musa.  The
waters  of  the  northern  part  of  the  plain  flow  off  through  the  Sik
behind  us  ;  wliile  those  further  south  find  their  way  to  Wady
Musa,  which  there  crosses  the  tract  from  east  to  west.  The  soil
of  the  plain  seemed  poor  ;  and  there  was  only  a  scanty  tillage.
A  few  people  were  reaping  and  gleaning  a  miserable  crop  of
wheat  sown  among  the  shrubs  ;  the  stalks  were  hardly  a  foot
high,  few  and  far  between.  Near  by  was  a  threshing-floor  ;  but
the  crop  seemed  hardly  to  merit  so  much  trouble.  A  few  Beda-
win  were  also  pasturing  their  flocks.  We  halted  at  12.10  and
purchased  a  sheep  ;  offering  for  it  forty  piastres,  which  at  first
was  refused,  but  afterwards  taken.  We  wished  to  provide  a
good  supper  for  our  Arabs  this  evening  in  Wady  Musa  ;  in  order
to  part  with  our  Haweitat  on  good  terms  on  the  morrow.

The  poor  people  whom  we  here  found,  were  at  the  least  pos-
sible remove  from  savage  life.  In  one  party,  consisting  mostly
of  females,  there  was  a  man  entirely  naked,  except  a  rag  around
his  loins  ;  and  most  of  the  children  had  only  a  hke  covering  for
their  nakedness.  This  man  was  armed  with  a  gun  and  knife,
and  looked  fierce  and  savage.  In  this  quarter  we  saw  two  or
three  smaU  tombs  in  the  sandstone  rocks.

From  this  spot  we  sent  off  our  servants  and  luggage  direct  to
Wady  Musa  ;  their  course  was  south  by  west,  crossing  obliquely
several  narrow  Wadys  which  ran  into  Wady  Musa  at  points
further  west ;  and  then  following  down  another,  to  enter  near
the  eastern  quarter.  We  in  the  mean  time  took  a  route  more  to
the  left,  in  order  to  approach  from  the  east  through  the  magnifi-
cent Sik  or  chasm.  Setting  off  at  12J  o'clock,  our  course  was
about  south,  along  the  base  of  the  mountain  on  our  left,  and  so

'  This  tablet  is  mentioned  by  Lord  Lindsay,  who  passed  by  this  route  after  leaving
Wady  Musa.

ii.  510-512

128

FROM  HEBRON  TO  WADT  MUSA.

[Sec.  Xn.

around  its  southwestern  end ;  thus  passing  above  or  across  the
heads  of  several  Wadys  running  southwest  to  Wady  Miisa.  At
2  o'clock  we  saw  the  ruined  structure  in  Wady  Musa,  bearing
southwest  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  distant ;  while  at  the
same  time  the  village  of  Eljy  bore  S.  S.  E.  distant  rather  more
than  an  hour.  The  body  of  the  regular  mountain  on  our  left,
appeared  to  be  limestone  ;  a  formation  still  higher  and  further
back  than  the  sandstone  though  the  base  in  this  part,  and  the
Wadys  on  our  right,  were  of  the  latter.  This  appears  to  be  the
mountain,  on  which  Irby  and  Mangles  and  their  companions  en-
camped for  several  days,  before  they  could  enter  Wady  Musa ;
from  it  they  could  see  that  place  in  the  south,  and  the  village  of
Dibdiba  below  them  towards  the  west.'

We  were  now  higher  than  Wady  Musa,  and  were  indeed
traversing  the  top  of  the  broad  sandstone  ridge,  which  extends
from  below  this  end  of  the  mountain  of  Dibdiba  southwards,
forming  the  eastern  barrier  through  which  the  ravine  of  the  Sik
leads  to  the  former  place.  We  soon  had  upon  our  right  a  simi-
lar narrow  chasm,  sunk  deep  in  the  rocky  surface  over  which  we
were  passing,  and  not  more  than  twenty  or  thirty  feet  in  breadth ;
this  I  suppose  to  be  the  ravine  marked  on  the  plan  of  Wady
Musa,  as  entering  at  the  northeast  corner.  At  2.20  we  came
opposite  a  ruined  fortress  on  the  other  side  of  this  chasm,  situ-
ated just  on  the  brink,  and  looking  down  into  the  depths  below.
It  is  of  considerable  extent,  with  pointed  arches  and  imperfect
masonry,  apparently  of  Saracenic  construction.  From  our  posi-
tion near  it,  Mount  Hor  bore  S.  72°  W.  and  Eljy  S.  35°  E.
The  particular  object  of  this  castle  we  could  not  perceive  ;  as  it
seems  to  guard  no  approach  to  Wady  Musa,  nor  to  any  other
place  of  importance.  Perhaps  it  was  an  outpost  of  the  former
fortress  of  Shobek  towards  the  south.  I  am  not  aware  that  it
has  yet  been  noticed  by  travellers.'

Eljy  was  now  before  us,  and  appeared  like  a  good  sized  vil-
lage on  the  western  declivity  of  another  long  limestone  moun-
tain ;  it  lies  on  a  point  or  promontory  between  two  Wadys
wliich  unite  at  the  foot.  According  to  Burckliardt,  it  "con-
tains between  two  and  three  hundred  houses,  and  is  enclosed  by
a  stone  wall  with  three  regular  gates  ;  a  few  large  hewn  stoijes
dispersed  over  the  present  town,  indicate  the  existence  of  an  an-
cient city  on  the  spot."*    The  slopes  around  are  terraced  and

'  Burckhardt  says  that  "  the  rocks  mentioned  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  as  seen

above  Eljy  are  calcareous,  and  the  sand-  from  their  camp  above  Dibdiba  ;  but  in

stone  does  not  begin  until  the  point  where  what  direction  they  do  not  say.  Travels

the  first  tombs  are  excavated  "  in  the  val-  p.  425.  [  l■^0.]

ley  further  wepoml(ou(ri,  vfp\  Si  rhs  Toa3)  83,  8.    Onomast.  arts.  Idumca,  Alius,  Ge-

and  the  Jioiiian  Gebalene,  which  Eusebius  thaim,  etc.    Iteland  Palaest.  p.  82-84.
ii.  551.  552

JCSE  I.]

xorxTAiys  or  edom.  nrHABrrAXTS.

155

South  of  Wadv  el-Ghuweir  follows  tte  district  esh-Sherah  ;
extending,  so  fer  as  we  could  learn,  indefinitely  towards  'Akabah
on  the  south,  and  including  properly  Shobek,  Wadv  Musa,  Ma'an,
el-Humeiyimeh.  and  other  places.'

The  region  el-Hismeh,  the  country  of  the  Ma'az  mentioned
above,  was  here  also  described  as  a  sandy  tract  with  mountains
arC'imd  it  on  the  east  of  'Akabah;  but  not  itself  a  mountain  nor
a  separate  district,  as  repNi.rted  by  Burckhardt.  Yet  the  Arabs
would  be  very  likely  in  pi-r-intins  out  the  adjacent  mountains  to
Epeak  of  them  as  Jebel  Hismeh  or  Tiir  Hismeh  ;  although  all
our  guides,  both  of  the  'Amran  from  'Akabah  and  of  the  Ha-
weitat  from  near  Ma'an,  uniformly  denied  the  existence  of  any
such  name  as  applied  to  a  mountain.'

The  chief  tribe  of  Bedawin  in  the  district  of  Jebal  are  the
Hejaya.  Besides  these,  there  is  ah'?  a  branch  of  the  Ka'abineh,
who  dwell  in  the  regic'n  of  Wady  el-Ahsy,  and  sc'W  near  a  well
called  el-Mahh.  They  were  now  at  enmity  with  the  Jehahn;
although  their  relatives  west  of  the  Dead  Sea  are  the  allies  of
the  latter  tribe,  and  intermarry  with  thenu

In  the  district  esh-Sherah,  the  Bsdawin  are  all  Haweitat,
with  a  few  allies.  This  is  an  extensive  tribe,  broken  up  into
several  subdivisions,  and  dwelling  in  various  and  distant  parts
of  the  country.  Those  lound  in  these  mountains  are  divided
into  the  clans  Abu  Kashid,  el-Jazy.  el- Bedim,  and  el-'Alawin.
The  last  properly  occupy  the  region  towards  'Akabah  ;  the
Bedun,  as  we  have  seen,  pasture  around  Wady  Miisa,  The
Sheikh  Abu  Jazy  of  Laborde/  appears  to  have  been  the  head
of  the  division  el-Jazy  ;  we  did  not  leam  the  limits  where  they
pasture.

The  proper  country  of  the  Haweitat  Abu  Bashid,  is  around
Shobek  ;  but  they  were  said  to  be  now  in  the  region  of  Kerak.
The  spirited  Sheikh  Muhammed  Abu  Eashid,  to  whose  fideKty
and  perseverance  Irby  and  Mangles  and  their  companions  were
indebted  for  their  visit  to  Wady  Musa.  was  the  head  of  this  di-
vision.* He  was  now  dead,  and  his  clan  were  governed  by  his
sons. — Closely  allied  with  these  are  the  'Ammarin,  who  are
not  themselves  Haweitat,  but  a  respectable  independent  tribe  ;

-  The  fixm  edi-Sienh  has  no  relatioa  T»b.  Sji.  ed.  K.3hkr  p.  13.  Tab.  Arab.  ed.

to  the  HeiHcw  Seir  (■^?^)  the  anaent  HmLiafi  pi  20.

name  cf  tUs  £stnet.   Tbe  Hebrev  void  '  B«irekhanit  pp.  433, 440, 444.  Labarda

means  'hairr*  and  b  vrittai  with  'Ain,  ^oj»se  p.  63.  [218.]    Cman
Here  the  Kcri  C'^linx  Edomitcg  is  to  be  writers  oTtcn  speak  of  the  whole  of  Pales-
read  instead  of  Syrians.  The  change  t'le  under  the  name  of  Idumea ;  see  Re-
doubtless  arose  out  of  the  close  rcscrn-  1""  Is.  34,  6.  63,  1.  Jer.  49,  13.  22.
Am.  1,  12.

blance  of  the  Hebrew  T  and

'  Jos.  I?.  J.  4.  4.  1,  .'■>.  ib.  7.  8.  1.
'  Ptolem.  5.  16,  'iSov/xaia,  ?t»i  ieion8.
The  coontry  was  rendered  more  aocesaaUe,  and  the  passage  of
merchants  and  caravans  ^cilitated,  by  military  ways,  and  by
the  estaUisfament  of  military  posts  to  keep  in  check  the  preda-
tory hordes  of  the  nei^ibonrii^  deserts.  One  great  road,  of
which  traces  sfciU  remain,  had  its  directitm  northwards  irorn
Ailah  to  Petza,  and  thence  to  Damascus  ;  fiom  Petra  a  branch
went  off  on  the  west  of  the  Dead  Sea,  to  Jerusalem.  Askelon,
and  other  parts  of  the  Mediterranean.*  A  line  of  military  sta-
tions was  estabh^ied  along  this  road,  which  serred  to  protect  it
against  incnisifflis  from  the  eastern  desert ;  and  some  of  these
became  the  sites  of  towns.'

Early  in  die  fimrth  century,  the  name  of  Palestine  was  occa-
sionaUy  extended  so  as  to  rnelnide  this  whole  region  and  in  the
be^nning  of  the  fifth  centory,  we  find  introduce'l  a  new  divi-
sion  of  Jndea  and  the  adjacent  coontries,  into  Paki:iiina  Prima^
Secmmda^  et  Tertia,  The  first  comprised  Jerusalem  and  the
whole  of  Jodea  on  the  soath,  and  as  iar  north  as  to  Samaria  ;
the  ^oond  inchided  Scjthopolis  and  the  north  of  Palestine ;
while  the  third  comprehended  the  countries  on  the  east  and

*  Dio  Cmm.  6Su  14^         ti  rir  «vr)r  mai^  pfaees  thSOt;  see  Boiclluzdt  pn.

Twnr                ^-  C  «08^)  Mai  OiAfuu  374^  419.    frbj  and  Sfai^Jes  pp.  371.

Ti»  ^ifims  ifrjiwm        'Afmimf  tV  ^  <«0-  [113,  115,             The  lartar

Ty  Hetf^  exf'-oinn^  nl  TmjK^nm  imlfc^'  tnrelfeKS  jaw  iev^al  mSe-stoiies  of  tiie

jaatir**!*.     Amm.  MaitelL  14.  S.  time  of  Tntjao.  sod  one  of  M:ircas  Aozeli-

.    la  2,  ».  e;  p.  4€1.[142.]
'DM.  Se^  19.  Kl    See  abo^  pc       ^  Thos  in  die    Xodtis  D^iatstaiB "  ia

159.  AefittorsixAeeBliiiij.wefinil '^eqidtes"

*  Strate  16.  4.  IS,  23.  itaSaaaei  at  Mdlola,  jIBs,  Banom,  Zodo-

*  See  the  Pestiiipr  Tables;  and  nw-  eadn,  Aiindela,  Aieopo&t  etc.    Tbe  Peu-
VamBiCamfmi.  Gcogg.  of  Veataai  tmger  TaHes  fcare  Haoara  azid  Zaditgatta.

Aa*.  L  p.  89        Bincr  GtaA.  tt»  Petr.  ea  die  grest  maA  betnieea  Aila  an  Will.  Tyr.  16.  6.    Wilten  ib.  IH.  L       '  Zach's  MonatL  Corr.  X^TH.  p.  433

208.    ^ee  above,  p.  128.  sq.    Seetzen  heard  at  Kerak  the  name

'  See  above,  Vol.  I.  pp.  161,  171. —  Bedra  as  of  a  place  a  day's  ioumey  fnr-

Will.  Tyr.  22.  28-30.    Bohaedd.  pp.  58,  ther  south;  ib.  p.  434.    But  he  admits,

69.    Abulf.  Ann.  Musi,  ad  A.  H.  580.  that  this  was  told  him  only  in  reply  to  a

Wilken  ib.  TIL  ii.  pp.  236,  246.  direct  inquiry  on  his  part  after  Petra.;  and

'  Gaut".  Vinisauf  1.  15.  Bohaedd-  pp.  88,  in  the  absence  of  all  further  testimony,  no

90.    Abulf  Annul,  ad  A.  H.  584.    WH-  weight  can  be  laid  upon  this  informa-

ken  ibid.  FV.  pp.  244,  245,  247.  tion.    See  the  remarks  on  employing  lead-

*  See  above,  Vol.  L  p.  317.  ing  questions  in  obtaining  information  from

*  Volney  Voyage  en  Syr,  c.  31.  Tom.  the  Arabs,  Vol  I.  p.  112.
n.  p.  317.    Par.  1787.

ii.  567,  568

166

FROM  WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON,

[Sec.  Xn.

him  an  extensive  list  of  the  various  towns  and  ruins  in  that  re-
gion.' But  it  was  reserved  for  Burckhardt,  first  to  traverse  the
country  in  1812  from  Kerak  to  the  southern  Wady  Ghurundel,
and  to  explore  the  wonders  of  Wady  Musa.  He  was  followed
in  the  same  direction  in  1818,  by  Messrs  Bankes,  Legh,  Irby
and  Mangles.  Ten  years  later,  Laborde  and  Linant  first  pene-
trated in  1828  from  'Akabah  to  Wady  Musa ;  returning  by  a
more  easterly  route  through  the  moimtains.

A  few  words  respecting  the  ancient  towns  whose  sites  have
been  found  in  this  region,  may  not  be  out  of  place  here,  prepara-
tory to  a  more  particular  notice  of  the  metropoHs  Petra.

Of  Machcerus,  a  fortress  of  Herod,  and  the  possible  identi-
fication of  it  by  Seetzen  with  Mkauer,  a  ruin  on  the  south  side
of  Zerka  Ma'in,  I  have  already  spoken.*

South  of  Wady  el-M6jib,  and  six  or  eight  miles  north  of
Kerak,  are  the  now  unimportant  ruins  called  Eabba,  about  half
an  hour  in  circuit,  exhibiting  the  remains  of  a  temple  and  sev-
eral Corinthian  columns.^  This  unquestionably  was  the  site  of  the
Rahhatli  Moah  of  the  early  centuries,  the  Areopolis  of  the  Greeks,
an  episcopal  see  of  the  Third  Palestine  ;  which  after  the  destruc-
tion of  Petra  became  the  metropolitan  city  of  that  region.  In
still  earlier  times  it  was  the  Ar  of  Moab,  mentioned  in  the  Old
Testament.*

In  Kerak  itself  we  have  the  ancient  Kir  Moab  of  the  Old
Testament ;  which  aheady  in  the  Chaldee  version  and  the  Greek
of  the  Apocrypha,  appears  in  the  form  Kerakka  ]\Ioab  and  Cha-
raca.'  Under  this  latter  name,  more  or  less  corrupted,  it  is
mentioned  by  Ptolemy  and  other  writers  both  ecclesiastical  and
profane,  down  to  the  centuries  before  the  crusades.'  The  crusa-
ders found  the  name  extant,  and  erected  the  fortress  still  known
as  Kerak.  But  their  knowledge  of  ancient  geography  was  here
also  at  fault ;  and  as  in  the  west  they  found  the  site  of  Beer-

'  Zach'g  Monatl.  Corr.  XVII.  pp.  133-  character,  see  the  ecclesiastical  Notitia,

139.  Reland  pp.  215,  217,  compared  with  pp.

'  See  above,  VoL  I.  p.  570.  n.  2,  223,  226.    Le  Quien  Oriens  Christ  UL

'  Seetzen  ibid.  X\^ni.  p.  433.    Burck-  p.  734.

hardtp.  377.    Irby  and  Mangles  p.  4.56  sq.  <•  Isa.  15,  1.    Heb.  ZX'i'O  "i^p  ;  Chald.

[141.1    According  to  Burckhardt,  the  dis-      „ ,  ,  „  .  ,:';(••„„    „/;  „.

<-      ■> .       I-     1  •     1       t  3X<  -  "  X.i  3  ,  both  signiiying  vmlU  or

tance  from  Kenik  is  three  hours  or  more.     . '  •  "iV       mi-  -Ji

Irbv  and  Mangles  give  it  at  about  two  hours.  f'^ZTr?  ,  '  \'h  ^"'"""JisQ  t^k

Ms.  15,  1.    Num.  21,  28.    Hieron.    ^  Reland  Pal.  pp.  463, 705.

Comm.  in  Jes.xv.  1,  "  Hujus  metropolis    Gesenms  Comm  zu  Jes.  xv   1 -I- or  the

civitas  Ar,  qus  hodie  ex  Hebneo  et  Grace  f  Y             ^'""'^PP-  ^IS.

^          J        I-             ^    n  217.    Of  the  two  later  Latin  Notitipp,  one

Bermone composita  ^rfopo/ts  nuncupatur,  ,              •       i          u     i-  -i.

r\    „              M    l.     II  tj    '    •  has  Karach  and  the  other  Kara;  ib.  pp.

etc.   Oiiomast.  art.  jjoab :  "  Porro  ipsa  „„„  „„„     „     , ,           ■  .    i   J.  ■   i  JL

.  ..     ^.        r  \  „     •       „  •            1,  22.%  226.    Burckhardt  mistook  this  last,

cmtas  ( Areopolivs),  quasi  propnum  vocab-  '    -                 ^              j     j-  >•  »

,           -J  Id  V  L  .u  m    u  •]    »  Kara,  lor  a  dinerent  name  and  a  distinct

uluin  p i  ssidet  Kubbatn  Moab,  id  est,  gran-  ,   ^     l-  i.  i            n  ^    ■      ,  i-

dis  MUb."    So  too  Steph.  Byzont."  See  Pl'^ce;  which  he  then  finds  in  el-Kerr,  a

Reland  Palast.  pp.  577,  957.    Gesenius    ^'%'^*''  7''"'  ^"^^
Comm.  zu  Jcsa.  xv.  1. — For  its  episcopal      ^^^^  P'

ii  5G8-570

Jew  1.]

EDOM.     ANCIENT  TOWNS.

167

eheba  at  Beit  Jibrin,  so  here  they  held  Kerak  to  have  been  once
the  ancient  capital  of  Arabia  Petraea,  and  gave  it  therefore  the
name  of  Petra  Deaerti.'  They  established  here  in  A.  D.  1167
a  Latin  bishopric  of  Petra,  which  continued  for  some  years  ;
and  the  name  and  title  remain  in  the  Greek  church  until  the
present  day.*

In  Tafileh  we  may  probably  recognise  the  ancient  Tophel,
once  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament  in  connection  with  the
'Arabah.  The  radical  letters  and  the  signification  are  the  same
both  in  Hebrew  and  Arabic'

The  place  el-Busaireh,  two  hours  and  three  quarters  south
of  Tufdeh,  seems  to  bear  in  its  name  decisive  tokens  of  anti-
quity. It  is  now  a  village  of  about  fifty  houses  situated  on  a
hill,  on  the  top  of  which  is  a  small  castle.*  The  Arabic  form
Busaireh  is  a  diminutive  of  Busrah,  the  present  Arabic  name  of
Bozrah  in  Hauran,  the  Bostra  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  ;
which  latter  has  been  regarded  as  a  city  of  the  Edomites,
though  lying  far  beyond  the  limits  of  their  territory.'  But
the  name  el-Busaireh  affords  reason  to  suppose,  that  another
Bozrah  lay  here  within  the  proper  Umits  of  Edom  ;  and  was  for
a  time  the  capital  of  the  country.  This  hypothesis  is  strength-
ened by  the  fact,  that  in  Scripture,  Bozrah  is  so  often  coupled  with
the  land  of  Edom  itself ;  while  the  prophet  Amos  speaks  of  it
expressly  in  connection  with  the  land  of  Teman  or  the  south.*
Further,  both  Eusebius  and  Jerome  mention  a  Bozrah  as  exist-
ing in  their  day  in  the  mountains  of  Idumea,  distinct  from  the
northern  Bozrah.'  In  this  way,  as  it  seems  to  me,  we  are  relieved
firom  the  incongruity,  of  supposing  the  chief  city  of  the  Edomites
to  have  lain  at  the  distance  of  several  days'  journey  away  from
their  territories.'

'  WDL  Tyr.  11.  26.  ib.  1.5.  21.  Jac  de

Vitr.  c.  96.  Com  p.  above,  p.  16-3,  n.  6.
This  fonn  of  the  name  the  crusaders
took  from  the  Valgate,  which  in  h.  16,  1
readj  '•  Petra  deaerti,"  instead  of  Sela.

'  Win.  Tyr.  20.  3.  .Jac.  de  \"tr.  c.  56.
Le  Qoien  Oriens  Christ.  III.  p.  1305.
Enrckhardt'a  Trar.  p.  .387.  See  above,
VoL  I.  p.  424  sq.

'  Dent.  1,  1.  The  identity  of  Tophel
and  Tilfileh  affords  an  easy  explanation
of  thi.s  very  difBcnlt  pas-sage,  to  which  I
■hall  again  recnr.  I  am  indebtM  for  the
suggestion  to  Prof.  Hengstenb^r^  of  Berlin.

*  Borckhardt's  Travels  p.  407.  Irhv  an>l
Mangles  p.  443.  [136.]

'  So  Gesenina  Comm.  zu  .Jea.  xxsiv.  6.
Lex.  Hebr.  art  n-aa.  RosenroiiUer  Bibl.
Geogr.  II.  iL  p.  23  sq.  See  Poland  PaL
p.  665  aq.    BoTckhardt  p.  226.

'  laa.  34,  6.    63,  1.    Jer.  49,  13.  22.

Am.  1,  12,  "But  I  ■win  send  afire  npon
Teman,  which  shall  devonr  the  palaces  of
Bozrah."

'  Onomast  art.  Bonor. — The  conjecture
of  Bnrckhardt,  that  el-Bnsaireh  is  the  an-
cient Psora,  an  episcopal  see  of  the  Third
Palestine,  rests  on  an  error  in  one  of  the
ecclesiastical  Notitias,  which  reads  "  Mamo,
Psora,"  In  two  words,  where  all  the  others
read  Mamopsora  or  Mamapson ;  Relaod
p.  217,  comp.  pp.  215,  223,  226.  See
Bnrckhardt  p.  407.

'  A  Bozrah  is  once  mentioned  among
the  cities  of  Moab;  .Jer.  48,  24.  This
was  not  improbably  the  same  ;  since  the
possession  of  particxdar  cities  often  passed
from  one  hand  to  another  in  the  wars  of
adjacent  tribes.  See  2  Chr.  20.  23.  Am.
2,  1.  So  too  Sela,  Is.  16,  1 ;  comp.  2  K.
14,  7.    Se«  Geaanins  L  c

ii.  570,  571

168

FROM  WADT  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn.

Proceeding  further  south,  we  find  Ghurundel,  the  ancient
Arindela,  as  already  described.' — In  Dhana,  a  Aallage  visited  by
Burckhardt,  on  the  declivity  of  a  mountain  north  of  Wady  el-
Ghuweir,  we  probably  have  the  site  of  the  ancient  Thana  or
Thoana,  assigned  by  Ptolemy  to  Arabia  Petrsea,  and  marked
also  apparently  in  the  Peutinger  Tables.^ — Shobek  corresponds
to  no  known  ancient  place;  though  we  find  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment both  Shobach  and  Shobek  as  the  names  of  persons.' —
Ma'an,  the  well  known  town  on  the  route  of  the  Syrian  Haj,
nearly  east  of  Wady  Miisa,  is  with  good  reason  assumed  as  the
probable  seat  of  the  Maonites  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures.*
Abulfeda  describes  Ma'an  (from  Ibn  Haukal)  as  inhabited  by
the  Ommiades  and  their  vassals.' — About  sis  hours  south
of  Ma'an  and  Wady  Musa,  lies  Usdakah,  a  fine  fountain,  near
which  is  a  hill  with  extensive  ruins  of  an  ancient  town,  con-
sisting of  heaps  of  hewn  stones.  Both  the  name  and  situation
correspond  to  the  Zodocatha  of  the  fifth  century  ;  which  is  also
marked  in  the  Peutinger  Tables,  under  the  form  Zadagatta,  at
eighteen  Roman  mUes  south  of  Petra.*

One  other  town  in  this  region,  el-Humeiyimeh,  is  described
by  Abulfeda  (quoting  from  Ibn  Sa'id)  as  the  native  place  of  the
Abbassides.  Its  rains  still  remain,  and  were  visited  by  Laborde,
on  the  plain  east  of  the  mountains,  considerably  south  of  the
southern  Wady  Ghurundel,  and  north  of  the  head  of  Wady  el-
Ithm.  The  ruins  are  very  considerable  ;  but  without  any  traces
of  architectural  splendour.  There  was  an  aqueduct  leading  to
it  for  a  long  distance  from  the  north  ;  and  the  place  itself  is  full
of  cisterns,  now  broken  and  abandoned  in  the  midst  of  a  desert/

PETRA.

We  come  now  to  the  celebrated  capital  of  this  region  in  an-
cient times,  called  from  its  remarkable  position,  The  Rock  ;  in

'  See  p.  117,  above.

"  Ptol.  5.  17.  Reland  p.  463.  The
Peutinger  Tables  have  Thorma,  probably
a  corruption.    See  Burckhardt  p.  410.

'  Shobach  T|aia  2  Sam.  10,  16.  18.
Shobek  p^iir  Nch.  10,  24.— Burckhardt
suggests,  that  Shobek  may  have  bee  t  he
castle  Carcaria  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  one
day's  journey  from  Petra.  But  this  notice
is  too  indefinite  to  bear  out  the  supposition.
Onomast.  art  Carcar.    Burckhardt  p.  416.

*  Judg.  10, 12  '^^■S1i  Maonites.  1  Chr.
4,41  and  2  Chr.  26,  7  0"«5  ISO  Mehunhns.
They  arc  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the
Amnlekites    and  Arabians.     The  form

ii.  671-573

Ma'dn  has  no  relation  to  the  name  Te-
man.  See  Seetzen  in  Zach  ib.  XVIII.  p.
381.  Burckhardt's  Travels  p.  437.  Ge-
senius  Lex.  Heb.  art  "(ISa ,  and  Notes  on
BuTckh.  p.  1069.  Rosenmuller's  Bibl.
Geogr.  III.  p.  83.

'  Abulfed.  Tab.  Sjt.  ed.  Kohler  p.  14.

«  Notit.  Dignitat.  ed.  Pancirol.  p.  216.
Reland  Pal.  p.  230.  See  Burckhardt's
Travels  p.  435.

'  Abulfeda;  Tab.  Syr.  p.  14.  Labordo
writes  the  name  Ameim6 ;  Voyage  en
Arab.  Petr.  p.  62.  [217.]— The  ftlacbcrt
el-Abid  of  Laborde  is  probably  the  Klii'ir  i-
bet  (ruins)  el-'Abid  of  our  lists ;  ibid.  p.
63.  [2 18. J

JCKD  1.]

PETRA.

169

Hebrew  Sela,  in  Greek  Petra.'  In  the  Old  Testament  we  find
it  recorded  of  king  Amaziali,  that  "  he  slew  of  Edom  ia  the
valley  of  salt,  ten  thousand,  and  took  Sela  by  war,  and  called
tJie  name  of  it  Joktheel  unto  this  day."'^  The  prophet  Isaiah
also  exhorts  Moab  to  "  send  the  lamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land
from  Sela  to  (through)  the  wilderness  unto  the  mount  of  the
daughter  of  Zion  ; "  alluding  apparently  to  the  tribute  in  sheep
formerly  paid  to  Israel.'  At  this  time,  therefore,  Sela  would
seem  to  have  been  in  the  possession  of  the  Moabites  ;  or  at  least
they  pastured  their  flocks  as  far  south  as  to  that  region,  much
iu  the  manner  of  the  adjacent  tribes  at  the  present  day.^ —
These  are  the  only  certain  notices  of  this  city  found  in  Scrip-
ture ;  and  the  last  of  them  cannot  be  later  than  about  700

B.  C

About  four  centuries  afterwards,  as  we  have  seen,  the  city
was  already  known  to  the  Greeks  as  Petra  ;  it  had  passed  iuto
the  hands  of  the  Nabatheans,  and  had  become  a  place  of  trade.
The  two  expeditions  sent  against  it  by  Antigonus  before  301  B.

C.  have  been  already  alluded  to.'  In  the  first,  Athenfeus  took
the  city  by.  surprise,  while  the  men  were  absent  at  a  neighbour-
ing mart  or  fair  ;  and  carried  off  a  large  booty  of  silver  and
merchandise.  But  the  Nabatheans  quickly  pursued  him,  to  the
number  of  eight  thousand  men  ;  and  falUng  upon  his  camp  by
night,  destroyed  the  greater  part  of  his  army.'  Of  the  second
expedition,  under  the  command  of  Demetrius,  the  Nabatheans
had  previous  intelligence  ;  and  prepared  themselves  for  an  attack,
by  driving  their  flocks  into  the  deserts,  and  placing  their  wealth
under  the  protection  of  a  strong  garrison  in  Petra  ;  to  which,
according  to  Diodorus,  there  was  but  a  single  approach,  and
that  made  by  hand.'  In  this  way  they  succeeded  in  baffling
the  whole  design  of  Demetrius.

Strabo,  speaking  of  the  Nabatheans  during  the  reign  of
Augustus,  describes  the  capital  as  follows  :  "  The  metropolis  of
the  Nabatheans  is  Petra,  so  called  ;  for  it  lies  in  a  place  in  other
respects  plain  and  level,  but  shut  in  by  rocks  roimd  about,  pre-
cipitous indeed  on  the  outside,  but  within  having  copious  foun-
tains for  a  supply  of  water  and  the  irrigation  of  gardens.
Beyond  the  enclosure,  the  region  is  mostly  a  desert,  and  espe-

*  Heb.  yho  Sela;  Greek  ^  nhpa  Pe-  The  expression  "the  rock,"  in  Jndg.
tra,  and  also  in  the  plur.  oi  neVpoi  in  the  li  36  and  Is.  42,  11,  has  sometimes  been
later  ecclesiastical  notices ;  Keland  pp.  referred  to  the  city  of  Petra  ;  but  is  too
215,  217,  533.  Comp.  the  similar  case  of  indefinite,  both  in  itself  and  in  relation  to
IIcXAa  and  OeAXai.  the  context,  to  be  taken  into  the  account.

»  2  Kings  14,  7.  '  Page  159.

*  Is  16,  1,  and  Gesenius  Comm.  in  loc.       '  Diod.  Sic.  19.  59.

Comp.  2  K.  3,  4.  .  *  lb.  19.  97,  oGcrris /iiiis  aya0dcr(us  xf'p<^

*  So  the  Ma'az,  see  above,  p.  143.   Com-  iroiiiTov.
pare  also  p.  167.  n.  8.

Vol.  II.— 15  ii.  573,574

1'70

FROM  WADT  MUSA  TO  HEBEOK,

[Sec.  Xn.

cially  towards  Judea."'  At  this  time  the  city  had  become  the
great  place  of  transit  for  the  products  of  the  east,  and  was  often
resorted  to  by  foreigners.'  The  philosopher  Athenadorus,  Stra-
bo's  friend,  spent  some  time  in  Petra  ;  and  related  with  admira-
tion, that  he  foimd  many  Romans  and  other  strangers  residing
there  ;  that  these  often  had  lawsuits  with  one  another  and  with
the  inhabitants  ;  while  the  latter  lived  in  peace  among  them-
selves, under  excellent  laws.^

Similar,  but  more  definite,  is  the  testimony  of  Pliny  in  the
first  century  :  "  The  Xabatheans  inhabit  the  city  called  Petra,
in  a  valley  less  than  two  (Roman)  miles  in  amplitude,  surround-
ed by  inaccessible  mountains,  with  a  stream  flowing  through
it."*  About  the  same  period,  Petra  is  often  mentioned  by
Josephus  as  the  capital  of  Arabia  Petraea,  in  all  his  notices  of
that  kingdom  and  its  connection  with  Jewish  affairs.^  With
that  kingdom,  it  passed  under  the  immediate  sway  of  the
Romans,  during  the  reign  of  Trajan.  His  successor  Adrian
appears  to  have  granted  privileges  to  Petra,  which  led  the  in-
habitants to  give  his  name  to  the  city  upon  coins.  Several  of
these  are  still  extant.'  In  the  fourth  century,  Petra  is  several
times  mentioned  by  Eusebius  and .  Jerome  ;  and  in  the  Greek
ecclesiastical  Notitias  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries,  it  appears
as  the  metropolitan  see  of  the  Third  Palestine."  Of  its  bishops,
Germanus  was  present  at  the  council  of  Seleucia  in  A.  D.  359  ;
and  Theodorus  at  that  of  Jerusalem  in  A.  D.  536.'

But  trom  that  time  onwards,  Petra  suddenly  vanishes  from
the  pages  of  history.  In  the  two  Latin  Xotitiae,  referring  in
part  to  the  centuries  after  the  Muhammedan  conquest  and  before
the  crusades,  the  name  of  Petra  is  no  longer  found,  and  the
metropolitan  see  had  been  transferred  to  Rabbah.'  Whether
Petra  perished  through  the  ruthless  rage  of  the  fonatic  conquer-
ors, or  whether  it  had  already  been  destroyed  in  some  incursion
of  the  hordes  of  the  desert,  is  utterly  unknown.    The  silence  of

'  Strsbo  16.  4.  21,  MrrTp6xo\is  St  ruy  '  Mionnet  Descr.  de  Medailles  Antiques,

No/SaTcu'tci'  iariy  ri  HtVpa  KoXouatyT]-  Kft-  Tom.  V.  p.  587.    Eckhel  Doctr.  Nummor.

TCI  yap    t'xl  x^P'O"  toAAo  d/xoAot!    (tol  Vet.  11.  p.  .503.    Xo  lers  than  eight  coins

iiriirf^ou,  KVK\  See  Borckhardt  p.  446.

ii.  580-582

joKE  2.]

'ain  el-weibeh.

175

the  peaks  which  immediately  skirt  the  'Arahah  ;  but  itself  lower
than  the  high  ridges  further  east.  Indeed,  as  here  seen,  this
peak,  and  the  rocky  groups  around  Wady  Mtlsa  and  next  the
'Arabah,  appear  to  belong  to  a  chain  further  west  and  lower
than  the  high  main  chain  of  esh-Slierah.  The  latter,  beginning
from  Wady  Ghuweir,  and  consisting  of  round  summits  and
ridges  without  precipices,  runs  on  continuously  as  far  south  as
the  eye  can  reach.  The  lower  masses  of  porphyry,  are  all  along
marked  by  a  dark  and  almost  black  appearance.'

We  were  much  struck  while  at  el-Weibeh,  with  the  entire
adaptedness  of  its  position  to  the  scriptural  account  of  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  IsraeUtes,  on  their  second  arrival  at  Kadesh.'
There  was  at  Kadesh  a  fountain,  called  also  En-Mishpat  ;^  this
was  then  either  partially  dried  up,  or  exhausted  by  the  multi-
tude ;  so  that  "  there  was  no  water  for  the  congregation."  By  a
miracle,  water  was  brought  forth  abundantly  out  of  the  rock.
Moses  now  sent  messengers  to  the  king  of  Edom,  informing  him
that  they  were  "  in  Kadesh,  a  city  in  the  uttermost  of  his
border  ; "  and  asking  leave  to  pass  through  his  country,  so  as  to
continue  their  course  around  Moab  and  approach  Palestine  from
the  east.  This  Edom  refused  ;  and  the  Israehtes  accordingly
marched  to  Mount  Hor,  where  Aaron  died  ;  and  then  along  the
'Arabah  to  the  Red  Sea.*

Here  at  el-Weibeh,  all  these  scenes  were  before  our  eyes.
Here  was  the  fountain,  even  to  this  day  the  most  frequented
watering  place  in  all  the  'Arabah.  On  the  northwest  is  the
mountain,  by  which  the  Israehtes  had  formerly  assayed  to  ascend
to  the  land  of  Palestine,  and.  were  driven  back.'  Overagainst
us  lay  the  land  of  Edom  ;  we  were  in  its  uttermost  border  ;  and
the  great  Wady  el-Ghuweir,  affording  a  direct  and  easy  passage
through  the  mountains  to  the  table  land  above,  was  directly
before  us  ;  while  further  in  the  south,  Mount  Hor  formed  a
prominent  and  striking  object,  at  the  distance  of  two  good  days
journey  for  such  a  host.  The  small  fountain  et-Taiyibeh  at  the
bottom  of  the  pass  er-Euba'y,  may  then  have  been,  either  the
wells  of  Bene-Jaakan,  or  the  Moseroth,  of  the  Israehtes.'
The  stations  of  Gudgodah  and  Jotbath  further  south,  we  may
perhaps  find  at  the  mouth  of  the  Wady  Ghurundel,  and  in  the
marshy  tract  with  palm  trees  further  towards  'Akabah,  men-

•  The  several  points  seen  from  the  foun-.  '  Num.  14,  40-45.    Deut.  1,  41-46.
tain  el-^Veibeh,  bore  as  follows :  Mount  «  Nmn.  33,  30.  31.  37.    Deut.  10,  C.
Hor  S.  25'  E.    Wady  from  pass  of  Neme-  Eusebius  and  Jerome  relate,  that  the  place
la  S.  60    E.    Wady  el-Ghuweir  S.  80"  E.  of  the  Beeroth  Bene-Jaakan  was  still  Eho\TO
el-Hufeiry  N.  65°  E.  in  their  day,  ten  Roman  miles  from  Petra,

Num.  c.  20.  at  the  top  of  the  mountain.    Onomast.  art.

»  Gen.  14,  7.  Beroth  Ftlior.  Jac.

*  Num.  20,  14-29.

ii.  582.  583

176

FROM  WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Skc.  xn.

tioned  by  Laborde  and  Schubert ;  wbere  in  winter  at  least  we
might  look  for  "  a  land  of  rivers  of  waters."'

In  view  of  all  these  circumstances,  we  were  disposed  to  re-
gard el-Weibeh  as  the  probable  site  of  the  ancient  Kadesh  ;  and
felt  that  we  were  here  treading  on  ground  consecrated  by  many
sacred  associations.  Some  other  circumstances  corroborative  of
the  same  view,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  adduce  further  on.'^
Yet  the  surrounding  desert  has  long  since  resumed  its  rights  ;
and  all  traces  of  the  city  and  of  its  very  name,  have  disap-
peared. Indeed  there  is  nothing  which  shows  Kadesh  to  have
ever  been  a  place  of  any  size,  or  of  any  importance,  except  in  con-
nection with  the  journeyings  of  the  Israelites.

As  we  were  ascending  the  pass  of  Nemela,  (May  30th,)  we
were  overtaken  by  a  single  Arab,  who  had  come  the  same  day
from  'Ain  el-Weibeh.  From  him  we  learned,  that  during  the  pre-
ceding night,  while  we  were  travelling  up  Wady  el-Jeib,  a  ma-
rauding party  (Ghuzu)  had  encamped  at  el-Weibeh,  composed
of  four  hundred  men  on  dromedaries  from  the  Tiyahah,  Terabin,
Dhullam  and  'Azazimeh,  going  against  the  Hawazim  and  'Anazeh
of  the  Syrian  desert.  Had  we  not  travelled  during  the  night,
we  might  very  probably  have  fallen  in  with  them.  It  is  these
marauding  expeditions,  which  render  the  'Arabah  and  the  Ghor
dangerous  for  travellers.  They  pass  and  repass  frequently
between  the  hostile  tribes  of  the  Arabs  on  the  east  and  west ;
and  there  is  always  some  risk  of  encountering  them.  In  the
present  instance,  such  an  encounter  would  have  brought  us  into
no  danger  ;  as  those  tribes  are  all  allies  of  the  Jehalin,  under
whose  protection  we  made  this  journey.

From  'Ain  el-Weibeh  a  travelled  path  enters  immediately
among  the  Hmestone  hUls,  and  proceeding  about  N.  N.  W.  doubt-
less ascends  the  mountain  to  the  region  above.  Our  Jehalin
seemed  not  to  be  acquainted  with  this  road,  being  accustomed
from  el-Weibeh  to  skirt  the  'Arabah  along  the  foot  of  the  hUls,
as  far  north  as  to  Wady  el-Khurar,  and  then  ascend  by  the  pass  of
es-Sufiih.  But  as  the  buffoon  Muhammed,  who  had  recently
been  here  with  Lord  Prudhoe's  party,  professed  to  have  taken
this  direct  road,  and  to  have  found  it  shorter,  the  guides  conclu-
ded to  follow  it  now.  We  left  the  fountain  at  9f  o'clock,  and  at
once  entered  among  the  hills,  here  low  and  consisting  of  chalky
stone  and  conglomerate,  without  a  particle  of  vegetation.  At
10.20,  we  crossed  a  large  Wady  called  el-Mirzaba,  which  gives
name  to  a  pass  up  the  mountains  on  the  left  ;^  and  at  11  o'clock
we  came  to  another  very  large  one  called  el-Muhelleh,  from  a

'  Deut.  10,  7;  comp.  Num.  33,  32.  33.  '  See  further  on:  Approach  of  the  Is-

See  Liiborde's  Map  and  Voynge  p.  53.  raelites  to  Palestine.

[147.]    Schubert's  Kcise  II.  p.  399.  '  See  above,  p.  125.
ii.  583-585

JcjfK2.]

PATHS  FROM  EL-WEIBEH.

177

place  of  tliat  name  in  the  country  of  the  'Azazimeh  in  the  same
mountains.  These  Wadys,  like  those  which  succeeded,  find
their  way  to  "Wady  el-Jeib  ;  and  have  in  them  many  Seiyal  or
Tulh  trees,  some  of  which  are  very  large.

It  now  appeared,  that  our  Arabs  were  afraid  of  having  taken
a  wrong  road.  The  path  was  evidently  much  travelled ;  but
where  it  led  to,  no  one  seemed  to  know.  We  therefore  turned
to  the  right  on  a  course  about  N.  N.  E.  without  any  track,  in
order  to  regain  the  path  known  to  our  guides,  descending  grad-
ually and  obhquely  among  the  hills  towards  the  'Arabah.  In
doing  this  we  crossed  several  Wadys  of  which  our  Arabs  did  not
know  the  names.  Indeed,  they  seemed  to  be  quite  lost,  as  if
they  were  entire  strangers  to  the  region.  "We  had  found  it  at  aU
times  difficult  to  get  information  from  them,  owing  partly  to
their  ignorance,  partly  to  carelessness,  and  somewhat  to  unwil-
lingness. But  they  had  become  less  reserved  and  more  and  more
communicative,  the  longer  we  had  been  with  them.  All  Arabs
are  usually  ignorant  of  the  localities  two  or  three  days  distant
from  their  own  country  ;  but  the  general  intelligence  of  our
present  guides,  was  the  most  limited  we  had  yet  met  with,  and
we  never  found  more  difficulty  in  eliciting  information.  Nor
could  we  always  put  trust  in  that  which  they  did  communicate,
without  much  cross-examination  and  other  confirmatory  evi-
dence.

At  length,  at  1  o'clock,  we  came  down  near  the  mouth  of  a
"Wady  not  far  from  the  'Arabah,  where  was  a  small  cane  brake
indicating  water.  Here  we  fell  into  the  road  of  which  our
guides  were  in  search.  The  spot  is  caUed  'Ain  el-Mureidhah ;
but  the  Arabs  said  the  water  was  good  for  nothing,  and  consisted
of  little  more  than  dampness  of  the  earth.  Following  now^  the
known  path,  we  struck  up  again  N.  Is.  W.  among  the  hills
towards  the  mountains.  We  passed  the  Wady  Abu  Jeradeh  at
1.55  ;  and  came  at  2.40  to  the  Kufafiyeh,  a  large  Wady,  which
conducted  us  more  into  the  mountains.  Leaving  this  we  crossed
over  to  Wady  el-Khurar,  which  we  reached  at  3.20.  Between
all  these  Wadys  are  only  desert  limestone  hills,  becoming  grad-
ually higher  and  more  broken  towards  the  west.

At  the  mouth  of  Wady  el-Khurar,  where  it  issues  upon  the
'Arabah,  an  hour  or  more  east  of  the  point  where  we  struck  it,
is  the  fountain  called  'Ain  el-Khurar,  smaller  than  el-Weiljeh,
but  having  tolerable  water,  which  continues  through  the  year.
As  we  passed  along  and  over  the  hills,  we  could  see  the  verdure
around  this  fountain  ;  and  also  that  around  the  water  of  Hash
in  the  plain  beyond,  somewhat  further  north.'    The  waters  of

'  See  above,  p.  119.

ii.  585,  586

178  FROM  WADT  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.  [Sec.  XIL

the  Khfirar  and  all  the  Wadys  we  had  passed,  find  their  way  to
the  J eib,  apparently  south  of  Wady  Hash  ;  or  in  part,  perhaps,
through  that  Wady.

Following  up  Wady  el-Khttrar  for  about  half  an  hour,  we  left
it,  and  ascended  by  a  steep  but  not  long  pass,  called  the  pass  of
Khurar.  This  brought  us  out  at  4  o'clock,  not  exactly  upon
table  land,  but  upon  a  higher  tract  of  country,  forming  the  first
of  the  several  steps  or  offsets  into  which  the  ascent  of  the  moun-
tains in  this  part  is  di%dded.  This  is  here  perhaps  four  or  five
hundred  feet  higher  than  the  tract  we  had  left ;  and  lay  before
us  two  and  a  half  hours  in  breadth,  quite  to  the  base  of  the  next
ascent,  in  which  is  the  main  pass  of  es-Sufah.  The  tract  runs
up  nearly  from  E.  N.  E.  to  W.  S.  W.  from  the  hills  around  Us-
dum  and  the  south  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  to  an  indefinite  extent
on  our  left ;  lising  very  considerably  all  the  way,  and  drained  in
its  whole  length  by  the  Wady  el-Fikreh,  which  enters  the  Ghor
at  the  southwest  corner. '  The  bed  of  this  Wady  hes  beyond
the  middle  of  the  tract,  near  the  base  of  the  next  ascent.  The
surface  is  here  broken,  and  in  some  parts  mountainous,  hke  that
of  the  lower  region  behind  us.  At  the  distance  of  an  hour  or
two  further  south,  a  ridge  begins  on  the  front  or  southeast  part
of  this  higher  tract,  and  runs  ofi"  parallel  to  the  next  chain  ;
the  head  of  Wady  el-Fikreh  being  far  up  between  them  in  tho
southwest. — We  soon  struck  upon  a  small  Wady,  called  diminu-
tively Wudey  Sik  ;  which  after  we  had  followed  it  for  a  while,
ran  off  on  the  right  towards  the  'Arabah.  After  this,  all  the
smaller  Wadys  ran  towards  the  Fikreh  ;  and  the  country  just
here  was  less  broken  than  towards  the  left.

The  mountain  before  us,  forming  the  next  step  of  the  ascent,
presented  a  formidable  barrier,  a  naked  limestone  ridge,  not  less
than  a  thousand  feet  in  height,  and  very  steep.  Three  passes
up  this  mountain  were  pointed  out,  viz.  that  of  es-Siiiah  direct-
ly before  us  ;  on  the  right,  not  far  off,  another,  es-Sufey  ;  and
on  the  left  at  some  distance  the  third,  called  el- Yemen,  leading
up  through  a  deep  rent  known  as  Wady  el- Yemen.  This  chasm
cleaves  the  mountain  to  its  base  ;  and  here  the  higher  portion
of  the  ridge  may  be  said  to  terminate  ;  for  although  it  continues
to  run  on  far  to  the  southwest,  yet  it  is  there  lower  and  less  steep.
The  Wady  el-Yemen  brings  down  apparently,  in  the  rainy  sea-
son, large  quantities  of  water  from  the  regions  above  into  the  Fik-
reh. At  the  top  of  this  pass,  water  is  found  in  pits,  which  is
good  and  never  fails.

Fifteen  minutes  before  we  reached  the  Fikreh,  a  road  fell
into  ours  (at  5.50)  coming  up  directly  from  'Ain  el-KhQrdr.

'  See  above,  p.  116.

ii.  58G-588

-  JCNE  2.]

PATHS.  MADURAH.

179

The  spot  was  marked  by  an  unusual  number  of  heaps  of  stones.
Immediately  afterwards,  a  path  apparently  much  travelled,  went
off  towards  the  left,  leading  to  the  pass  el- Yemen.  A  branch
of  it  was  said  to  take  a  course  still  more  to  the  left,  so  as  to
keep  along  up  the  Fikreh  for  some  time,  and  then  ascend  the
mountain  further  in  the  southwest,  where  it  is  lower  and  less  dif-
ficult. This  circuitous  road  is  called  el-Haudeh,  and  is  usually
taken  with  loaded  animals  ;  since  it  escapes  the  steep  ascent.
The  roads  which  lead  up  all  these  passes,  fall  into  each  other
again  in  the  countr}'^  above,  as  we  shall  see.  Yet  a  track  would
seem  to  procorid  directly  from  the  ascent  of  the  Haudeh  to  Gaza  ;
and  on  this,  so  far  as  we  could  learn,  perhaps  in  the  next  chain
of  mountains,  is  probably  the  pass  called  el-Gharib,  of  which  we
several  times  heard.'

The  road  which  immediately  enters  the  hills  from  el-Weibeh,
and  which  we  had  at  first  taken,  seems  to  ascend  more  in  the
south  to  this  higher  tract,  on  which  we  now  were.  Lord  Lind-
say appears  to  have  followed  it  with  Sheikh  Husein  of  the  'Ala-
win  ;  and  he  relates,  that  at  seven  hours  from  el-Weibeh,  a  path
went  off  on  the  left  to  Gaza,  while  he  and  his  party  kept  on  and
ascended  the  pass  es-Sufah.  This  Gaza  road  probably  joined
the  Haudeh  as  above  described!  An  hour  north  of  the  fork  of
the  same  roads,  the  party  had  on  their  left  the  isolated  chalky
hiU  or  mountain  of  Madurah;  under  which,  their  guides  said,
God  once  crushed  a  village  for  its  vices.*

This  mountain,  so  remarkable  in  its  appearance,  we  too  had
seen  upon  our  left  at  the  distance  of  about  an  hour,  ever  since
we  came  out  upon  this  higher  tract,  rising  alone  like  a  lofty  cit-
adel on  the  eastern  bank  of  Wady  el-Fikreh.  Sheikh  Hussan
related  of  it,  that  a  city  once  stood  there  ;  but  God  was  pro-
voked at  the  inhabitants  and  slew  them,  and  destroyed  their  city
with  stones  from  heaven.  He  could  not  say,  however,  whether
there  were  now  any  ruins  on  or  near  it.^ — This  question,  as  I
have  since  found,  had  been  already  determined  by  Seetzen
thirty-one  years  before.  Being  at  Hebron  in  March,  1807,  he
was  told  of  this  mountain,  and  of  the  city  Madurah  which  once
stood  upon  it,  but  was  now  by  the  vengeance  of  God  buried  be-
neath it ;  there  were  also  said  to  be  round  about  it  many  human
bodies  turned  to  stone.    Thinking  to  find  here  something  which

'  See  Vol.  I.  p.  208.  el- Yemen ;  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de  Gfiogr.  Juin

'  Lord  Lindsay's  Letters,  etc.  11.  p.  46.  1839,  p.  321-323.
— Schubert  also  mentions  Madurah,  and  '  To  this  mountain  Bertou  gives  the  ad-
appears  to  have  ascended  by  the  pass  es-  ditional  name  of  Kadessa,  and  supposes  it
Sulah  ;  but  by  which  route  he  travelled  to  be  the  site  of  Kadesh,  but  without  tho
from  el-Weibeh  tliither,  I  am  not  able  to  slij;htest  ground ;  Bulletin  etc.  1.  c.  p.
make  out;  Reise  II.  p.  441—1-13.  Bertou  322.
followed  our  route,  but  ascended  the  pass

ii.  588,  589

180

FROM  WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  m

might  illustrate  the  pillar  of  salt,  Seetzen  travelled  hither  with
guides  of  the  Haweitat  from  esh-Sherah ;  descending,  it  -would
seem,  by  the  pass  el- Yemen.  He  examined  the  mountain  care-
fiill}^ ;  but  no  trace  of  ruins  was  to  be  found  ;  and  instead  of
petrified  human  bodies,  there  was  nothing  but  a  small  plain  cov-
ered with  round,  conical,  cylindrical,  and  lens-shaped  stones,
about  the  size  of  a  man's  head,  composed  of  limestone  mixed
with  sand.  It  was  to  make  up  for  this  disappointment,  that  his
guide  now  told  him  of  Wady  Musa  and  the  other  ruined  places
of  his  own  country.  But  although  Mount  Hor  was  here  direct-
ly before  the  traveller,  and  in  full  sight ;  and  he  was  likewise
told  of  the  Wely  Neby  Ha  run  upon  a  high  rocky  summit  ;  yet
his  eye  appears  nevertheless  not  to  have  rested  distinctly  upon
that  mountain.'

We  came  upon  the  Fikreh  at  five  minutes  past  6  o'clock  ;
it  is  here  a  large  shallow  Wady  with  marks  of  much  water,  and
evidently  takes  its  rise  at  a  long  distance  on  the  left.  The  moun
tain  before  us,  we  could  now  see,  was  composed  of  naked  strata
of  limestone  lying  obliquely  and  very  irregvdarly,  sometimes  in-
deed rising  up  in  convex  curves,  as  if  forming  the  external  cov-
ering of  an  arch.  These  strata  are  occasionally  cut  through  by
short  but  deep  chasms.  This  aacent  is  obviously  the  continua-
tion in  this  direction  of  the  step  or  oftset  which  we  had  formerly
descended  adjacent  to  the  lower  ez-Zuweirah  ;  though  it  is  here
much  higher  and  more  difiicult  than  there." — We  kept  on  di-
rectly towards  the  middle  pass  es-Sufah,  which  afibrds  also  the
shortest  route.  Near  the  foot  of  the  mountain  we  came  at  6^
o'clock  upon  the  ruins  of  a  small  fort  or  castle  of  hewn  stones,
with  a  few  other  foundations  round  about.  It  was  obviously  de-
signed to  guard  the  pass  ;  like  a  similar  one  at  ez-Zuweirah.'

We  reached  the  bottom  of  the  pass  at  6.40,  and  began  im-
mediately to  ascend.  The  way  leads  up  for  a  short  time  grad-
ually along  the  edge  of  a  precipitous  ravine  on  the  right ;  and
then  comes  all  at  once  upon  the  naked  surface  of  the  rock,  the
strata  of  which  lie  here  at  an  oblique  angle,  as  steep  as  a  man
can  readily  climb.  The  path,  if  so  it  can  be  called,  continues  for
the  rest  of  the  ascent  along  this  bare  rock,  in  a  very  winding
course.  The  camels  made  their  way  with  difiiculty,  being  at
every  moment  liable  to  slip.  The  rock  indeed  is  in  general  po-
rous and  rough ;  but  yet  in  many  spots  smooth  and  dangerous

'  Seetzen  in  Zach's  Monatl  Corr.  XVII.  the  whole  range,  so  far  as  we  could  learn,

p.  133-138.    Reisen  III.  13  sq.  does  not  bear  either  of  these  ns  a  general

'  See  p.   101,  above. — The  Arabs  in  name ;  as  socras  to  be  supposed  by  Schu-

gpeaklng  of  this  mountain,  would  be  very  bcrt  and  Bertou.

likely  to  give  to  the  different  parts  of  it  ^  From  this  spot  Madurah  bore  S.  ;">()'

the  names  of  Jebel  es-Siif.ih,  Jebel  el-Ye-  VV.    Mount  Hor  S.  15  E.    Mountain  of

men,  etc.  from  the  various  passes.    But  Moiib  near  Khanzireh  N.  80°  £.
ii.  589-591

Jiise2.]

PASS  E8-SrFAH.

181

for  animals.  In  such  places  a  path  has  been  hewn  in  the  rock
in  former  days  ;  the  slant  of  the  rock  being  sometimes  levelled,
and  sometimes  overcome  by  steps  cut  in  it.  The  vestiges  of
this  road  are  more  frequent  near  the  top.  The  appearance  is
that  of  a  very  ancient  pass.  The  whole  mountain  side  presents
itself  as  a  vast  inclined  plane  of  rock  ;  in  which,  at  intervals,
narrow  tracts  of  the  strata  run  up  at  a  steep  angle,  and  break
out  towards  the  upper  part  in  low  projections ;  while  in  other
places,  they  seem  to  have  been  thrown  up  in  fantastic  shapes  by
some  convulsion  of  nature.

We  clambered  up  the  pass  on  foot,  taking  a  direct  course
over  the  surface  of  the  rock,  while  the  camels  ascended  more
slowly  by  the  winding  route.  A  parallel  and  still  more  direct
path  for  footmen,  was  taken  by  several  of  our  Arabs  ;  entering
the  chasm,  on  our  right  from  below,  and  then  climbing  up  by  a
long  narrow  point  or  ledge  of  the  rock,  which  extends  far  down
into  it.  Further  to  the  right,  beyond  the  chasm,  the  pass  of
the  Sufey  winds  up  over  the  rock  in  a  similar  manner.

The  name  of  this  pass,  es-Stifah  (a  rock),  is  in  form  identi-
cal with  the  Hebrew  Zephath,  called  also  Hormah  ;  which  we
know  was  the  point  where  the  Israelites  attempted  to  ascend  the
mountain,  so  as  to  enter  Palestine  from  Kadesh,  but  were  driven
back.'  A  city  stood  there  in  ancient  times,  one  of  the  "  utter-
most cities  of  Judah  towards  the  coast  of  Edom  southwards,"
■which  was  afterwards  assigned  to  the  tribe  of  Simeon.'  There
is  therefore  every  reason  to  suppose,  that  in  the  name  of  es-
Sufah,  we  have  a  reminiscence  of  the  ancient  pass  which  must
have  existed  here,  and  bore  the  name  of  the  adjacent  city
Zephath.    Of  the  name  Hormah  we  could  find  no  vestige.

"We  reached  the  top  of  the  steep  ascent  at  7J  o'clock  ;  when
the  light  of  day  was  nearly  gone,  and  the  landscape  behind  us
was  dim.  Below  us,  we  could  overlook  the  broad  tract  or  step
which  we  had  just  crossed,  drained  in  its  whole  length  by  the
Fikreh  ;  beyond  were  the  lower  hilLs,  the  'Arabah,  and  the  moun-
tains of  Edom.  In  the  northeast  the  Dead  Sea  was  of  course
visible.  We  continued  to  ascend  more  gradually,  through  an
exceedingly  rocky  and  desert  region.  We  wished  much  to  en-
camp somewhere  near  the  brow  of  the  pass,  in  order  to  obtain  a
ftdler  view  by  daylight  ;  but  there  was  here  neither  wood  for  a
fire,  nor  pasture  for  the  camels.  We  were  therefore  compelled
to  proceed,  lighted  only  by  the  moon  in  her  first  quarter.  This
we  much  regretted  ;  for  the  region  which  we  now  traversed,
seemed  one  of  the  wildest  and  most  broken  we  had  yet  seen.
After  a  little  while,  pursuing  the  same  general  course,  about  N.

'  Jndg.  1,  17.   Nmn.  14,  43.    21,  3.       '  Josh.  12,  14,    15,  30.    19,  4.
Dent  1,  44.

Vol.  IL— 16  ii.  591,  592

182

FROM  "WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn.

N.  W.  over  a  more  level  tract,  we  could  distinguish  deep  ravines
on  each  side  of  us,  with  precipitous  mountains  beyond,  seeming-
ly rent  to  their  base.  The  road  for  some  distance  lay  along  a
narrow  causeway  of  rock,  between  two  such  ravines,  hardly  wide
enough  for  a  dozen  men  to  walk  abreast,  with  a  deep  precipice
on  each  side.  From  this  we  at  length  found  a  descent  towards
the  right  into  a  broader  Wady,  and  following  it  up,  encamped
near  it  at  9j  o'clock,  in  a  small  plain  surrounded  by  hills.  Here
were  many  Tulh  trees  and  shrubs.  The  Arabs  had  no  name
for  the  spot,  and  knew  of  no  ruins  in  the  \dcinity  ;  but  we
thought  we  had  seen,  not  long  before,  a  couple  of  small  towers  on
the  right  of  the  road.

We  were  excessively  fatigued ;  having  now  been  upon  our
camels  since  11  o'clock  of  the  preceding  day,  with  only  occa-
sional stops  of  two  or  three  hours.  The  camels  too  had  eaten
nothing  for  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  that  is,  since  our  stop  of
the  evening  before  ;  yet  they  did  not  seem  fatigued.  Being  now
out  of  aU  danger,  we  rejoiced  to  encamp  and  give  ourselves  up
to  repose  ;  and  after  the  fatigues  of  the  'Arabah  and  the  ex-
citing scenes  of  Wady  Musa,  we  looked  forward  with  delight  to
a  day  of  rest  upon  the  morrow.  While  the  tent  was  pitching,  I
threw  myself  upon  my  cloaks  and  fell  immediately  into  a  deep
sleep  ;  from  which  it  was  hard  to  be  awaked  to  remove  into  the
tent,  and  partake  of  our  evening  meal.  But  we  slept  soundly  *
through  the  whole  night ;  and  felt  afterwards  no  further  remains
of  the  fatigue.

Of  the  three  passes,  that  of  es-Siifah  is  the  most  direct ;  but
that  of  el- Yemen,  though  the  way  is  longer,  is  more  used,  on
account  of  the  water  at  the  top.  We  did  not  learn,  that  there
is  any  great  difference  between  them  all,  as  to  the  length  or
difficulty  of  the  ascent  itself,  which  we  estimated  at  about  a
thousand  feet.'  The  roads  leading  up  the  two  adjacent  passes,
es-Sufah  and  es-Sufey,  as  we  have  seen,  are  similar.  The  third
road  enters  the  gorge  of  Wady  el- Yemen  ;  and  following  it  up
for  a  time,  then  climbs  the  wall  of  rock  by  a  steep  and  difficult
path.  Seetzen  describes  this  Wady  as  a  frightfully  wild,  deep,
and  desert  valley,  strewed  with  large  rocks  so  thickly,  that  it  is
often  difficult  to  find  a  way  between  them.'^

The  high  region  which  we  had  now  reached,  is  bounded,
as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  by  another  less  elevated  ridge  in  the
northwest,  and  forms  a  second  step  or  ofiset  in  the  whole  ascent
to  Palestine.    It  is  indeed  the  continuation  of  the  broad  desert

'  Tho  whole  elevation  from  Wad}'  el-  "  J^ach's  Monatl.  Corr.  XVII.  pp.  134,

Fikreh  to  a  point  near  our  cncampiueut,  is  135.    So  Bcrtou  in  BvilL  de  la  Soc.  de

given  by  Schubert's  ulea^nroments  at  1434  Giiogr.  Juin  1839,  p.  323.
Paris  feet ;  Iteiste  II.  p.  448.

ii,  592-594

Jose  2.]  EL-GHOR  AND  EL-'aRABAH.  183

tract,  which  lies  between  the  two  passes  of  ez-Zuweirah,  and
runs  up  in  this  direction.'

As  we  had  now  taken  leave  of  the  'Arabah  and  of  the  region
of  the  Dead  Sea,  probably  for  ever,  it  may  be  proper  to  pause
for  a  few  moments,  and  bring  together  into  one  view  what
remains  to  be  said  upon  these  topics.  I  subjoin  too,  some
remarks  upon  the  catastrophe  of  the  cities  of  the  Plain,  and  on
the  route  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  their  approach  to  Palestine.

WADT  EL-'aRABAH.

This  great  valley,  lying  here  between  the  Dead  Sea  and  the
gulf  of  'Akabah,  constitutes  a  very  remarkable  feature  in  the
configuration  of  the  whole  region.  "With  a  partial  interruption,
or  rather  contraction,  between  the  lakes  el-Hiileh  and  Tiberias,
it  may  be  said  to  extend  from  Banias,  at  the  foot  of  Jebel  esh-
Sheikh,  to  the  Red  Sea.  The  northern  half  is  watered  by  the
Jordan,  which  during  its  course  expands  into  the  two  fresh-water
lakes  just  mentioned  ;  and  is  at  length  lost  in  the  bitter  waters
of  the  Dead  Sea  ;  this  latter  occupying  the  middle  point  of  the
great  valley  nearly  equidistant  from  irs  two  extremities.  From
the  lake  of  Tiberias  to  the  line  of  cliffs  some  three  hours  south
of  the  Dead  Sea,  the  vaUey  or  great  chasm  bears  among  the
Arabs  the  name  el-Ghor  ;  above  and  south  of  the  offset  of  those
cliffs,  and  so  to  'Akabah,  it  is  known  only  as  Wady  el-'Arabah.
Its  breadth  at  Jericho  and  at  'Ain  Jidy  has  already  been  speci-
fied ;^  where  we  had  now  crossed  it,  somewhat  obliquely,  from
the  pass  of  Nemela  to  'Ain  el-Weibeh,  we  had  found  the  width
to  be  not  far  from  six  hours  with  camels,  or  nearly  the  .same  as
at  Jericho  ;  while  at  'Akabah,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  contracted
perhaps  to  less  than  half  that  distance.'

The  remarkable  depression  of  the  Dead  Sea  in  the  middle
of  this  long  valley,  of  more  than  thirteen  hundred  feet  below
the  Mediterranean,  has  already  been  adverted  to.*  To  judge
from  the  general  configuration,  and  from  the  course  and  current
of  the  Jordan,  it  follows  almost  of  necessity,  that  the  lake  of
Tiberias,  and  most  probably  also  the  Huleh,  must  also  be  simi-
larly depressed  ;  although  the  measurements  are  as  yet  so  indefi-
nite and  inconsistent,  that  the  actual  degree  of  this  depression
can  hardly  be  regarded  as  determined.'

'  See  this  tract  described,  pp.  103,  104,  '  See  Vol.  I.  p.  162.
»l>ove.  ♦  See  Vol.  I.  p.  513.

•  Soc  above,  VoL  L  pp.  559  sq.  509  sq.       »  See  Note  XXX,  end  of  Yd.  L

ii.  594,  595

184

FROM  WADT  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[SEcXn.

On  the  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  the  elevation  of  the  water-
shed, which  according  to  our  Arabs  lies  beyond  the  southern
"Wady  Ghurundel,  has  not  yet  been  determined.  Schubert
gives  the  depression  of  the  bed  of  Wady  el-Jeib,  an  hour  and  a
half  south  of  el-Weibeh,  at  ninety-one  Paris  feet  below  the  level
of  the  Red  Sea  ;  and  that  of  Wady  el-Fikreh,  near  the  pass  es-
Sufah,  at  five  feet  below  the  same.'  These  specifications  seem
to  me  to  correspond  tolerably  with  the  depression  of  the  Dead
Sea.  But  apart  from  all  barometrical  measurements,  which  as
yet  are  so  uncertain,  the  veiy  conformation  of  this  part  of  the
great  valley,  thus  presenting  a  much  longer  and  greater  descent
towards  the  north  than  towards  the  south,  seems  of  itself  to  in-
dicate, that  the  Dead  Sea  must  he  considerably  lower  than  the
gulf  of  'Akabah.

The  Ghor,  between  the  lake  of  Tiberias  and  the  Dead  Sea,
as  we  have  seen,  is  for  the  most  part  a  desert ;  except  so  far  as
the  Jordan  and  occasional  fountains  cover  some  portions  of  it
with  exuberant  fertility.*  On  the  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  Avhere
instead  of  the  Jordan  we  find  only  during  the  rainy  season  the
torrents  of  el-J eib,  the  surface  of  the  'Arabah  is  almost  unin-
terruptedly a  stdl  more  frightful  desert.  In  the  Ghor  indeed,
around  the  southern  end  of  the  sea,  the  living  streams  from  the
Wadys  Kerak,  el-Kurahy,  and  et-Tufileh,  impart  fertility  to
the  adjacent  soil ;  while  on  the  southwest,  and  along  the  base
of  the  transverse  hne  of  chffs,  the  brackish  fountains  compre-
hended under  the  names  el-Beida  and  el-Arus,  nourish  exten-
sive tracts  of  marshy  verdure.^  But  in  el-'Arabah,  although
the  fountains  are  numerous  for  a  desert,  yet  they  are  less  copi-
ous, and  seem  to  exert  a  less  Advifnng  power,  than  those  of  the
northern  Ghor.  On  the  east,  the  stream  which  fertilizes  Wady
Ghuveir,  in  which  the  Fellahin  of  Dhaneh  plough  and  sow,
appears  not  to  reach  the  great  plain  of  the  'Arabah,  at  least  not
to  any  great  extent.  Then  follow  towards  the  south,  'Ain  el-
Buweirideh  already  described  ;  the  small  fountain  et-Taiyibeh
near  the  foot  of  the  pass  leading  up  to  Mount  Hor  ;  and  the
waters  within  the  mouth  of  the  southern  Wady  Ghurundel.*
On  the  western  side,  we  find  first  the  water  of  Hash  in  the  plain

'  Reise  n.  pp.  440.  443. — From  'Aka-  '  See  above,  in  Vol.  I.  pp.  545,  556,  659,

bah  to  Wady  Abu  Kugbeibeh  leading  np  571,  etc.

to  Mount  Hor,  Schubert  travelled  along  '  See  gent  rally  above,  pp.  112, 113  ;  al-

tbe  east  side  of  the  'Arabah,  where  the  so  pp.  115-117.

ground  is  higher  than  on  the  western  side.  '  Kor  Wady  el-Ghuweir,  see  p.  121,

Of  course  the  measurements  of  465,  954,  above;  for  'Ain  el-Buweirideh  p.  122;

and  2046  feet  of  elevation,  do  not  mark  the  for  'Ain  et-Taiyibeh  p.  139.     For  the

proper  level  of  the  'Arabah  ;  especially  the  springs  near  the  mouth  of  Wady  Ghjriin-

latter  one,  which  seems  to  have  been  taken  del,  see  Burckhardt  p.  441.  Laborda

in  the  eastern  mountains.    Ibid.  pp.  401,  Voyage  p.  53.  [148.]
411,  440;  comp.  p.  439.

ii,  595-5'J7

JUSE  2.]

EL-GHOR  AND  EL-'aRABAH.

185

of  the  'Arabah ;  then  'Ain  el-Khurar  at  the  mouth  of  the
Wady  of  the  same  name  ;  'Ain  el-Mureidhah  ;  el-Hufeiry  ;  el-
Weibeh  ;  'Ain  el-Ghamr  ;  and  then  beyond  the  Jerafeh  also  el-
Melihy  and  el-Ghudhyan.'

The  main  road,  by  which  Ma'an  and  the  adjacent  country
has  communication  vnth.  Hebron  and  Gaza,  descends  to  the
'Arabah  near  Mount  Hor,  and  crossing  to  el-Weibeh  ascends
again  to  the  south  of  Palestine  by  some  one  of  the  passes  above
described,  the  Hand  eh,  el- Yemen,  es-Sufah,  or  es-Sufey.  A
route  also  from  'Akabah  to  Hebron  and  Gaza  leads  along  the
'Arabah  ;  one  branch  goes  up  through  Wady  el-Beyaneh  to  the
western  plain  and  so  to  Kuhaibeh  ;  while  another,  apparently
little  travelled,  remains  in  the  'Arabah,  and  falls  into  the  Ma'an
road  at  el-Weibeh.'  An  ancient  route  between  Hebron  and
Allah  followed  the  same  track  ;  it  is  mentioned  by  Eusebius  and
Jerome,  and  its  traces  still  remain  along  the  pass  of  es-Sufah.'

Not  the  least  remarkable  circumstance  in  regard  to  this  great
valley  between  the  two  seas,  is  the  singular  fact,  that  until  the
present  century,  its  existence  should  have  remained  unknown  to
modem  geographers.  Among  ancient  writers,  neither  Strabo,
nor  Pliny,  nor  Ptolemy,  nor  Josephus,  nor  any  other  geographer
or  historian,  makes  the  slightest  allusion  to  it ;  although  they
often  speak  both  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Elanitic  gulf,  and  de-
scribe the  adjacent  regions.*  The  historians'  of  the  middle  ages
preserve  the  same  silence  ;  although  the  crusaders  must  have
been  acquainted  with  the  'Arabah  throughout  its  whole  length.
We  read  indeed  of  a  vaUey  in  these  parts,  to  which  the  crusa-
ders gave  the  name  of  "  Vallis  Illustris  ; "  but  this  appears  to

'  See  above  for  the  Hash,  pp.  119,  177  ;
for  el-Khurar  and  'Ain  el-Mureidhah,  p.
177;  for  el-Hufeiry,  p.  174;  for  el-Wei-
beh, p.  174-176  ;  for  el-Ghamr  p.  174 ;  for
el-Melihv,  p.  12.5.  For  el-Ghudhyan  see
Vol.  I.  pp.  169,  182.  See  also  generally.
Vol  I.  p.  182;  and  Burckhardt  p.  446.
Schubert  speaks  of  water  found  by  digging
holes  in  the  bottom  of  the  Jeib,  an  hour
and  a  half  south  of  el-Weibeh  ;  where  the
■water  probably  has  some  connection  with
el-Ghamr.  He  also  describes  a  fountain
three  or  four  hours  north  of  el-Weibeh,  in
a  valley  which  he  calls  Mirzaba  ;  though
the  proper  Wady  of  this  name  is  only  35
minutes  from  el-Weibeh.  The  distance
coincides  well  with  that  of  'Ain  el-Murei-
dhah.   Reise  U.  p.  440-443.

'  See  above.  Vol.  I.  p.  198.

*  See  pp.  180, 181.  Onomast.  art.  Jla-
zazon-Thamar,  compared  with  art.  Arath.
Reland  Pal.  pp.  410,  885.

*  Ritter  cites  a  passage  from  the  Peri-

VoL.  IL— 16*

plus  of  Agatharcides,  as  referring  to  this
valley,  or  at  least  to  the  southern  end  of  it
near  Ailah  :  "  Beyond  the  Laeanitio  (Ela-
nitic) gulf,  around  which  the  Arabs  dwell,
is  the  country  of  the  Bi,themanei ;  a  spa-
cious plain,  well  watered  and  low,  with  va-
rious grasses  as  high  as  a  man's  head,
and  much  fruit ;  full  also  of  wild  camels
and  deer,  and  multitudes  of  flocks  and
herds  of  cattle  and  mules  ;  "  Agatharcides
PeripL  Rubri  Maris,  ed.  Hudson,  pp.  57,
58 ;  in  Hudson's  Geogr.  Vet.  Scriptores
Minores  Tom.  I.  There  seems  however
nothing  in  this  language,  except  the  word
low  (Pa^eia),  that  can  well  be  applied  to
the  'Arabah  ;  all  the  rest,  if  meant  to  re-
fer to  that  valley,  is  exaggerated  and  fab-
ulous. This  circxmistance,  and  also  the
expression  beyond  (^tercf)  the  gulf,  seem
rather  to  intimate,  that  the  writer  was
speaking  of  some  part  of  Arabia  further
east.  See  Ritter's  Erdkunde  Th.  II.  p.
219.  BerL  1818.

u.  597,  598

186  FROM  WADT  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.  [Sec.  XII.

refer  merely  to  the  Ghor  just  around  the  south  end  of  the  Dead
Sea,  the  valley  of  Salt  of  the  Scriptures. '

Arabian  writers  not  unfrequently  speak  of  the  Ghor,  apply-
ing this  term  solely  to  the  valley  of  the  Jordan.'  In  Abidfeda
alone  we  find  it  mentioned,  that  the  valley  extends  southwards
to  the  Red  Sea.  He  describes  it  as  follows  "From  the  Dead
Sea  and  Zoghar  (Zoar)  to  Beisan  and  Tiberias,  the  tract  is  called
el-Ghor,  as  lying  between  two  mountains.  One  part  of  the
Ghor  is  reckoned  to  the  district  of  the  Jordan,  the  other  to
Palestine.  Ibn  Haukal  adds  :  The  Ghor  begins  at  the  lake  of
Gennesareth,  whence  it  extends  to  Beisan,  and  so  to  Zoghar  and
J ericho,  even  to  the  Dead  Sea  ;  and  thence  to  Ailah."  To  this
passage  is  subjoined,  in  a  note,  a  Scholion,  apparently  of  Abul-
feda  himself,  from  the  Leyden  manuscript,  supposed  to  be  an
autograph  "  el-Ghor  is  a  deep  valley  shut  in  by  mountains.
This  tract  abounds  in  palm  trees,  fountains,  and  streams  ;  and
snow  sometimes  falls  in  it.  One  part  extends  from  the  district
of  Jordan  till  you  pass  Beisan  ;  then  comes  Palestine.  And  if
one  proceeds  continuously  in  this  valley  [southwards],  it  will
bring  him  to  AUah."  These  passages,  which  we  now  know  to  be
literally  correct,  were  long  overlooked.  Biisching,  near  the  close
of  the  last  century,  simply  refers  to  them.^

But  if  we  turn  to  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  both  the  knowledge
and  the  name  of  the  'Arabah,  are  found  to  go  back  to  a  high
antiquity.  The  Hebrew  word  'Arabah,  signifying  in  general  "  a
desert  plain.  Steppe,"*  is  applied  with  the  article  (the  'Arabah)
directly  as  the  proper  name  of  the  great  valley  in  question  in  its
whole  length  ;  and  has  come  down  to  us  at  the  present  day  in
the  same  form  in  Arabic,  el-' Arabah.  We  find  the  Hebrew
'Arabah  distinctly  connected  with  the  Red  Sea  and  Elath  ;  the
Dead  Sea  itself  is  called  the  sea  of  the  'Arabah.  It  extended
also  towards  the  north  to  the  lake  of  Tiberias  ;  and  the  'Arboth
(plains)  of  Jericho  and  Moab  were  parts  of  it.''  The  'Arabah
of  the  Hebrews,  therefore,  like  the  Ghor  of  Abidfeda,  was  the
great  valley  in  its  whole  extent ;  and  in  our  present  state  of

'  See  above,  p.  109.  '  Heb.  n^nsn  Aa'.4ra6aA,  in  connection

'  Edrisipar  Jaubcrtp.  346.    Bohaeddin  vrith  the  Re'd'Sea  and  Elath,  Deut.  1,  1.

Vit.  Salad,  pp.  221,  222.    .Jakiit  Lex.  2,  8.     As  extending  to   the   lake  of

Gcogr.  quoted  by  Schultens,  Index  in  Vit.  Tiberias,  Josh.  12,  3.     2   Sam.  4,  7.

Salad,  art  Algauriim.    Reland  Pal.  p.  2  K.  25,  4.    "  Sea  of  the  'Arabah,  the

1041.  Salt  sea,"  Josh.  3,  16.     12,  3.  Deut

»  Abulfedte  Tab.  Syr.  ed.  Kohler,  Lips.  4^  49.     "  plains  (riair)  of  Jericho,"

1766,  pp.  8,  9.  Josh.  5,  10.    2  K.  25,' ?>.    "  Plains  of

*  Ibid.  p.  9.  n.  35.  See  the  account  of  Moab,"  L  e.  opposite  Jericho,  probably
this  nianu.script  in  Kohler's  Prooemium.  pastured  by  Moab  though  not  within  ita

'  Erdheschr.  Th.  XL  L  pp.  879,  605.    proper  territory,  Deut.  ?4,  1.  8.  Num.

Hamb.  1792.  22,  1.    Comp.  Gesenius  Lex.  Heb.  art.

•  Is.  33,  9.    Jer.  50, 12,  61,  43.  nanS.
ii.  598-600

JtrsK  2.]

el-'arabah.    the  dead  sea.

187

knowledge  respecting  it,  the  Scriptures  thus  receive  an  impor-
tant illustration.'

Yet  60  utterly  vmsuspected  was  the  general  conformation  of
the  region  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  that  Seetzen,
a  keen  observer  and  well  prepared  as  a  traveller,  appears  not  to
have  noticed  or  inquired  further  after  this  great  valley  ;  although,
as  he  descended  from  the  mountains  of  Kerak  in  A.  D.  1806,
and  again  when  he  travelled  in  1807  as  far  south  as  to  the  hill
Madurah,  it  lay  directly  before  him,  stretching  off  towards  the
south  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.  That  he  should  have  failed
to  remark  it,  is  most  singular ;  or  if  he  noticed  it,  then  his
silence  is  equally  unaccountable.*  Burckhardt  in  1812  was  the
first  to  visit  and  describe  this  valley  as  it  exists  ;  but  his  dis-
covery seems  to  have  been  first  published  to  the  world  in  1819,
and  his  more  full  description  in  1822.^  Before  this  time,  how-
ever, the  sagacity  of  Ritter,  from  the  account  of  Abulfeda  alone,
had  already  detected  the  true  configuration  of  the  region  in  ques-
tion ;  and  he  had  described  it  in  language  which,  even  now,
there  would  be  little  occasion  to  alter.*

The  journey  of  Laborde  in  1828,  gave  occasion  for  the  earli-
est good  map  of  the  'Arabah,  south  of  Wady  Musa.  The  first
to  pass  through  its  whole  length  from  one  sea  to  the  other,  was
M.  de  Bertou,  who  preceded  us  by  a  few  weeks.  In  looking
through  the  published  account  of  his  journey,  I  have  only  to  re-
gret the  appearance  of  some  inaccuracies  ;  which,  followed  as
they  seem  to  have  been  by  Letronne,  can  only  lead  to  confusion
in  the  geography  of  this  region.'

THE  DEAD  SEA  AND  CATASTROPHE  OF  THE  PLAIK.

With  the  conformation  of  the  valley  of  the  'Arahah  as  above
described,  the  history  and  character  of  the  Dead  Sea  stand  in

•  Besides  this  general  illustration,  the
difficult  passage  in  Deut.  1,  1,  admits  in
this  way  an  easy  explanation.  The  Isra-
elites were  in  the  plains  of  Moah  opposite
Jericho  ;  and  are  there  described  as  "  in
the  'Arabah  overagainst  the  Red  Sea,"  L  e.
in  the  part  opposite  to  the  Red  Sea,  or  to-
wards the  other  end.  This  'Arabah  is
then  said  to  lie  between  Paran  (Kadesh)
on  the  one  side,  and  Tophel  (Tiifileh)  on
the  other.  The  remaining  names  men-
tioned, are  all  on  the  west,  viz.  Laban,  the
Libnah  of  Num.  33,  20;  Hazeroth,  i.  e.
'Ain  el-Hudherah  ;  and  Di-Zahab,  prob-
ably Dahab. — I  owe  the  suggestion  of  this
explanation  to  the  kind  communication  of
Prof.  Hengstenberg  of  Berlin.

'  I  speak  here  of  course  only  with  re-
ference to  his  printed  letters,  in  Zach's
Jlonatl.  Corr.  XVII.  pp.  133-UO.  XVni.
pp.  433-443.  His  silence  as  to  Mount
Hor  has  already  been  noticed;  p.  180,
above.

'  See  the  letter  dated  Sept.  12,  1812,
prefixed  to  his  Travels  in  Nubia,  Lond.
1819.  Also  Travels  in  Syria  etc.  Lond.
1822.  p.  441  sq.

*  Erdkunde  Th.  II.  p.  218.    BerL  1818.

'  These  particulars  were  pointed  out  in
the  former  edition  of  this  work,  in  Note
XXXVII,  end  of  VoL  U ;  also  in  Monaths-
bericht  der  Berliner  Ges.  fiir  Erdk,  I.  p.
192  sq.  BerL  1840.

ii.  600,  601

188

FEOM  WADT  MTSA  TO  HEBRON.

[SbcXIL

close  connection.  It  lias  usuaUv  been  assumed,  that  this  lake  has
existed  only  since  the  destraction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  as
recorded  in  the  book  of  Genesis  ;  and  the  favourite  hypothesis
of  late  years  had  been,  that  the  Jordan  before  that  time  had
flowed  through  the  whole  length  of  Wady  el-'Arabah  to  the  gulf
of  'Akabah,  lea\-ing  the  present  bed  of  the  Dead  Sea  a  fertile
plain.  But  this,  as  we  had  now  learned,  could  not  have  been
the  case  ;  at  least  not  witliin  the  times  to  which  history  reaches
back.  Instead  of  the  Jordan  pursuing  its  course  southwards  to
the  gulf,  we  had  found  the  waters  of  the  'Arabah  itself,  and  also
those  of  the  high  western  desert  far  south  of  'Akabah,  all  flow-
ing northwards  into  the  Dead  Sea.'  Every  circumstance  goes
to  show,  that  a  lake  must  have  existed  in  this  place,  into  which
the  Jordan  poured  its  waters,  long  before  the  catastrophe  of
Sodom.  The  great  depression  of  the  whole  broad  Jordan  vaUey
and  of  the  northern  part  of  the  'Arabah,  the  direction  of  its
lateral  valleys,  as  well  as  the  slope  of  the  high  western  desert
towards  the  north,  aU  go  to  show  that  the  configuration  of  this
region,  in  its  main  features,  is  coeval  with  the  present  condition
of  the  surface  of  the  earth  in  general ;  and  not  the  effect  of  any
local  catastrophe  at  a  subsequent  period.

It  seems  also  to  be  a  necessary  conclusion,  that  the  Dead  Sea
anciently  covered  a  less  extent  of  surface  than  at  present.  The
cities  which  were  destroyed,  must  have  been  situated  on  the
south  of  the  lake  as  it  then  existed  ;  for  Lot  fled  to  Zoar,  which
was  near  to  Sodom  ;  and  Zoar,  as  we  have  seen,  lay  almost  at
the  southern  end  of  the  present  sea,  probably  in  the  mouth  of
Wady  Kerak  as  it  opens  upon  the  isthmus  of  the  peninsula.*
The  fertile  plain,  therefore,  which  Lot  chose  for  himself,  where
Sodom  was  situated,  and  which  was  well  watered  like  the  land
of  Egypt,  lay  also  south  of  the  lake,  "  as  thou  comest  unto
Zoar."^  Even  to  the  present  day,  more  living  streams  flow  into
the  Ghor  at  the  south  end  of  the  sea,  from  Wadys  of  the  eastern
mountains,  than  are  to  be  found  so  near  together  in  all  Pales-
tine ;  and  the  tract,  although  now  mostly  desert,  is  still  better
watered,  through  these  streams  and  by  the  many  fountains,  than
anv  other  district  throughout  the  whole  countrv.^

In  the  same  plain  were  slime  pits  ;  that  is  to  say,  weUs  of
bitumen  or  asphaltum  ;  the  Hebrew  word  being  the  same,  as
that  used  in  describing  the  building  of  the  waUs  of  Babylon,
which  we  know  were  cemented  with  bitumen.*    These  pits  or

'  See  VoL  L  pp.  180,  199.    Compare       '  Gea  13,  10-12.
also  above,  p.  lU  sq.  «  See  above,  pp.  112,  113.

'  Gen.  19,  20,  '•Behold  now,  this  city       »  n  v  1 1    m  _j

.„''„,.     ^,     -.     CI  Heb.  "icn  Gea  14,  10:  compand

u  near  to  nee  to.     I  or  the  site  of  Zoar,      ■  u  i     o    '  "
lee  above  p.  IOC  sq.  and  Note  XXXV,  end  *
of  the  volume.

iL  601-603

Jtok  2.]

CATASTROPHE  OF  S0T10M.

189

fountains  appear  to  have  been  of  considerable  extent.  The  val-
ley in  which  they  were  situated,  is  indeed  called  Siddim  ;  but  it
is  said  to  have  been  adjacent  to  the  salt  sea,  and  it  contained
Sodom  and  Gomorrah.*  The  streams  that  anciently  watered
the  plain,  remain  to  attest  the  accuracy  of  the  sacred  historian  ;
but  the  pits  of  asphaltum  are  no  longer  to  be  seen.  Did  they
disappear  in  consequence  of  the  catastrophe  of  the  plain  ?

The  remarkable  configuration  of  the  southern  part  of  the
Dead  Sea,  I  have  already  described  ;  the  long  and  singular  pe-
ninsula connected  with  the  eastern  shore  by  a  broad  low  neck ;
the  bay  extending  up  further  south,  in  many  parts  very  shallow  ;
and  the  low  flat  shores  beyond,  over  which  the  lake,  when  swol-
len by  the  rains  of  winter,  sets  up  for  several  miles.  Indeed  the
whole  of  this  part  of  the  sea,  as  I  have  said,  as  seen  from  the
western  mountains,  resembles  much  the  winding  estuary  of  a
large  river,  when  the  tide  is  out,  and  the  shoals  left  dry.*  I  have
also  related  the  sudden  appearance  of  masses  of  asphaltum  float-
ing in  the  sea  ;  which  seems  to  occur  at  the  present  day  only
rarely,  and  immediately  after  earthquakes  ;  and  also,  so  far  as
the  Arabs  knew,  only  in  the  southern  part  of  the  sea.^  The
character  of  the  shores,  the  long  mountain  of  fossil  salt,  and  the
various  mineral  productions,  have  also  been  described.*

In  view  of  aU  these  facts,  viz.  the  necessary  existence  of  a
lake  before  the  catastrophe  of  Sodom ;  the  well  watered  plain
towards  the  south,  in  which  were  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Go-
morrah, and  not  far  off  the  sources  of  bitumen ;  as  also  the  pecu-
liar character  of  this  part  of  the  Dead  Sea,  where  alone  asphal-
tum at  the  present  day  makes  its  appearance  ;  I  say  in  view  of
aU  these  facts,  there  is  but  a  step  to  the  obvious  hypothesis,  that
the  fertile  plain  is  now  in  part  occupied  by  the  southern  bay,  or
that  portion  of  the  sea  lying  south  of  the  peninsula  ;  and  that
by  some  convulsion  or  catastrophe  of  nature,  connected  with  the
miraculous  destruction  of  the  cities,  either  the  surface  of  this
plain  was  scooped  out,  or  the  bottom  of  the  sea  was  heaved  up,
so  as  to  cause  the  waters  to  overflow  and  cover  permanently  a
larger  tract  than  formerly.  In  either  case,  it  would  follow,  that
the  sources  of  bitumen  would  in  like  manner  be  covered  by  the
sea  ;  and  the  slimy  substance  becoming  hardened  and  fixed  by
contact  with  the  waters,  might  be  expected  occasionally  to  rise
and  float  upon  the  surface  of  this  heavy  flood.  The  ancients
describe  the  masses  of  asphaltum  as  thus  rising  from  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  apparently  in  greater  abundance  than  at  the  present
day  ;  although  this  circumstance  perhaps  may  be  accounted  for,

'  Gen.  U,  2.  3.  10-12.  »  See  Vol.  I,  p.  617  sq.

See  above,  Vol  L  pp.  501  gq.  519.  ♦  See  Vol  I.  p.  610 ;  also  p.  108,  above.

ii.  603.  604

190

FROM  WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn,

by  supposing,  that  the  bitumen  was  not  anciently,  as  now,  eager-
ly gathered  up  and  carried  away.'

The  country  we  know  is  sulDject  to  earthquakes  ;  and  exhi-
bits also  frequent  traces  of  volcanic  action.  In  the  whole  region
around  the  lake  of  Tiberias  these  traces  are  decided  ;  and  at  a
short  distance  northwest  of  Safed,  we  afterwards  came  iipon  the
crater  of  an  extinguished  volcano.  It  would  have  been  no  un-
common eifect  of  either  of  these  causes,  to  upheave  the  bottom
of  the  ancient  lake,  and  thus  produce  the  phenomenon  in  ques-
tion. But  the  historical  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  cities,
implies  also  the  agency  of  fire  :  "  The  Lord  rained  upon  Sodom
and  Gomorrah  brimstone  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven  ; "
and  Abraham  too  "  beheld,  and  lo,  the  smoke  of  the  country
went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace."'  Perhaps  both  causes
were  at  work  ;  for  volcanic  action  and  earthquakes  go  hand  in
hand  ;  and  the  accompanying  electric  discharges  usually  cause
lightnings  to  play  and  thunders  to  roll.  In  this  way  we  have
all  the  phenomena,  which  the  most  literal  interpretation  of  the
sacred  records  can  demand.

Further,  if  we  may  suppose,  that  before  this  catastrophe,  the
bitumen  had  become  accumulated  around  the  sources,  and  had
perhaps  formed  strata  spreading  for  some  distance  upon  the
plain  ;  that,  possibly,  these  strata  in  some  parts  extended  under
the  soil  and  might  thus  easily  "approach  the  vicinity  of  the  cities  ;
if  indeed  we  might  suppose  all  this,  then  the  kindUng  of  such  a
mass  of  combustible  materials,  through  volcanic  action  or  by
lightning  from  heaven,  would  cause  a  conflagration  sufficient  not
only  to  engulf  the  cities,  but  also  to  destroy  the  surface  of  the
plain,  so  that  "  the  smoke  of  the  country  would  go  up  as  the
smoke  of  a  furnace  "  and  the  sea  rushing  in,  would  convert  it  into
a  tract  of  waters.  The  supposition  of  such  an  accumulation  of
bitumen,  may  at  first  appear  extravagant ;  but  the  hypothesis
requires  nothing  more,  (and  even  less,)  than  nature  herself  ac-
tually presents  to  our  view,  in  the  wonderful  lake  or  tract  of
bitumen  found  on  the  island  of  Trinidad.'  The  subsequent
barrenness  of  the  remaining  portion  of  the  plain,  is  readily  ac-
counted for  by  the  presence  of  such  masses  of  fossil  salt,  which
perhaps  were  brought  to  light  only  at  the  same  time.

The  preceding  views  and  suggestions  are  not  the  result  of
mere  conjecture  ;  but  rest  upon  a  basis  of  facts  and  analogies
supplied  by  the  researches  of  science.  Nor  do  they  depend  sim-
ply upon  my  own  unaided  authority,  which  would  be  nothing  in

'  See  Vol.  I.  p.  518.  sq.     The  account  of  this  extraordinary

*  Gen.  19,  24.  28.  lake  of  pitch,  illustrates  very  strikingly,

'  See  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Geo-  what  well  may  have  been  the  character  of

logical  Society,  London  1811,  Vol.  I.  p.  C3  a  portion  of  the  ancient  plain  of  Sodom,
ii.  CO-i-OOo

jniE  2.]

CATASTROPHE  OF  SODOM.

191

a  matter  of  this  kind.  Through  the  kindness  of  the  distinguished
geologist  Leopokl  von  Buch,  whose  researches  have  been  partic-
ularly directed  to  the  phenomena  of  volcanos,  I  was  permitted
to  lay  before  him  an  abstract  of  the  facts  which  have  been  more
fully  detailed  in  this  work  ;  and  the  following  letter  in  reply
contains  his  commentary  upon  them.

Berlin,  April  20,  1839.

Sib,

It  is  rather  in  reply  to  your  kind  confidence,  than  in  the
hope  of  presenting  any  observation  of  importance,  that  I  address
to  you  these  lines.

The  valley  of  the  Jordan  is  a  fissure  (o'evasse),  which  ex-
tends from  Mount  Lebanon  to  the  Red  Sea  without  interruption.
Such  it  seems  to  me,  is  the  result  of  your  researches,  as  well  as
of  those  of  M.  de  Bertou  and  of  M.  Callier ;  who  nevertheless
find  fault  with  Ritter  for  having  said  the  same  thing.  These
long  fissures,  especially  frequent  among  limestone  mountains,  give
the  configuration  to  our  continents.  If  they  are  very  large  and
deep,  they  afford  passage  to  the  primitive  mountains,  which  for
that  reason  form  chains,  in  the  direction  which  the  fissure  pre-
scribes. We  might  therefore  expect  a  greater  development  of
the  volcanic  agents  at  the  bottom  of  this  fissure,  than  upon  the
heights.

According  to  the  most  recent  researches,  fossil  salt  is  a  pro-
duct of  volcanic  or  plutonic  action  along  an  opening  of  this  na-
ture. But,  fountains  of  asphaltum  or  bitumen  are  so  likewise  ;
as  is  proved  by  the  numerous  sources  of  bitumen  fi-om  the  foot
of  the  Zagros  in  the  environs  of  Bassorah  as  far  as  to  Mosul,
and  also  at  Bakou  ;  as  is  proved  further  by  the  source  of  bitu-
men in  the  gulf  of  Naples,  or  at  Mellilli  near  to  Syracuse  ;  as
is  proved  too  by  the  sources  of  bitumen  in  the  isle  of  Zante,  and
even  by  the  bitumen  of  Seyssel,  of  which  they  make  side-walks
in  Paris.

The  asphaltum  of  the  Dead  Sea,  is  probably  nothing  more
than  bitumen  consolidated  at  the  bottom  of  the  lake  ;  wliich,  not
being  able  to  flow  off",  forms  by  consequence  a  layer  at  the  bot-
tom, as  in  the  island  of  Trinidad.  It  is  quite  probable,  that
this  accumulation  may  have  taken  place  in  remote  times,  as  well
as  in  our  day  ;  and  if  some  volcanic  action,  an  elevation  of  the
soil,  or  shocks  of  earthquakes,  have  brought  to  light  masses  of
asphaltum  analogous  to  that  which  you  describe,  (a  phenomenon
of  the  highest  importance,  hitherto  unknown,)  we  can  very  weU
conceive  of  the  conflagration  of  entire  cities,  by  the  inflamma-
tion of  materials  so  eminently  combustible.

ii.  606,  607

192

ntOM  WADT  MTSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec  Xn.

Could  some  mass  of  basalt  be  discovered  in  the  southern
part,  or  towards  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea,  one
might  believe  that  a  basaltic  dyke  had  been  upheaved  at  the
time  of  the  celebrated  catastrophe  ;  just  as  this  took  place  in
1820,  near  the  isle  of  Banda,  and  at  another  time  at  the  foot  of
the  volcano  of  Ternate.'  The  movements  which  accompany  the
breaking  out  of  such  a  dyke,  are  of  a  character  to  produce  all
the  phenomena  which  have  changed  this  interesting  region,
without  exercising  any  very  marked  influence  upon  the  form  and
configuration  of  the  mountains  round  about.

The  fertihty  of  the  soil  depends  sometimes  upon  light  acci-
dents. It  is  not  probable,  that  bitiunen  would  be  adapted  to
augment  it.  But  it  is  very  possible,  that  earthquakes  may  have
brought  out  a  larger  mass  of  fossil  salt  ;  which  being  carried  by
the  waters  to  the  bottom  of  the  vaUey,  would  suffice  to  take
away  its  productive  power.  Lot  would  hardly  have  been  so
struck  with  the  fossil  salt,  as  to  suppose  his  wife  was  changed
into  salt,  had  there  been  any  knowledge  of  its  existence  be-
tween the  layers  of  the  moimtain,  before  the  remarkable  catas-
trophe.

It  is  to  be  hoped,  that  the  very  active  Geological  Society  of
London  may  one  day  send  out  one  of  its  members,  to  illuminate
with  the  torch  of  geology  the  facts  which  interest  aU  the  world.
But  it  would  be  necessarv  to  examine  the  whole  geological  con-
stitution,  both  of  Motmt  Lebanon  and  of  all  the  valley  of  the
Jordan,  from  Tiberias  quite  to  'Akabah.

I  conceive,  Sir,  that  all  this  can  hardly  conteat  you.  But  I
think  it  would  be  rash  to  build  a  theory  upon  fects,  of  which
one  has  not  himself  at  least  observed  the  results.

(Signed)    Leopold  von  Bcch.*

APPROACH  OF  THE  ISRAELITES  TO  PALESTI>'E.

I  have  formerly  endeavoured  to  trace  the  route  of  the  Israel-
ites to  Sinai ;  and  have  pointed  out  also  their  probable  course
from  Sinai  northwards,  passing  by  'Ain  el-Hudhera  correspond-
ing to  the  ancient  Hazeroth.'    I  have  likewise  already  expressed

'  Descriprion  des  Ilea  Canaries  etc.  par
L.  de  Bnch.  Paris  18.36,  pp.  412,  4:i3.

'  The  oriirinal  of  this  letter  U  given  in
Note  X.XXVIII,  end  of  the  volume. — For
some  of  the  main  soisgestions  coatoined  in
the  views  above  presented,  I  am  indebted
to  mj  friend  and  companion,  Mr  Smith,
whose  attention  was  tamed  to  the  sabject

iL  607-609

at  an  earlier  period  than  my  own.  It  was
in  consequence  of  these  suggestions,  that  I
was  first  led  to  lay  the  subject  before  the
writer  of  the  abore  letter.

'  See  at  the  end  of  Sect  II,  and  the  first
part  of  Sect  IIL  For  el-UudberB  tee  Vol
L  p.  15L

Jrtk  2.]

BOUTE  OF  THE  ISRAELITES.

193

my  conviction,  that  whatever  may  have  heen  the  direction  of
their  course  after  leaving  that  fountain, — whether  to  the  shore
of  the  eastern  gulf  and  so  along  the  'Arabah,  or  whether  they
crossed  the  Tih  and  came  out  upon  the  high  western  desert
north  of  that  mountain, — they  stUl  could  not  have  passed  on
the  west  of  Jebel  'Araif,  and  the  mountainous  tract  further
north.  Such  a  course  would  have  brought  them  directly  to
Beersheba,  and  not  to  Kadesh  in  the  "  uttermost  border  of
Edom.'"

The  mountainous  tract  north  of  Jebel  'Araif  and  west  of
the  'Arabah,  forming  the  country  of  the  'Azazimeh,  we  had  now
seen  on  all  sides.  Beginning  at  the  bluff  el-Mukrah  and  the
fountain  'Ain  esh-Shahibiyeh,  it  extends  northwards  nearly  or
quite  to  the  point  where  we  now  were,  a  desert  limestone  region
full  of  precipitous  ridges,  through  which  no  travelled  road  has
ever  passed.^  Our  conviction  was  therefore  strengthened,  that
even  if  the  Israelites  came  out  at  first  upon  the  great  western
plateau,  they  must  necessarily  have  followed  down  the  Jerafeh
to  its  junction  with  the  'Arabah  opposite  Mount  Hor ;  and
then,  in  any  case,  have  approached  the  border  of  Palestine  along
the  latter  valley.  Most  probably,  however,  they  passed  by  way
of  the  Red  Sea  and  the  'Arabah  :  for  the  language  of  the  sacred
writer  seems  to  imply,  that  their  way  led  along  Mount  Seir.^

"We  are  led  also  to  the  same  conclusion  by  all  the  scriptural
notices  of  the  site  of  Kadesh,  to  which  they  first  came.  It  was
"  in  the  uttermost  border  of  Edom."*  The  southern  quarter  of
Judah  too  is  described  as  being  "  along  by  the  coast  of  Edom  ; "
and  the  line  was  drawn  "  from  the  shore  of  the  salt  sea,  from
the  bay  that  looked  southward  ;  and  it  went  out  to  the  sijuth
side  to  the  ascent  of  Akrabbim,  and  passed  along  to  Zin,  and
ascended  up  on  the  south  side  to  Kadesh-bamea."^  Further,
from  Kadesh  the  spies  entered  Palestine  by  ascending  the
mountain  ;  and  the  murmuring  Israelites  attempting  to  do  the
same,  were  driven  back  by  the  Amalekites  and  Canaanites,  and
afterwards  apparently  by  the  king  of  Arad  as  far  as  to  Hormah,
then  called  Zephath.'  There  was  also  at  Kadesh  a  fountain,
mentioned  long  before  the  exodus  of  the  Israelites  ;  and  the
miraculous  supply  of  water  took  place  only  at  their  second
visit ;  which  imphes,  that  at  their  first  approach,  there  was  no
special  lack  of  this  necessary  article.'    From  Kadesh  they

•  See  Vol  L  p.  187.  Nouv.  AnnaL  des  Voyages,  1839.  Tom.

»  See  VoL  I.  186.    Not  hat  that  !t  may  III.  p.  272.
b«  and  is  gometimes  traversed;  for  the       *  Dent.  1,2.
'Azazimeh  live  in  it;  but  other  Arabs       *  Num.  20,  16.

avoid  the  tract  and  paas  around  it  on  their  *  Josh.  15,  1.  2.  3  ;  comp.  Num.  34,  3. 4.
journeys.    M.  Callier  appears  to  hare  got       '  Num.  13,  17.    14,40-45.  21,1-3.

among  these  mountains  on  his  journey  in  Deut.  1,  41-44.    Comp.  Jndg  1,  17.
thia  region;  Joum.  des  Savans,  Jan.  1836.       '  Gen.  14,  7.    Num.  20,  1-11.
Vol.  II. -17  ii.' 609,  610

194

FROM  WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn.

turned  back  to  Mount  Hor,  and  thence  proceeded  to  the  Ecd
Sea.

These  circumstances  all  combine  to  fix  the  site  of  Kadesh  at
a  fountain  in  the  northern  part  of  the  great  valley  ;  and  I  have
already  pointed  out  the  remarkable  coincidence  of  the  position
of  the  fountain  el-Weibeh,  with  all  these  particulars.  There
the  Israelites  would  have  Mount  Hor  in  the  S.  S.  E.  towering
directly  before  them  ;  across  the  'Arabah  is  the  Wady  el-Ghu-
weir,  affording  an  easy  passage  through  the  land  of  Edom  ;  in
the  northwest  rises  the  mountain  by  which  they  attempted  to
ascend  to  Palestine,  with  the  pass  still  called  Sfifah  (Zephath)  ;
while  further  north  we  find  also  Tell  'Arad,  marking  the  site  of
the  ancient  Arad.  To  all  this  comes  then  the  vicinity  of  the
southern  bay  of  the  Dead  Sea  ;  the  line  of  cliffs  or  offset  sepa-
rating the  Ghor  from  the  'Arabah,  answering  to  the  ascent  of
Akrabbim  and  the  desert  of  Zin  with  a  place  of  the  same
name  between  Akrabbim  and  Kadesh,  not  improbably  at  the
water  of  Hash  in  the  Arabah.'^ — In  this  way  all  becomes  easy
and  natural ;  and  the  scriptural  account  is  entirely  accordant
with  the  character  of  the  country.^

I  have  thus  far  assumed  that  the  Israelites  were  twice  at
Kadesh  ;  and  this  appears  from  a  comparison  of  the  various  ac-
counts. They  broke  up  from  Sinai  on  the  twentieth  day  of  the
second  month  in  the  second  year  of  their  departure  out  of
Egypt,  corresponding  to  the  early  part  of  May  ;^  they  came  into
the  desert  of  Paran,  whence  spies  were  sent  up  the  mountain
into  Palestine,  in  "  the  time  of  the  first  ripe  grapes  ; "  and  these
returned  after  forty  days  to  the  camp  at  Kadesh.^  As  grapes
begin  to  ripen  on  the  mountains  of  Judah  in  July,  the  return
of  the  spies  is  to  be  placed  in  August  or  September.  The  peo-
ple now  murmured  at  the  report  of  the  spies  ;  and  received  the
sentence  from  Jehovah,  that  their  carcasses  should  fall  in  the
wilderness,  and  their  children  wander  in  the  desert  forty  years.*

'  See  above  p.  120.

'  See  pp.  119,  177,  above.  Compare
Num.  20,  1.

^  Mr  Rowlands  supposes  tliat  lie  found
Kadesh  at  the  fountain  el-'Aiu,  in  the  liigh
western  desert;  see  above.  Vol.  I.  pp.  18!),
1!)0.  Holy  City  I.  p.  460  sq.  That  fountain  is
calked  also  'Ain  el-Kudcir.it,  from  a  tribe  of
Arabs  who  water  there.  Out  of  this  name
Mr  Kowlands,  or  hisGreek  dragoman,  seems
to  have  made  Kiidi  s  or  Kadi-s  ;  ami  on  the
strength  of  this  blunder,  assumed  tliore  the
site  of  Kadesh.  Against  this  view  the  con-
siderations urged  above  in  the  text,  are
conclusive  ;  not  one  of  them  applies  to
el-'Ain.    It  is  not  iu  the  uttermost  border

ii.  610,  611

of  Kdom  ;  there  is  no  great  valley  passing
up  thence  through  Edom  to  the  eastern
desert,  like  el-Ghuweir ;  the  host  could
not  have  proceeded  thence  directly  to
Mount  Hor,  where  Aaron  dies ;  there  is  no
mountain  near,  by  which  the  spies  could
ascend  into  Palestine  ;  nor  by  which  the
people  could  go  up  to  Arad,  where  tliey
were  discomfited.  In  short,  the  position
of  el-'Ain,  is  utterly  inconsistent  witli  all
the  circumstances  narrated  as  having  taken
place  at  Kadesh.  See  more  in  Biblioth.
Sacra,  1840,  p.  .S77-381.

*  Num.  10,  11  ;  comp.  9,  1.

'  Num.  12,  16.    13,  2.  17.  20.  25.  20.

•  Num.  14,  29.  32.  33.

Joke  2.]

ROUTE  OF  THE  ISRAELITES.

195

They  were  ordered  to  turn  back  into  the  desert  "  by  the  way  of
the  Eed  Sea  ; "  although  it  appears  that  they  abode  "  many
days  "  in  Kadesh.'

The  next  notice  of  the  Israelites  is,  that  in  the  first  month,  •
thc-y  came  into  the  desert  of  Zin  and  abode  again  at  Kadesh  ;
here  Miriam  dies  ;  Moses  and  Aaron  bring  water  from  the  rock  ;
a  passage  is  demanded  through  the  land  of  Edom,  and  refused  ;
and  they  then  journey  from  Kadesh  to  Mount  Hor,  where  Aaron
dies  in  the  fortieth  year  of  the  departure  from  Egypt,  in  the
first  day  of  the  fifth  month,  corresponding  to  a  part  of  August
and  September.*  Here  then,  between  August  of  the  second
year  and  August  of  the  fortieth  year,  we  have  an  interval  of
thirty-eight  years  of  wandering  in  the  desert.  With  this  coin-
cides another  account.  From  Mount  Hor  they  proceeded  to
Elath  on  the  Red  Sea,  and  so  around  the  land  of  Edom  to  the
brook  Zered  on  the  border  of  Moab  ;  and  from  the  time  of  their
departure  from  Kadesh,  (meaning  of  course  their  first  dej^ar-
ture,)  until  they  thus  came  to  the  brook  Zered,  there  is  said  to
have  been  an  interval  of  thirty-eight  years. ^

In  this  way,  the  scriptural  account  of  the  joumeyings  of  the
Israelites,  becomes  perfectly  harmonious  and  intelligible.  The
eighteen  stations  mentioned  only  in  the  general  list  in  the  book
of  Numbers,  as  preceding  the  arrival  at  Kadesh,  are  then  appa-
rently to  be  referred  to  this  eight  and  thirty  years  of  wandering,
during  which  the  people  at  last  approached  Ezion-geber,  and
afterwards  returned  northwards  a  second  time  to  Kadesh,  in
the  hope  of  passing  directly  through  the  land  of  Edom.*  Their
wanderings  extended  doubtless  over  the  western  desert  ;  although
the  stations  named  are  probably  only  those  head-quarters  where
the  tabernacle  was  pitched,  and  where  Moses  and  the  elders  and
priests  encamped  ;  while  the  main  body  of  the  people  was  scat-
tered in  various  directions.^

How  in  these  wide  deserts,  this  host  of  more  than  two  mil-
lions of  souls,  having  no  traffic  nor  intercourse  with  the  sur-
rounding hordes,  could  find  supplies  of  food  and  water  sufficient
for  their  support  without  a  constant  miracle,  I  for  one  am  unable
to  divine.  Yet  among  them  we  read  only  of  occasional  longings
and  complaints  ;  while  the  tribes  that  now  roam  over  the  same
regions,  although  numbering  scarcely  as  many  thousands,  are
exposed  to  famine  and  privation  of  every  kind  ;  and,  at  the
best,  obtain  only  a  meagre  and  precarious  subsistence.^

'  Num.  14,  25.    Dent.  1,  40.  46.  *  For  a  synoptical  arrangement  of  the  sev-

Kum.  20,  1-29.    33,  37.38.  eral  lists  of  stations  during  the  wanderings

'  Num.  21,  4.    Deut.  2,  8.  13.  14.  18.  of  the  Israelites,  exhibiting  in  one  view  the

*  See  the  list  of  all  these  stations,  Num.  whole  course  of  their  journey,  see  Note

83,  18-36.  XXXIX,  end  of  the  Volume.
'  See  above,  VoL  I.  p.  72  sq.  Comp.  ib.  52.

ii.  611-613

196

FBOM  WADT  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn.

Sunday,  June  3d.  After  our  fatigues  of  the  preceding  two
days,  we  slept  soundly  until  6^  o'clock  ;  and  rose  congratulating
ourselves  upon  the  rest  of  the  Christian  Sabbath.  '  But  this  rest
to-day  was  not  to  be  of  long  duration.  After  breakfast,  one  of
the  Arabs,  Muhamnied,  went  with  the  camels  to  the  water  at
the  head  of  the  pass  Yemen,  nearly  an  hour  distant  from  our
tent  in  the  southwest.  There,  as  he  said,  he  met  an  Arab  who
had  come  up  the  pass  during  the  night,  and  who  reported,  that
yesterday  towards  evening  he  had  seen  a  party  of  men  with
horses  and  dromedaries  encamp  at  the  water  of  Hash  in  the
'Arabah,  apparently  coming  this  way  on  a  marauding  expedi-
tion. Our  Arabs  immediately  concluded,  that  they  were  of  the
Sulit  or  Hejaya  coming  against  the  Tiyahah  in  retaliation  for
the  inroads  of  the  latter.  Should  they  ascend  by  the  Sufah,
they  would  come  directly  upon  us  ;  or  if  by  the  Yemen,  their
scouts  would  doubtless  discover  our  tent ;  and  as  they  were  at
war  with  the  Jehahn  also,  we  should  of  course  be  exposed  to  be
plundered,  if  to  nothing  worse.  We  had  indeed  strong  suspi-
cions, that  this  was  a  story  got  up  by  Muhammed,  the  worthless
buffoon,  who  alone  had  seen  the  stranger,  in  order  to  induce  us
to  push  forward.  Yet  it  might  after  all  be  true  ;  and  we  there-
fore thought  it  advisable  under  the  circumstances  to  go  on,  and
get  out  of  the  reach  of  any  danger.  This  was,  however,  the
only  instance,  in  which  we  were  compelled  to  violate  our  princi-
ple of  not  travelling  upon  the  Christian  Sabbath. — It  was  said,
the  party  would  not  reach  the  top  of  the  pass  until  the  after-
noon. A  camel  was  now  despatched  with  the  water-skins  to  be
filled  at  the  water  of  Yemen.  The  Arabs  seemed  to  be  in  no
hurry  whatever  ;  and  it  was  not  until  after  long  delays,  that  we
at  length  set  off.  Nor  do  we  know  unto  the  present  day,
whether  the  story  of  the  hostile  party  was  tnie  or  false.

We  at  length  started  at  10|  o'clock  ;  the  course  continuing
about  N.  N.  W.  We  soon  came  out  upon  an  open  and  tolera-
bly level  tract,  called  et-Turaibeh  ;  which,  although  chiefly  cov-
ered with  loose  sand,  had  ever}Tvhere  many  herbs  affording
pasture  for  camels.  It  belongs  to  the  Arabs  called  Sa'idiyeh.
Before  ns  was  another  long  mountain  ridge,  running  from  E.  N.
E.  to  W.  S.  W.  similar  in  its  general  appearance  to  that  we  had
ascended  last  night ;  though  not  more  than  half  as  high.  This
tract,  between  the  top  of  one  ridge  and  the  bottom  of  the  other,
constitutes  the  second  step  or  offset  of  the  whole  ascent  between
the  'Arabah  and  Palestine  ;  and  is,  as  we  have  seen,  the  con-
tinuation in  this  direction  of  the  broad  region  of  desert  hills  be-
tween the  two  passes  of  ez-Zuweirah  ;  the  lower  ridge  being
here  much  higher,  and  the  upper  one  much  lower,  than  on  that
road.    Further  north,  it  is  drained  by  Wady  el-Fa'iya,  a  branch

ii.  G13.  614

Jxnsz  3.]

KUENUB.

197

of  the  Muhauwat,  which  enters  the  Dead  Sea  at  the  north  end
of  Usdum;'  but  just  in  this  part,  the  waters  are  carried  off
southwards  by  one  of  the  main  heads  of  Wady  el- Yemen,  which
runs  along  the  base  of  the  next  ridge.  On  this  plain,  the  roads
from  the  three  passes,  Sufey,  Sufah,  and  Yemen,  all  unite  ;  and
a  branch  was  also  said  to  come  in  from  the  Haudeh.''

At  12.25  we  crossed  the  branch  of  Wady  el-Yemen,  which
commences  not  far  to  the  right.  Here  we  immediately  began  to
ascend  by  a  low  gap  in  the  ridge  before  us,  called  el-Muzeikah.
The  ascent  is  gradual  and  easy ;  at  a  quarter  before  one,  we
were  at  the  top,  and  came  out  upon  another  higher  tract  of
table  land,  or  rather  a  basin,  shut  in  on  the  southeast  by  hiUs,
forming  the  top  of  the  ridge.  They  are  here  comparatively  low  ;
but  further  towards  the  W.  S.  W.  the  ridge  becomes  higher,  and
spreads  out  into  a  mountainous  tract,  through  which  our  Arabs
knew  no  road.  Yet  we  were  led  to  suppose,  that  the  pass  el-
Gharib,  of  which  we  had  several  times  heard,  is  probably  con-
nected with  this  range  of  mountains.^

We  kept  on  N.  N.  W.  across  the  basin,  around  which  are
gravel  hills,  and  which  is  bounded  on  the  other  side  at  the  dis-
tance of  about  an  hour  by  another  low  ridge  or  line  of  hills,
parallel  to  that  we  had  just  ascended.  On  our  right  the  surface
had  a  gradual  descent ;  and  here  was  the  beginning  of  a  Wady
running  down  northeast  to  Wady  el-Fa'iya,  and  forming  one  of
its  heads.  On  the  left  we  could  perceive  a  shallow  Wady  called
Abu  Teraifeh,  coming  from  the  north  and  passing  down  through
the  hiUs  of  the  ridge  we  had  ascended,  about  half  a  mile  further
southwest  to  Wady  el- Yemen.  Another  road  ascends  along  this
Wady,  which  was  taken  by  some  of  our  Arabs.  Just  at  the
head  of  this  latter  pass,  we  could  distinctly. see  the  ruins  of  a
town,  called  Kurnub,  covering  a  low  hill  near  the  Wady  ;  our
guides  said  there  was  here  living  water  in  pits  (Themail)  ;  and
on  that  account  they  had  been  very  desirous  to  reach  this  spot
the  evening  before.  With  our  telescopes  we  could  distinguish
two  or  three  ruined  walls,  apparently  of  hewn  stones,  which
seemed  to  be  the  remains  of  churches  or  other  public  "buildings.V

'  See  above,  pp.  104,  106.

'  In  1834,  M.  Callier  travelled  from
Hebron  to  "  D.iriy6  "  (Dhoheriyeh ) ;  thence
S.  S.  W.  to  Wady  "Kalassa"  (Kliulacah,
Kuni,  see  Vol.  I.  p.  202)  at  the  foot  of  the
mountains,  where  he  encamped  on  the
third  day.  On  the  fourth  day  he  follow-
ed up  this  Wady  into  the  mountains  and
then  descended  eastwards  along  another
Wady  called  "Traybe"  (Turuibeh),  which
brought  him  near  to  the  Ghor.  This
would  seem  to  have  some  reference  to  the
tract  we  were  now  crossing,  which  is  about
Vol.  II.— 17*

in  the  latitude  of  Wady  Khulasah ;  and
the  traveller  probably  approached  the  pass
of  Yemen.  But  from  Hebron  to  this
point,  his  route  by  Dhoheriyeh  was  singu-
larly circuitous  ;  occupying  four  days  in-
stead of  the  two  which  it  took  us.  See
Journ.  des  Savans  Jan.  183G,  p.  47.  Nouv.
Annal.  de  Voy.  1839,  Tom.  III.  p.  274.

^  See  Vol.  I.  p.  208  ;  also  p.  179,  above.

*  Lord  Lindsay  appears  to  have  ascend-
ed by  the  more  southern  pass,  directly  to
Kurimb ;  he  describes  it  as  the  extensive
ruins  of  an  ancient  walled  town,  about
ii.  615,  616

198

FROM  WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn.

This  place  is  marked  on  Seetzen's  map,  and  would  seem  most
probably  to  have  been  the  Thamara  of  Ptolemy  and  other
■writers,  as  well  as  the  Thamar  of  the  Old  Testament.'  The
grounds  on  which  this  supposition  rests,  will  be  better  under-
stood in  connection  with  the  remarks  respecting  el-Milh  further
on.

In  passing  over  this  open  tract  or  basin,  we  saw  traces  of
grass,  now  dried  up.  At  1.20  we  crossed  obliquely  the  bed  of
Wady  Abu  Teraifeh.  Here  a  path  branched  off  to  the  right,
leading  directly  to  the  country  of  the  Jehahn  ;  while  that  which
we  still  followed  is  the  Hebron  and  Gaza  road.  At  2  o'clock  we
came  out  upon  the  top  of  the  swell  or  low  ridge  above  mentioned,
here  called  Kubbet  el-Baul  ;  and  had  before  us  a  smaller  basin
forming  the  head  of  Wady  'Ar'arah,  which  runs  off  to  Wady  es-
Seba',  and  so  to  the  Mediterranean.  We  now  had  a  slight  de-
scent into  this  basin,  and  kept  then  along  the  broad  Wady.
Here  was  the  first  appearance  of  soil ;  and  along  this  tract  we
found  at  2.30  traces  of  ancient  walls,  probably  once  dams  or
terraces  connected  with  tillage.  Indeed  the  vestiges  of  ancient
cultivation  began  to  be  everywhere  visible.  Towards  the  western
part,  at  3.05,  we  passed  the  foundations  of  a  former  village  of  un-
hewn stones,  now  called  el-Kuseir  (little  castle),  from  a  small
structure  near  the  foot  of  the  hiU,  which  may  have  been  a  tower.
This  tract  belongs  to  the  DhuUam.  We  found  in  it  a  stray  female
camel  with  her  foal,  which  our  Arabs  at  first  were  inclined  to
drive  off  with  them.  They  caught  her  and  examined  her  marks  ;
and  finding  that  she  belonged  to  the  'Azazimeh,  let  her  go.
Each  tribe  has  a  peculiar  mark  for  its  camels  ;  and  those  of  one
tribe  are  in  no  danger  of  being  taken  by  any  other  in  time  of
peace.  •

At  a  quarter  past  3  o'clock,  another  path  went  off  towards
the  right,  leading  directly  to  el-Milh  ;  this  is  the  usual  Hebron
road.  We  still  kept  the  Gaza  path,  which  passes  to  the  left  of
el-Mllh.  The  Wady  soon  sweeps  off  more  towards  the  northeast
and  after\Yards  northwest.  We  ascended  the  low  ridge  or  swell
on  the  left,  and  from  the  top  at  3|  o'clock,  had  a  wide  view  over
the  broad,  open,  undulating  region,  extending  ia  the  northeast  to

three  hours  from  the  top  of  the  pass  es-  self  not  tinnaturally  :  ^Mjether  these  rnSns

Sufah,  exhibiting  fragments  of  columns,  may  not  mark  the  site  of  Honnah,  the  an-

bnt  no  inscriptions  ;  he  saw  a  large  vault-  cient  Zophath  ?     But  this  place  would

ed  subterranean  chamber  near  a  ruined  more  appropriately  be  sought  further  south,

building,  and  a  strong  dam  in  a  ravine  on  nearer  to  the  pass  Si'if  in  (Zephatli) ;  if

the  south  of  the  town.    Letters  etc.  II.  p.  not  indeed  quite  at  the  foot  of  the  pass

46.     \\'hen  Schubert  passed  this  way,  around  the  small  fort.    It  could  hardly  be

there  was  here  an  Arab  encampment;  expected,  that  any  very  di?-tiiict  niins  should

Reise  II.  p.  449.  yet  remain  of  a  town  last  mentioned  in  1

'  l-iek.  47,19.    48,28.    Reland  Pa-  Sam.  30,  30.    See  Reland  PaL  p.  721.
Itest.  p.  1031. — The  question  suggests  it-
ii.  GIC,  G17

ABOER.

199

the  neighbourhood  of  Tell  'Arad,  and  on  the  west  towards  Beer-
sheba,  with  the  mountains  of  Judali  in  the  north.  Indeed  it
was  the  southern  part  of  the  same  wide  tract,  which  we  had
formerly  beheld  from  the  mountain  south  of  Carmel  and  that
same  mountain  ridge  was  now  directly  before  us,  terminating
towards  the  left  in  a  low  bluff ;  and  forming,  as  it  were,  another
step  in  the  whole  ascent.  The  high  encampment  of  the  Jehalin
was  visible  bearing  about  N.  N.  E. — Descending  very  gradually
towards  the  north  for  an  hour,  we  again  struck  "Wady  'Ar'arah
at  4|  o'clock,  here  running  northwest  and  then  W.  N.  W.  to  join
W ady  es-Seba',  of  which  it  is  one  of  the  main  branches.

Here  in  the  broad  Wady  are  many  pits  for  water  (Themail),
which  are  caEed  'Ar'arah,  and  give  name  to  the  valley.  The
water  is  good  ;  but  most  of  the  pits  were  now  dry.  In  the  val-
ley and  on  the  western  hiU  are  evident  traces  of  an  ancient  til-
lage or  town  ;  consisting  only  of  foundations  of  unhewn  stones
now  much  scattered,  but  yet  sufficiently  in  place  to  mark  them
as  foundations.  Small  fragments  of  pottery  are  also  everywhere
visible.  In  this  instance,  the  name  leaves  little  room  to  ques-
tion, that  this  is  the  site  of  the  ancient  Aroer  of  the  south  of
J udah  ;  to  which  David  sent  presents  after  the  recovery  of  the
spoil  of  Ziklag.' — This  water  is  frequented  chiefly  by  the  Dhul-
1am.  On  the  west  side  of  the  bed  of  the  Wady  is  a  burying
place  belonging  to  the  Sa'idiyeh ;  in  which  were  several  fresh
graves.  The  dead  are  brought  from  a  great  distance  to  this
cemetery.

We  had  come  thus  far  upon  the  Gaza  road  in  order  to  visit
the  site  of  Aroer.  After  a  stop  of  ten  minutes,  we  now  struck
across  the  country  northeast  towards  Milh,  without  a  path,  in
order  to  regain  the  Hebron  road.  The  land  was  undulating,
with  gentle  swells  and  broad  valleys.  Here  we  fell  in  with
another  stray  camel,  which  joined  company  with  ours,  although
the  Arabs  tried  to  drive  it  away.  At  6  o'clock  we  encamped  in
a  retired  valley,  hid  from  all  view  ;  and  felt  ourselves  now  out
of  the  reach  of  aU  marauders,  whether  real  or  imaginary.

Monday,  June  4th.  We  rose  early,  and  found  ourselves
enveloped  in  a  thick  fog,  the  first  we  had  yet  felt  in  Palestine  ;
once  before,  when  at  Beit  Nettif,  we  had  seen  the  mists  in  the
valleys  below.  The  strange  camel  was  still  with  us  5  while  the
dromedary  of  my  companion  had  strayed  away  during  the  night,
and  was  nowhere  to  be  found.  It  was  the  property  of  Sheikh
Hussan,  who  now  went  in  search  of  it.  As  however  we  no
longer  needed  to  fill  the  water-skins,  we  were  able  to  get  on
with  four  camels  ;  and  accordingly  set  ofi"  at  5  o'clock,  leaving

•  See  pp.  97,  98.

*  1  Sam.  30,  26.  28.

ii.  617-619

200

FROM  WADT  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn.

HussSn  to  overtake  us.  Our  track  was  northeast  over  a  country
still  undulating  ;  and  after  an  hour  we  reached  the  wells  el-MUh
at  6  o'clock.  Here  we  stopped  for  breakfast,  and  to  wait  for
Hussan  ;  but  we  saw  no  more  of  him  to-day  ;  and  afterwards
learned,  that  having  sought  long  and  in  vain  for  his  camel,  he
had  despaired  of  overtaking  us,  and  had  gone  directly  to  the
encampment  of  his  tribe.

At  ^lilh  are  two  wells,  measuring  about  forty  feet  in  depth,
and  walled  up  round  with  good  mason  work  ;  one  of  them  is
seven  and  a  half,  and  the  other,  five  feet  in  diameter.  The
water  seemed  not  to  be  good,  and  the  Arabs  said  it  was  acid ;
but  we  had  no  rope  or  bucket  to  draw  any.  The  Arabs  of  the
Tiyahah  water  here  ;  they  come  hither  early  in  autumn  ;  and
after  the  rains  commence,  send  their  camels  to  the  Ghor  es-
Safieh  for  the  winter,  and  go  themselves  to  sow  in  the  Sheri'ah
south  of  Gaza. ' — The  broad  shallow  Wady  close  by  which  the
wells  are  situated,  Wady  el-Milh,  comes  from  the  northeast  and
continues  on  W.  S.  W.  to  unite  with  the  'Ar'arah,  and  so  to
"Wady  es-Seba'.  It  passes  around  the  southwestern  extremity
or  bluff  of  the  ridge  before  us,  (that  south  of  Kurmul,)  which
was  now  not  far  distant  in  the  same  direction.  Here  and  on  our
way,  great  numbers  of  the  bird  called  Kuta  by  the  Arabs,  a
large  species  of  partridge,  were  flying  about  very  low  in  all  di-
rections ;  our  Egyptian  servants,  being  used  only  to  water-fowl,
mistook  them  for  ducks,  and  fired  among  them  repeatedly,
though  without  success.  This  species  of  bird  has  often  been
suj^posed  to  be  the  quails,  that  came  up  and  covered  the  camp
of  the  Israelites  ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no  other  ground  for  this
opinion,  than  their  present  abundance  in  regions  not  very  far
remote  from  the  route  of  that  people.'

On  the  plain  adjacent  to  the  weUa  on  the  south,  the  stones  of
a  ruined  town,  or  extensive  village,  are  scattered  over  a  space  of
E early  half  a  mile  square,  all  unhewn.  Just  by  the  wells  is  a
round  hill  like  a  high  tumulus,  upon  which  the  foimdations  of
a  wall  are  visible,  running  in  the  form  of  a  square  around  the
whole  top.  On  this  hill  is  now  an  Arab  cemetery,  where  the
DhuUam  bury.^    From  this  spot  we  saw  Tell  el-Kuseifeh,  a  hill

'  In  this  connection  it  was  told  ns,  that  the  quail  is  Selwa.    The  ancient  versions

the  Kudeinit  water  at  Beersheha ;  and  that  also  understood  here   the  quail ;  Sept.

the  Terabin  live  chiefly  in  the  Fari'a.  oprvyo/i-firpa,    Vulg.    cotvrnix.  There

"  Kx.  16,  13.    Num.  11,  31.  32.  Ps.  105,  would  therefore  seem  to  be  no  sufficient

40. — The  Kuti  is  the  7e/raoa/rAav  liirh

ii.  622,  023

XeBpuv  fls  AtKdjx.  Jerome  :  "  Est  et  aliud
castelhim  Thamara  unius  diei  itinere  a
Memphis  oppido  separatum  pergentibus
Ailam  de  Chebron."  But  these  corrup-
tions fortunately  aid  in  correcting  each
other ;  the  Memphis  of  Jerome  serves  to
show  that  there  must  have  been  here  a
proper  name ;  while  the  fiSkts  or  Ma\i$
of  Eusebius  shows  no  less  clearly,  that  this
name  was  Malatha.  Comp.  Le  Clerc  in
loo.    Reland  Patest.  p.  1031.

'  Ptolem.  4.  IG.  Rcland  Pal.  p.  462.

*  Ezek.  47,  10.    48,  28.
"  See  p.  197.

•  See  p.  185.

THE  SOUTH  OF  JTDAH.

203

said,  across  the  mountain  west  of  their  encampment,  and  so
through  Susieh  and  Yutta  to  Hebron.  At  last,  however,  they
recollected  that  there  was  also  a  road  to  Semii'a,  and  we  took  it.
Our  course  lav  about  N.  X.  E.iE.  haWng  the  mountain  at  our
left,  and  approaching  it  gradually  and  very  obliquely  along  a
level  plain.  At  9^  o'clock  we  came  to  the  foot  of  the  ascent ;
and  had  on  our  right  not  far  off  the  site  of  a  former  place,  called
llak-htd,  consisting  of  little  more  than  a  few  caves  in  the  side
of  the  hill.  Indeed,  such  caverns  constitute  the  chief  mark  of
several  ancient  sites  in  this  region.  The  path  goes  up  here  along
a  gap  or  ravine,  somewhat  steep,  but  not  long.  We  reached  the
top  of  the  steep  ascent  at  a  quarter  before  ten ;  and  stopped  for
a  time  to  take  a  last  survey  of  the  country  behind  us.'

This  ascent  did  not,  as  we  had  expected,  bring  us  out  upon
a  ridge,  like  that  we  had  crossed  in  travelKng  south  from  Carmel
and  Ma'in ;  but  only  among  higher  hills.  After  fifteen  minutes
we  went  on  again  :  and  continued  crraduallv  ascending:  alon^  the
Wady,  shut  in  by  the  mountainous  tract  on  every  side,  which
cut  off  all  prospect  around  us.  Here  all  at  once  a  jackal  start-
ed up  near  our  path,  and  ran  at  full  speed  up  a  hill  on  our  left ;
when  about  half  way  to  the  top,  much  to  our  amusement,  he
stopped  and  looked  round  very  sheepishly,  to  see  if  we  were  yet
in  sight  ;  and  perceiving  us,  set  off"  anew  with  still  greater  speed,
without  venturing  to  look  again.  At  lOi  o'clock  we  were
through  the  mountainous  tract,  and  came  out  upon  the  hill
country  of  Judah,  resembling  the  region  around  Hebron  in  its
hUls  and  naked  rocks  ;  but  apparently  less  fertile.  We  made
here  no  descent  from  the  chain  of  hills  behind  us  ;  but  had
gained  another  step  of  the  whole  ascent  between  the  Dead  Sea
and  Hebron.

On  examining  the  Hst  of  the  cities  of  Judah  and  Simeon,  as
given  in  the  book  of  J oshua,  it  appears,  that  all  the  cities  of
the  mountains,"  so  far  as  their  position  is  known,  were  situated
north  of  the  point  where  we  now  were  ;  while  those  of  the  ut-
termost south  lay  either  behind  us  or  on  oiu-  left,  further  in  the
south.2  rpi^jg  to  tlie  probable  conjecture,  that  this  moun-
tain ridge,  which  commences  not  far  flom  Carmel  and  runs  W.
S.  W.  to  the  latitude  of  Beersheba,  formed  the  natural  bound-
ary, on  this  side,  of  the  higher  tract  or  "  mountains"  of  Judah  ;
while  the  lower  region  further  south,  extending  quite  around
to  Beersheba,  constituted  appropriately  the  uttermost  border
"  toward  the  coast  of  Edom  southward."

At  this  season  of  drought,  the  country  looked  naked  and

•  The  bearings  here  taken  were  ns  fol-    of  the  mountain  of  Moab,  near  Khanzireh,
lows :  TeU  Milh  S.  26  W.    TeU  Knseifeh    S.  57'  E.
S.  2"  E.  TeU  'Arad  S.  70  E.    Sonth  end       »  Josh.  15,  21-32.  4a-60.

iL  623-625

204

FROM  WAJJY  MUSA  TO  HEBEON,

[Sec.  XII.

desolate ;  towards  the  north  and  west,  the  eye  rested  only  on
parched  and  rocky  hills.  Yet  it  was  evidently  a  fine  grazing
region.  Traces  of  ancient  tillage  were  everywhere  visible  in  the
terraces  built  up  along  the  hill  sides.  Our  course  was  now  in  gen-
eral about  N.  20°  E.  At  11.20  we  came  upon  the  first  appear-
ance of  recent  tillage  ;  and  near  by  were  fields  of  millet,  sown
by  the  people  of  Semu'a.  At  11.40  we  had  in  a  valley  on  our
right,  eight  or  ten  minutes  distant,  the  ruins  of  a  village  called
el-Ghuwein,  perhaps  the  ancient  ^nm  and  at  the  same  time  the
site  of  Attir  was  on  our  left,  bearing  about  west,  at  the  distance
of  half  an  hour,  marked  by  caves  upon  a  liill.'^  Here  we  feD  in
with  several  small  swarms  of  young  locusts,  the  first  we  had  seen
during  our  journey.  They  were  quite  green,  with  wings  just
sprouting ;  they  entirely  resembled  grasshoppers,  and  hopped
briskly  away  from  our  path.  Our  Arabs,  when  asked  if  they
ate  them,  spurned  at  the  idea  ;  but  said  the  Ma'az  do  so,  and
also  the  Sherarat,  a  tribe  in  Wady  Sirhan  in  the  east.

From  an  elevated  point  in  the  road  at  12^^  o'clock,  several
places  were  visible,  which  we  had  formerly  seen  from  Ma'in.'
Their  names  and  sites  were  quite  familiar  to  us  ;  and  we  felt
that  we  were  approaching  Hebron,  which  we  looked  upon  almost
as  the  end  of  our  journey.

At  half-past  12  o'clock  we  passed  a  ruin  on  a  hiU  at  the
left,  called  Rafat  ;  and  just  by  the  way  side  was  a  cistern  of  rain
water  hewn  in  the  rock,  with  a  large  circular  hewn  stone  near
by,  intended  probably  as  a  curbstone,  but  never  finished.  Ten
nadnutes  beyond,  we  came  to  another  place  of  ruins  bearing  the
same  name,  Rafat,  on  the  southern  slope  of  a  low  hill  close  by
the  path.  These  ruins  are  somewhat  extensive,  with  remains  of
walls  and  arches.  A  square  building  of  large  hewn  stones  is  still
standing  ;  the  doorway  has  been  walled  up  ;  but  over  it  is  a
round  arch  of  good  workmanship,  separate  from  the  wall,  and
as  it  were  leaning  against  it.  The  building  has  the  appearance
of  having  been  once  a  church.

We  reached  Semu'a,  the  first  inhabited  place  in  approaching
Hebron  from  this  quarter,  at  1  o'clock.  It  is  a  considerable  vil-
lage, situated  on  a  low  hill,  with  broad  valleys  round  about,  not
susceptible  of  much  tillage,  but  full  of  flocks  and  herds  aU  in

'  The  name  Anim,  C^sr  (for  CS"^?)    i°  Judah,  apparently  beyond

T-.u   1  c  rn  :»            _„i  If  ..iw      c  '  the  ridge  above  mentioni'd.     The  sng-

Josb.  15,  50,  IS  the  plural  ot        a  foun-  "  <•  »  •     .  ,        ^  n.-i

„,      ...              .     :  •    ,.    .  cestion  of  Aium  belongs  to  Dr  Wilson:

tain.    The  Arabic  Ghuwezn  is  a  d>m.n-  ^j-  jj^^  yi^ie  I.  p.%rA.

ntive  of  the  form   •,■'5  .    Anim  is  men-  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  494.

tioned  in  Josh.  1.  c.  along  with  Anab  and  "  These  places  bore  as  follows ;  Semu'a

Eshtemoa. — In  the  former  edition  I  refer-  N.  20'  E.    Mejd  el-Ba'a  N.  4'  E.  Shu

red  el-Ghuwein  to  the  Heb.  Ain,  Josh,  weikeh  N.  51"  W.    Dhohoriyeh  N.  57"

15,  32.    i;>,  7.    The  Arabic  name  cor-  W.    Za'uutah  N.  85°  W.
responds  better  to  Ain  ;  but  the  latter  was

ii.  625,  626

JUMX  4.]

semu'a,  eshtemoa.

205

fine  order.  We  halted  among  the  olive  trees  in  the  shallow
southern  valley  ;  and  were  glad  once  more  to  obtain  milk  and
fresh  fruits  for  our  noon-day  meal.  After  dinner  we  walked
through  and  around  the  village.  In  several  places  there  are  re-
mains of  walls  built  of  very  large  stones,  bevelled,  but  left  rough
in  the  middle.  We  measured  several  of  the  stones,  which  were
more  than  ten  feet  in  length.  These  old  foundations  seem  to
mark  this  as  the  site  of  an  extensive  ancient  town  ;  probably,
as  I  have  already  shown,  the  Eshtemoa  of  the  Old  Testament.'

The  most  conspicuous  object,  at  the  present  day,  is  the
ruins  of  a  castle  ;  of  which  however  only  one  square  tower  re-
mains in  any  degree  perfect.  This  and  the  other  portions  of
the  walls,  are  built  of  well-wrought  masonry,  with  loop-holes  ;
but  there  are  now  no  arches,  except  some  small  ones  of  modern
construction.  The  work  does  not  look  ancient  ;  and  might  per-
haps be  referred  to  the  crusaders,  were  there  any  evidence  that
they  had  outposts  and  fortresses  further  south  than  Hebron.  It
is  most  probably  of  Saracenic  or  Turkish  origin. — We  had  some
difficulty  in  getting  to  the  top  of  the  tower,  as  all  the  doors
leading  to  it  were  closed  ;  and  we  could  find  no  place  by  which
to  climb  up  on  the  outside.  The  men  of  whom  we  inquired,
seemed  too  lazy  to  take  the  trouble  of  showing  us  the  way.  At
length,  however,  one  man  volunteered  to  take  us  up  ;  and  led
the  way,  clambering  up  the  outside  of  the  wall,  and  passing
over  the  flat  roofs  of  several  houses.  He  seemed  well  acquainted
with  the  surrounding  country,  and  proved  an  intelligent  guide.

The  prospect  from  the  tower  is  somewhat  extensive  ;  and
various  places  were  in  sight.'^  At  Susieh,  we  were  told,  here  as
well  as  at  Ma'in,  is  a  large  extent  of  ruins,  with  columns  and
other  indications  of  an  ancient  city.'  Our  guide  also  said  that  at
Mar'in  and  Tawaneh,  there  are  wells  of  living  water  belonging  to
the  Jehalin  ;  and  other  similar  ones  at  Deirat  and  Abu  Sheb-
ban  belonging  to  the  Ka'abineh  ;  while  both  tribes  water  at
Kurmul  in  common.  This  however  does  not  accord  with  the
account  given  us  by  the  Jehalin  themselves.''

As  we  came  down  from  the  tower,  an  old  man  sat  at  the
foot,  playing  on  the  Kemenjeh,  a  little  musical  instrument  some-
what like  a  viol,  common  also  in  Egypt,  and  described  by  Mr
Lane.'  We  left  Semu'a  at  2\  o'clock,  descending  first  gradually
into  a  deep  valley  running  southwest,  apparently  the  great  drain
of  the  basin  west  of  Carmel  and  Zif and  then  ascending  to

"  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  494,  n.  4.  »  See  Vol.  I.  p.  494.

"  Bearings  at  Semu'a  :  Ma'in  N.  87°  *  See  p.  98,  above.     Comp.  Vol.  I.  p.

E.    Susieh  N.  80'  E.    Beni  Na'im  N.  41°  499.

E.    Yutta  N.  30'  E.    Hebron,  not  visible,  '•  Mann,  and  Cust.  of  the  Mod.  Egyp-

aboutN.  20'  E.  Mejd el-Ba'a N.  5' W.  Shu-  tians.  Vol.  II.  p.  6.3  sq.

weikeh  N.  75"  W.    Dhoheriyeh  N.  77°  W.  '  See  above.  Vol.  I.  p.  493.

Vol.  II.— 18  ii.  626-628

206

FROM  WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[SKcXn.

the  higher  tract  heyond.  Here,  after  ahout  three  quarters  of  an
hour,  Yutta  lay  on  the  right  before  us,  having  the  appearance
of  a  large  modern  Muhammedan  town,  on  a  low  eminence,  with
trees  around.  Our  guide  at  Semii'a  told  us,  that  there  were
here  old  foundations  and  walls  like  those  in  the  former  place.
We  have  already  seen  that  this  is  the  ancient  Juttah  of  the  Old
Testament,  a  city  of  the  priests,  which  has  been  lost  sight  of
since  the  days  of  Jerome.  There  seems,  therefore,  little  reason
to  question  the  correctness  of  Roland's  suggestion,  that  this  was
probably  the  residence  of  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth,  and  the
birthplace  of  John  the  Baptist.'

We  were  here  of  course  considerably  higher  than  in  the  plain
of  Carmel.  After  3  o'clock  we  began  to  get  among  bushes,  the
verdure  of  which  we  had  long  seen  from  a  distance  as  we  ap-
proached.

Descending  into  a  cultivated  valley  at  3.20,  we  turned  off
from  the  road,  firet  west  and  then  W.  S.  W.  to  Um  el-'Amad,
"  Mother  of  Columns,"  a  site  of  ruins  thirty-five  minutes  dis-
tant. Here,  on  a  low  round  hill,  once  stood  apparently  a  town
of  no  great  size,  with  houses  of  hewn  stone,  the  foundations  of
which  still  remain.  The  place  takes  its  name  from  the  ruins  of
a  small  church,  which  had  originally  four  columns  on  each  side
of  the  middle  aisle  ;  of  those  on  the  south  side,  three  with  the
architrave  are  still  standing  ;  and  one  on  the  north  side.  They
are  all  of  common  limestone,  of  coarse  architecture,  and  of  no
order.  Near  by  is  an  excavated  tomb  or  magazine. — This  spot
is  not  far  fi-om  the  south  side  of  the  great  Wady  el-Khfihl.^

After  a  stop  of  ten  minutes,  we  returned  E.  N.  E.  leaving
the  ruined  village  Beit  'Amreh  on  our  left,  to  the  Hebron  road.
This  we  reached  at  4.40,  at  a  point  some  twenty  minutes  north
of  wdiere  we  had  left  it  ;  thus  losing  in  all  about  an  hour.  We
soon  came  to  the  great  Wady  el-Khiilil,  here  mnning  southwest
and  quite  deep  ;  we  reached  the  bottom  at  5  o'clock.  On  a  hill
at  the  right,  on  the  south  bank,  are  the  ruins  of  a  village,  the
name  of  which  we  did  not  learn.  Crossing  the  valley,  we
entered  Wady  Kirlds,  which  conies  in  from  the  north  ;  on  the
left  is  a  Tell  with  the  ruins  of  a  village  called  Kirkis,  which  we
passed  at  5\  o'clock.  Our  way  led  up  the  W ady  ;  which  how-
ever soon  turns  more  N.  N.  W.  while  our  path  ascended  obliquely
along  the  eastern  slope  to  the  top  of  the  ridge  ;  where  we  came

'  Josh,  l.'j,  ."i.^.    21,16.    See  above,  Vol.       '  From  Um  el-'Amad  we  took  bcarirps  :

I.pp.4'.)l,  4!»4.  Also  Rcliind  Pal.T.'st  p.  870.  Dhoheriyeh  .S.  74    W.    Mi'jd  el-B..'n  S.

Relaiid  sup;)oses  this  to  be  the  ^(JAis 'loi'/Sa  25' E.  Beit  'Amreh  N.  44  E.    Thi.s  last

of  Luke  1,  3!l ;  being  so  written  by  a  cor-  is  the  niinsof  a  large  village  on  a  hill  iieai'

ruption,  or  from  a  softer  pronunciution,  Wady  el-Khulil,  ]K'rhaps  twenty  minutes

instead  of  ttSMs  'Iouto.  distant  from  Um  el-'Amad.

ii.  628;  629

Jtoh  5.]

TUTTA.  HEBRON.

207

out  at  6  o'clock.  Here,  close  on  our  right,  were  the  foundations
of  another  ruined  village.

At  this  point  begin  the  fields  of  grain  and  the  cultivation  on
this  side  of  Hebron.  We  now  kept  along  on  high  ground,
around  the  heads  of  two  cultivated  Wadvs  running  off  southeast,
and  at  6.20  reached  the  top  of  another  ridge,  from  which  we  de-
scended into  a  broad  fertile  Wady  full  of  fields  of  wheat,  run-
ning down  into  the  valley  in  which  Hebron  is  situated.  We  fell
in  with  many  people  returning  from  their  work,  some  of  them
with  donkeys  carrying  home  loads  of  sheaves.  This  showed  that
the  wheat  harvest  was  here  just  beginning.  We  came  now
upon  the  olive  groves  and  vineyards  ;  and  rounding  the  point  of
the  hill  between  the  two  valleys,  entered  that  in  which  Hebron
stands.  At  length,  at  7{  o'clock,  we  encamped  on  our  old  spot
on  the  green  slope  west  of  the  city.

Our  friend  EUas  was  already  on  the  look-out,  and  soon
visited  us  ;  and  we  were  glad  to  learn,  in  general,  that  all  things
remained  as  they  were.  The  plague  in  Jerusalem,  it  was  said,
had  not  increased  its  ravages  ;  although  the  city  continued  to  be
still  shut  up.

Tuesday,  June  5th.  Our  first  care  now  was,  to  decide  upon
our  further  course  from  Hebron  ;  and  as  the  journey  from  Wady
Musa  had  occupied  less  time  than  we  had  anticipated,  in  conse-
quence of  our  travelling  uninterruptedly  by  night  and  day  ;  and
as  much  of  the  week  was  still  before  us  ;  we  concluded  to  go
from  Hebron  to  Eamleh,  and  thence  to  Yafa  or  Jerusalem,  as
the  case  might  be.  In  Hebron,  however,  no  animals  were  to  be
had,  except  camels  or  asses  ;  and  we  therefore  despatched
Komeh  at  once  on  a  donkey  to  J erusalem,  to  bring  us  beasts,
money,  and  our  letters  ;  and  return  as  soon  as  possible.  We
had  occupation  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  for  the  day,  in
writing  up  our  journals  ;  which  during  our  late  rapid  travelling
had  fallen  greatly  behind.

In  the  course  of  the  forenoon,  the  Sheikhs  of  the  Jehalin,
Defa'  Allah  and  our  guide  Hussan,  came  in  to  receive  their
money  and  to  take  leave.  They  and  the  men  of  Hebron,  of
whom  many  visited  us,  expressed  great  indignation  at  the  con-
duct of  the  Arabs  of  Wady  Musa,  and  paid  us  many  compli-
ments for  having  extricated  ourselves  so  successfully  from  their
clutches.  We  distributed  a  bakhshish  to  Sheikh  Hussan  and
his  men,  which  appeared  to  satisfy  them  fully  ;  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  wortliless  Muhammed,  whom  we  designedly  passed
over,  and  whose  disappointment  seemed  to  amuse  the  Sheikhs.
We  had  also  a  hint  from  Elias,  that  besides  all  this,  a  present
of  ten  or  twelve  dollars  to  the  chief  Sheikh  would  be  very
proper  ;  but  as  the  suggestion  lay  very  near,  that  if  the  said

ii,  629-6.S1

208

FROSI  WADY  MUSA  TO  HEBRON.

[Sec.  XH

Sheikh  deserved  such  a  present,  a  similar  one  would  be  much
more  proper  in  the  case  of  Elias  himself,  we  could  not  regard  the
hint  as  entirely  disinterested,  and  took  no  further  notice  of  it.
Defa'  Allah  himself  put  in  no  such  claim.

As  to  the  price  of  the  camels,  we  could  not  pay  it  until  our
money  should  arrive  from  Jerusalem  the  next  day.  Meanwhile,
there  arose  a  trial  of  skill  between  Elias  the  Christian  and  Defa'
Allah  the  Bedawy,  in  arranging  to  whom  the  money  should  be
paid  over.  The  Arabs  wished  to  go  home,  leaving  some  one  to
receive  the  money  ;  and  Elias  felt  entitled  to  be  that  receiver,
because  he  said  they  owed  him  several  thousand  piastres  ;  while,
for  this  very  reason,  the  Sheikh  did  not  wish  the  money  to  go  into
his  hands.  But  the  policy  of  Elias  towards  us  was  so  very
crooked,  that  it  gave  the  Sheikh  the  advantage  over  him,  how-
ever Httle  he  might  otherwise  deserve  it.  We  doubted  indeed
for  a  time  the  story  of  the  debt ;  though  Ehas  afterwards
showed  us  the  written  obligation.  Our  course  was  plain  enough  ;
we  had  made  the  bargain  with  Defa'  Allah  for  his  camels  ;  and
our  duty  was  to  pay  the  money  only  to  him  or  to  liis  order.
Accordingly,  he  brought  to  us  a  man  with  witnesses,  who  testi-
fied solemnly,  that  this  person  had  advanced  the  money  to  the
Sheikh ;  and  now  the  Sheikh,  in  their  presence,  requested  us  to
pay  over  the  money  to  the  same  man,  when  it  should  arrive.
Elias  was  very  indignant  on  learning  this  transaction  ;  declaring
that  we  ought  at  any  rate  to  pay  the  money  into  his  hands  ;
because  the  bargain  was  made  through  him,  as  the  agent  of  the
Franks  in  Hebron.

The  man  to  whom  we  were  to  pay  the  money,  was  the  owner
of  camels,  to  whom  allusion  has  formerly  been  made. '  He  had
been  a  great  traveller  in  his  day,  and  now  gave  us  particidar  in-
formation respecting  'Abdeh  in  the  southern  desert,  as  to  wliich
we  had  hitherto  had  some  doubts.  He  was  quite  desirous  of
famishing  us  with  camels  for  our  further  journey  to  Damascus
and  Beirut.    But  of  this  offer  we  had  no  wish  to  avail  ourselves.

We  had  now  done  with  camels  ;  and  I  cannot  say  otherwise,
than  that  I  rejoiced  at  the  circumstance.  Admirably  adapted
to  the  desert  regions  which  are  their  home,  they  yet  constitute
one  of  the  evils  which  travelling  in  the  desert  brings  with  it.
Their  long,  slow,  rolling  or  rocking  gait,  although  not  at  first
very  unpleasant,  becomes  exceedingly  fatiguing  ;  so  that  I  have
often  been  more  exhausted  in  riding  five  and  twenty  miles  upon
a  camel,  than  in  travelling  fifty  on  horseback.  Yet  without
them,  how  could  such  journeys  be  performed  at  all  ?

But  their  home  is  the  desert ;  and  they  were  made,  in  the

•  See  Note  XXUI,  end  of  Vol.  I.

ii.  631,  632

JtWE  5.]

THE  CAMEL.

209

wisdom  of  the  Creator,  to  be  the  carriers  of  the  desert.  The
coarse  and  prickly  shrubs  of  the  wastes,  are  to  them  the  most
dehcious  food  ;  and  even  of  these  they  eat  but  little.  So  few
are  the  wants  of  their  nature,  that  their  power  of  going  without
food,  as  well  as  without  water,  is  wonderful.  They  never  appear
to  tire,  but  commonly  march  as  freshly  at  evening  as  in  the
morning.  The  only  instance  I  remember  to  the  contrar)',  was
yesterday  after  our  long  march  in  returning  to  Hebron  ;  when
my  young  camel,  on  arriving  at  the  place  of  encampment,  seemed
weary,  and  lay  down  of  its  own  accord  in  order  to  be  relieved  of
its  load.  If  they  once  begin  to  fail,  they  soon  lie  down  and  die.
Thus  two  camels  of  our  train  died  between  Suez  and  'Akabah,
which  a  few  hours  before  had  been  travelhng  with  full  loads.  In
all  our  recent  journey  to  Wady  Musa,  the  camels  fed  only  upon
shnibs,  and  never  tasted  grain  of  any  kind  ;  although  once  we
had  them  loaded  for  thirty-six  hours,  during  aU  which  time  they
browsed  only  for  one  hour.

Their  well  known  habit  of  lying  down  upon  the  breast  to  re-
ceive their  burdens,  is  not,  as  is  often  supposed,  merely  the  result
of  training  ;  it  is  an  admirable  adaptation  of  their  nature  to  their
destiny  as  carriers.  This  is  their  natural  position  of  repose  ;  as
is  shown  too  by  the  callosities  upon  the  joints  of  the  legs,  and
especially  by  that  upon  the-breast,  which  serves  as  a  pedestal
beneath  the  huge  body.  Hardly  less  wonderful,  is  the  adapta-
tion of  their  broad  cushioned  foot  to  the  arid  sands  and  gravelly
sod,  which  it  is  their  lot  chiefly  to  traverse.

The  camel  in  very  many  respects  is  not  unlike  the  sheep.
They  are  a  siUy  timid  animal,  gregarious,  and  when  alarmed,
like  sheep  they  run  and  huddle  all  together.  They  are  commonly
represented  as  patient ;  but  if  so,  it  is  the  patience  of  stupidity.
They  are  rather  exceedingly  impatient ;  and  utter  loud  cries  of
indignation  when  receiving  their  loads,  and  not  seldom  on  being
made  to  kneel  down.  They  are  also  obstinate  and  frequently
vicious  ;  and  the  attempt  to  urge  them  forward,  is  often  very
much  like  trying  to  drive  sheep  the  way  they  do  not  choose  to
go.  The  cry  of  the  camel  resembles  in  a  degree  the  hollow
bleating  of  the  sheep  ;  sometimes  it  is  like  the  lowing  of  neat
cattle,  or  the  hoarse  squeal  of  the  swine.  But  the  Arabs  heed
not  their  cries  ;  nor  does  the  poor  animal  find  much  mercy  at
their  hands.  Heavy  and  galling  loads  and  meagre  fare  are  his
appointed  portion ;  and  God  has  hardened  him  to  them.  The
camels  of  the  Fellahln  appear  to  have  an  easier  lot ;  they  are
mostly  large,  fat,  and  strong  ;  while  those  of  the  Bedawin  in  the
deserts  are  comparatively  thin  and  slender.

The  singular  power  of  the  camel  to  go  without  water,  seems
also  to  be  of  the  same  nature  as  that  of  the  sheep,  at  least  in  its

Vol.  II.— 18*  ii.  632-«34

210

HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn.

manifestation  ;  thongli  in  a  far  greater  degree.  The  dew  and
the  juice  of  grass  and  herbs,  are  sufficient  for  them  in  ordinary
cases  ;  though  when  the  pasturage  has  become  dry,  the  Arabs
water  their  flocks  eveiy  two  days,  and  the  camels  every  three.
The  longest  trial  to  which  we  subjected  our  camels  in  respect  to
water,  was  from  Cairo  to  Suez,  four  days  ;  yet  some  of  them  did
not  drink-  even  then,  although  they  had  only  the  driest  fodder.*
But  at  all  times  the  camel  eats  and  drinks  httle,  and  secretes
little  ;  he  is  a  cold-blooded,  heavy,  sullen  animal,  having  little
feeling  and  little  susceptibility  for  pain.  Thistles  and  briers  and
thorns  he  crops  and  chews  with  more  avidity  than  the  softest
green  fodder  ;  nor  does  he  seem  to  feel  pain  from  blows  or
pricks,  unless  they  are  very  violent.

There  is  nothing  graceful  or  sprightly  in  any  camel,  old  or
young  ;  all  is  misshapen,  ungainly,  and  awkward.  The  young
have  nothing  frisky  or  playful ;  but  in  all  their  movements  are
as  staid  and  sober  as  their  dams.  In  this  respect,  how  unlike  to
the  lamb  !

As  the  carriers  of  the  east,  the  "  ships  of  the  desert,"  another
important  quahty  of  the  camel  is  their  sure-footedness.  I  was
surprised  to  find  them  travelling  with  so  much  ease  and  safety
up  and  down  the  most  rugged  mountain  passes.  They  do  not
choose  their  way  with  the  like  sagacity  as  the  mule,  or  even  as
the  horse  ;  but  they  tread  much  more  surely  and  safely,  and
never  either  slip  or  stumble.  In  all  our  long  journeys  with
them,  I  do  not  recollect  a  single  instance  ;  and  yet  no  roads  can
be  worse,  than  the  passes  in  going  and  returning  between  He-
bron and  Wady  Miisa.

The  sounds  by  which  the  Arabs  govern  their  camels,  are  very
few  and  very  guttural.  The  signal  for  kneeling  is  not  unhke  a
gentle  snore  ;  and  is  made  by  throwing  the  breath  strongly
against  the  palate,  but  not  through  the  nose.  That  for  stop-
ping, is  a  sort  of  guttiiral  clucldng,  which  I  could  never  master.

In  accordance  with  an  invitation  from  Elias,  we  went  to  dine
with  him  at  6  o'clock  P.  M.  The  room  in  wliich  he  received  us
was  a  small  one,  in  the  third  or  main  story  of  the  house  ;  it  was
his  usual  sitting  room.  We  found  three  other  guests  already
present,  common  Muhammedans  of  the  place.  The  females  of
the  family  did  not  make  their  appearance.  Dinner  was  soon
served.  A  large  napkin  was  spread  upon  the  carpet  of  the
room  ;  on  this  was  placed  a  coarse  wooden  stool,  supporting  a
large  tray  of  tinned  copper.  Bread  in  thin  sheets  was  laid  for
each  person  on  the  napkin  below.  On  the  tray  were  three  dishes
of  pillaw  without  meat  ;  three  dishes  of  mutton  stewed  with
onions  ;  three  dishes  of  a  kind  of  sausage,  stuffed  with  rice  and

'  See  Vol.  I.  p.  45  sq.

ii.  034.  635

Jttne  6.]

THRESHING  FLOOES.  PREPAKATIONS.

211

chopped  meat ;  and  a  large  bowl  of  lebben  or  soured  milk.  The
company  sat  around  as  we  best  could,  six  persons  in  all.  There
were  no  plates  ;  but  each  had  a  wooden  spoon  and  his  fingers.
We,  as  strangers,  had  silver  forks,  and  one  silver  spoon  between
us.  Our  companions  seemed  more  dexterous  with  their  fingers
than  with  the  spoon  ;  the  latter  was  used  to  lade  a  little  of  the
lebben  upon  the  rice  in  the  dish,  and  then  to  take  up  a  spoonful
of  the  rice  thus  moistened.  This  constituted  the  dinner  ;  and
so  soon  as  each  had  done  eating,  he  drew  back  from  the  table.
A  single  cup  of  coffee  followed,  and  we  soon  retired.  As  we
passed  down  stairs,  the  younger  females  of  the  family  were
standing  near  the  kitchen  in  the  second  story,  and  returned  our
salutations,  welcoming  us  back.

The  threshing-floors  near  our  tent,  which  during  our  former
visit  were  full  of  barley  and  lentiles, '  were  now  just  beginning  to
be  covered  with  sheaves  of  wheat.  The  crops  were  apparently
very  good  ;  and  there  was  a  prospect  of  a  prosperous  and  busy
season,  during  both  wheat  harvest  and  the  vintage.  Indeed,
the  country  in  general  round  about  Hebron,  exhibited  more  of
industrious  cultivation  and  actual  productiveness,  than  any
other  equally  extensive  portion  of  the  mountains  of  Judah,
which  we  visited.

J^ednesday,  June  6tJi.  Forenoon.  While  we  were  at  break-
fast early  this  morning,  Komeh  returned  from  Jerusalem,  bring-
ing with  him  horses,  money,  and  albo  many  letters  from  Europe
and  America.  The  breakfast  was  at  once  forgotten  over  the
letters  ;  and  we  rejoiced  to  hear  of  the  health  and  welfare  of
distant  friends,  both  in  the  old  world  and  the  new.  AVith  a
burst  of  grateful  emotion,  we  thanked  God,  and  took  courage.

Komeh  of  course  had  not  entered  Jerusalem,  but  had  had
communication  with  Mr  Whiting  at  the  gate.  The  horses  too
he  had  found  outside  ;  the  owners,  on  the  shutting  up  of  the
city,  having  sent  them  out  to  remain  in  the  fields  around  the
walls.  We  were  not  particularly  delighted  thus  to  get  again
one  of  our  former  Mukarj^s  ;  but  were  easily  disposed  to  make
the  best  of  it.  We  learned  too  that  Mr  Lanneau  and  our  fellow
traveller  were  keeping  a  strict  quarantine  under  a  guard  in  their
own  house,  in  order  to  come  out  and  join  us  in  our  tent  on  our
return.

In  the  course  of  the  morning,  Ehas  came  again  with  the
man  who  was  to  receive  the  money  for  the  camels.  It  was
agreed  between  them,  that  we  should  pay  the  money  into  the
hands  of  Elias  ;  and  he  should  immediately  deliver  it  over  to
the  man.  This  took  place  accordingly.  The  only  reason  for  it
seemed  to  be,  that  Elias  might  be  able  to  say,  the  papuent  was

'  See  p.  83.

u.  635-637

212

HEBRON.

[Sec.  Xn.

made  through  him  as  the  agent  of  the  Franks.  The  man  paid
him  back  one  hundred  and  fifty  piastres  in  our  presence  ;  which
we  understood  to  be  his  commission  on  the  bargain  we  had
made  with  the  Arabs  ;  being  equal  to  thirty  piastres  on  each
camel.  It  was  probably  partly  in  order  to  render  this  pill  less
unpalatable  to  Defa'  Allah,  that  Elias  had  yesterday  given  us
the  hint  respecting  an  extra  present  to  that  Sheikh.  •

We  finished  writing  up  our  journals,  and  made  our  pur-
chases of  provisions  for  the  journey  as  far  as  to  Nabulus  ;  since
we  could  now  obtain  nothing  at  Jerusalem.  Just  as  we  were
preparing  to  set  off,  two  English  travellers  came  in  from  Beer-
sheba.  We  had  found  their  tent  here  yesterday,  and  learned
that  they  had  gone  on  this  excursion.  As  travellers  under  such
circumstances  do  not  stand  upon  etiquette,  we  called  at  their
tent,  and  found  the  Eev.  Dr  Mill  and  Col.  Hezata,  who  in  re-
turning from  India  by  way  of  Egypt,  had  thus  taken  the  route
through  Palestine.  Our  present  visit  was  a  short  one  ;  but  we
afterwards  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  them  again  at  Jerusa-
lem and  Beirut ;  and  also  of  making  in  company  with  them  the
voyage  from  Beirut  to  Alexandria  and  Smyrna.

'  I  have  since  learned,  that  things  went  had  few  friends  in  Hebron,  ho  made  ap-

on  prosperously  with  our  friend  Elias  for  plication  to  the  American  missionaries  at

the  next  two  years;  and  he  obtained  the  Jerusalem,  to  intercede  in  his  behalf,  that

height  of  his  ambition,  in  being  made  tlie  his  case  might  be  transferred  to*the  au-

agent  of  the  British  consul  at  Jerusalem,  thorities  of  the  Holy  City.    This  they  were

But  early  in  the  last  year  (1840)  he  was  able  to  effect,  through  the  good  will  of

seized  and  thrown  into  prison,  on  a  charge  the  Mufti ;  and  Elias  was  still  lying  there

of  peculation.    Feeling  perhaps  that  he  in  prison  at  midsummer,

il.  637,  638

SECTION  XIII.

FROM  HEBRON  TO  RAMLEH  AND  JERUSALEM.

Wednesday,  June  6th.  Afternoon.  In  lea\'ing  Hebron  for
Ramleh,  we  decided  first  to  turn  our  steps  towards  el-Burj,  the
place  which  we  had  been  formerly  prevented  from  visiting  when
at  Dawaimeh.  We  heard  many  extravagant  reports  from  the
Arabs  respecting  it ;  so  that  it  seemed  of  sufficient  importance
to  be  investigated.  We  were  now  ready  to  set  off ;  but  found
great  difficulty  in  obtaining  a  guide.  Several  persons  oflFered
their  services ;  but  as  this  seemed  to  be  in  Hebron  a  new  species
of  employment,  of  which  the  price  was  not  yet  fijsed  or  in  any
way  regulated,  they  chose  to  demand  at  least  threefold  wages  ;
apparently  too  without  being  well  acquainted  with  the  route.
We  offered  the  double  of  what  we  had  formerly  paid  ;  which
was  refused.  Knowing  however  tnat  we  should  fall  in  with
persons  on  the  way,  or  at  least  should  certainly  be  able  to  obtain
a  guide  at  Dura,  we  cut  the  matter  short  with  the  Hebronites  ;
and  loading  up  our  animals,  left  the  city  at  1  o'clock  alone.

Our  way  led  up  the  western  hill,  by  the  same  path  which  we
had  formerly  descended  in  coming  from  Dhoheriyeh.  On  the
top,  however,  the  roads  separate  ;  we  took  that  leading  to  Dura,
lying  more  to  the  right  ■  and  proceeded  on  a  general  course
about  west  by  south.  We  now  passed  through  a  succession  of
fine  vineyards  sloping  gently  towards  the  west ;  the  way  being
everywhere  shut  in  between  their  walls.  Our  new  Mukariyeh
had  loaded  the  tent  and  other  luggage  so  unskilftilly,  that  in
passing  along  this  narrow  way,  the  load  was  first  caught  against
the  walls  and  drawn  from  the  horse  ;  and  again,  soon  after,  it
slipped  off  in  going  down  a  steep  place.  This  detained  us  half
an  hour.  At  2.40,  we  came  upon  the  head  of  a  valley  running
westwards,  on  the  north  of  Dura,  towards  the  plain.  It  soon
becomes  deep  ;  and  looking  down  through  it,  we  could  perceive
the  distant  sand-hills  along  the  coast.  Here  on  our  right  were
the  ruined  foundations  of  a  village  ;  and  five  minutes  further,
on  the  left,  was  a  beautiful  little  spring  with  a  riU  crossing  our

iii.  1,  2

214

FROM  HEBRON  TO  RAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xm.

path.  We  learned  from  a  slieplierd,  that  it  is  called  Nunkur,
and  gives  its  name  to  the  valley.  The  way  continued  along  the
high  ground  on  the  south  of  this  Wady  ;  and  at  a  quarter  past
three,  we  passed  another  i:>lace  of  springs  at  the  head  of  a  small
branch  of  the  same.  Proceeding  across  some  hills,  we  came
upon  the  fine  plain  which  extends  for  half  an  hour  on  the  east
of  Dura.  It  was  now  covered  with  fields  of  wheat,  which  the
peasants  were  busily  engaged  in  reaping  ;  the  wheat  harvest
having  just  begun.

Crossing  this  plain,  we  reached  at  4  o'clock  the  large  vUlage
of  Dura,  situated  on  the  gradual  eastern  slope  of  a  cultivated
hill,  with  olive  groves  and  fields  of  grain  all  around.  On  the
top  of  the  hill,  not  far  off,  is  the  Mukam  or  Wely  of  Neby  Nuh
(Noah),  which  we  had  formerly  seen  from  Dawaimeh.  The
village  is  one  of  the  largest  in  the  district  of  Hebron,  and  is
properly  the  chief  place  ;  being  the  residence  of  the  Sheikhs  of
the  house  of  Ibn  'Omar,  who  are  the  head  of  the  Keisiyeh  of
the  mountains,  and  formerly  raled  over  the  villages.'  We  found
here  a  party  of  Egyptian  soldiers  ;  but  saw  no  traces  of  anti-
quity ;  unless  perhaps  in  a  large  hewn  stone  over  a  doorway,
with  an  ornamental  figure  cut  upon  it.  Here  too  we  were  able
to  obtain  no  guide  in  the  village  itself ;  but  having  rode  through
it,  we  found  one  of  the  principal  Sheikhs  with  a  number  of  the
inhabitants  sitting  in  an  olive  grove  ;  and  laid  our  request  before
him.  He  treated  us  with  great  civility  ;  and  politely  in\dted  us
to  remain  over  night ;  repeating  the  usual  story  of  the  insecuri-
ty of  the  way  ;  but  on  our  declining,  he  immediately  sent  with
us  the  servant  of  his  brother,  the  head  Sheikh,  who  was  absent.
This  man  was  a  Nubian  slave,  jet  black,  of  a  tall  commanding
figure  ;  he  proved  a  very  intelligent  and  faithful  guide,  and
was  of  great  service  to  us.  He  told  us,  that  his  master,  the
chief  Sheikh,  was  the  owner  of  five  male  and  six  female  slaves,
two  hundred  sheep,  three  hundred  goats,  twenty-one  neat  cattle,
three  horses,  and  five  camels.

Dura  had  recently  been  the  seat  of  a  violent  quarrel,  in
which  the  inhabitants,  although  nominally  disarmed-,  seized
their  weapons  and  went  to  killing  each  other.  This  of  course  drew
upon  them  the  notice  of  the  government ;  and  it  was  here  that
the  three  governors,  whom  we  had  recently  met  in  Hebron,  had
been  for  some  weeks  occupied  in  compelling  the  people  a  second
time  to  deliver  up  their  arms.  They  had  in  this  way  collected
from  the  one  i)arty  about  two  hiuidred  guns,  and  from  the  other
nearly  a  hundred  more,  which  we  had  seen  brought  into  Hebron
upon  camels.''    The  origin  of  the  quarrel  was  related  to  us,  as

'  See  above,  p.  27.
iii.  2,3

'  Seo  above,  p.  80.    Comp.  p.  57.

JnsK  a]

DUKA,  ADORA.

215

follows.  A  family  of  Sheikhs,  not  of  tlie  house  of  Ibn  'Omar,
was  in  power  ;  and  one  of  them  was  MulesoUim  at  the  time  of
the  last  conscription  ;  in  which  he  and  hi?  followers  so  managed,
as  to  take  all  the  men  required  for  s-r-ldiers  from  the  opposite
party.  In  consequence  of  the  ill  will  which  thus  arose,  he
caused  also  the  head  of  the  house  of  'Omar.  'Abd  er-Rahman.  to
be  imprisoned.  Up^n  this,  the  brother  of  the  latter,  the  Sheikh
•whom  we  saw,  went  to  Damascus  to  Sherif  Pasha,  governor  of
all  Syria,  and  obtained  from  him  the  relea,^  of  the  prisoner.
The  chief  himself  now  repaired  to  Damascus  ;  and  returned  as
MuteseUim  in  place  of  his  enemy.  In  the  broils  which  ensued,
the  parties  took  arms  ;  and  six  men  were  killed,  all  of  the  party
now  in  disgrace.  The  people  of  Tutta  also  entered  into  the
quarrel  The  government  interfered  with  stem  severity  ;  gath-
ered up  the  arms  of  both  parties  ;  and  the  followers  of  the  de-
posed Mutesellim  withdrew  to  el-Burj  and  other  places  in  the
plain.  It  was  probably  for  this  reason,  that  the  Sheikh  repre-
sented the  way  to  el-Burj  as  insecure.'

Although  we  saw  no  special  traces  of  antiquity  among  the
buildings  in  Diira,  yet  the  general  aspect  of  the  village  and  of
the  adjacent  coimtry  testifies,  that  the  place  is  one  of  long  stand-
ing. There  is  indeed  httle  reason  to  doubt  of  its  being  the
A'hraim  of  the  Old  Testament,  enumerated  along  with  Hebron
and  Maresha  as  one  of  the  cities  fortified  by  Rehoboam."^  Un-
der the  name  Adora  it  is  mentioned  in  the  Apocrypha,  and  also
often  by  Josephus  ;  who  usually  connects  the  two  places  Adora
and  Maressa  as  cities  of  the  later  Idumea.^  At  the  same  time
with  Maressa,"  it  was  captured  by  Hyrcanus,  and  again  built  up
by  Gabinius.*  After  Josephus,  there  seems  to  be  no  mention
of  the  place,  either  by  Eusebius  or  Jerome  or  any  other  writer,
down  to  the  present  day.  Yet  the  name  is  quite  decisive.  The
dropping  of  the  first  feeble  letter  is  not  uncommon  ;  and  ap-
pears also  to  have  been  partially  current  in  this  name,  even  in
the  days  of  Josephus  ;  in  whose  writings  we  find  it  in  several
instances  in  the  form  of  Dijra.'

After  a  delay  of  forty  minutes  we  left  Diira  at  4.40,  proceed-

•  In  1839.  this  ch=«  '  of  Dura.  'AM  er-  ib.  13.  6.  i.  ib.  13.  9.  1.  ib.  13.  15.  ib.

Rahman,  rose  in  rebellion  against  the  gor-  1-L  5.  3.    B.  J.  I.  2.  6.  ib.  1.  S.  4.

eruincr.t ;  and  with  his  follo^.  ers  got  pos-  *  Jos.  Ant  13.  9.  1.  ib.  14.  5.  3.  B.

session   of  flebrou,   and  held  it  fur   a  J.  1.  S.  4.    Comp.  above,  p.  G7.

tinie.  Tlie  governor  of  Dama^cia  inarched  ^  iiiu^  Dora,  Aiit.  13.  6.  4  in  all  Mss.

agaiii-t  him:  aud  compelle i  him  to  abiin-  Ant  14.  5.  3  ia  the  test,    Awpfo'r  Dckus,

dou  Hebron  and  retire  to  th-?  desert  to-  B.  J.  1.  2.  6,  and  ib.  1.  8.  4  in  the  Mss.

Traidi 'Ain  Jidy.    Here  he  wa>  surrounded  See  generally  Relnnd  Palsst.  pp.  547,  739.

by  a  cinle  of  2000  men  upon  the  watch  :  — Josephus  scoffs  .at  Apioii  for  plicing  the

tiirongh  which  he  at  last  cut  his  way,  and  Dora  (Dor)  of  Phenicia  in  Idamea  :  which

escapc'i  to  the  country  east  of  the  'Aiabah.  at  lejist  server  to  show  diat  Apion  might

3  Chron.  11,  9.  have  heard  of  this  nume  there:  c.  Apion

1  Mace  13,  20.  Joseph.  Ant  8.  10.  L

ui.  iJ-O

216

FBOM  HEBROy  TO  RAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xm.

ing  on  a  southwest  course,  passing  around  the  head  of  a  Wady
■which  runs  off  west  on  the  south  of  Dura,  and  crossing  a  low
ridge  beyond.  Here  we  had  a  view  of  the  western  sea.  At  5
o'clock  there  was  a  site  of  foundations  on  our  left  called  Khur-
sah  ;  and  at  the  same  time  Dhoheriyeh  was  visible,  bearing  S.
35^  W.  The  hills  aroimd  us  were  now  green  with  bushes,  and
the  trees  higher  than  we  had  usually  seen.  At  5.35,  we  were
opposite  to  other  ruined  f  oundations,  called  el-Hadb,  at  the  foot
of  a  hdl  on  our  left.  At  5J  o'clock,  we  passed  between  two
higher  hills  on  the  brow  of  the  steep  descent  of  the  mountain,
into  the  head  of  a  Wady  called  el-Keis,  which  nms  down  near-
ly west  into  the  lower  region.*

We  followed  down  Wady  el-Keis,  descending  very  gradually
on  a  western  course.  The  adjacent  hills  were  decked,  as  before,
with  bushes  and  large  trees.  This  proved  to  be  the  least  steep
and  rugged,  and  therefore  the  most  feasible,  of  all  the  passes
that  we  travelled  up  or  down  the  mountains.  The  path  contin-
ued aU  the  way  in  the  Wady  ;  which  brought  us  out  at  6.40
into  the  region  of  lower  hUls,  and  valleys,  intermediate  between  the
moxmtains  and  the  great  plain,  similar  to  that  which  we  had
formerly  traversed  further  north.  The  hills,  where  not  tilled,
were  bushy  and  green,  and  sprinkled  with  numerous  flocks  ;  the
vaUeys  broad  and  covered  with  a  rich  crop  of  wheat  ;  the  fields
full  of  reapers  and  gleaners  in  the  midst  of  the  harvest  ;  with
asses  and  camels  receiving  their  loads  of  sheaves,  and  feeding
unmuzzled  and  undisturbed  upon  the  ripe  grain.^  These  peas-
ants were  mostly  from  Dura,  belonging  to  the  party  which  had
fled,  and  was  now  scattered  at  different  places  in  this  region.

Our  path  led  us  southwest  across  a  broad  basin  or  plain  ;
around  which  many  of  the  hills  were  marked  by  ruins,  showing
that  this  tract  of  country  was  once  thickly  inhabited.  Of  these,
one  called  Deir  el-'Asal  was  on  our  right  at  6.55  ;  another
named  Beit  er-Rush,  on  the  left  ten  minutes  beyond  ;  at  7.30
we  had  Khurbet  en-Nusrany  on  the  same  side  ;  and  at  7.40
some  foundations  called  Beit  Mirsim  occupied  a  Tell  on  our  left.

Here  we  ascended  from  the  plain,  and  crossed  a  ridge  run-
ning north  from  this  Tell.  It  was  now  quite  dark.  In  going
up  the  ascent  the  guide  suddenly  demanded  a  pistol,  and  run-
ning forward  fired  at  an  animal,  which  he  supposed  to  be  a  hy-
aena ;  but  without  effect.  We  now  came  into  another  valley
running  about  S.  by  W.  and  at  8  o'clock  reached  el-Burj,  situa-
ted on  a  very  rocky  promontor}-,  or  long  point  of  a  hill  project-

'  From  the  top  of  the  southern  hill  I  '  Ps.  65,  13,  "The  pastures  are  clothej

took  the  followiug  bearings  :  Yfitta  S.  70'  with  flcx-ks;  the  valleys  aloo  are  covered

E.    .Semu'a  S.  36'  E.     Dhoheriyeh  S.  over  with  com;  thoy  shout  for  joy,  they

23°  W.  also  sing."
iii.  5,  6

June  7.]

EL  BUBJ.

217

ing  towards  the  west.  The  ground  was  so  rugged  and  so  strewn
with  rocks,  that  it  was  with  great  difficulty  we  could  find  a  place
for  our  tent  in  the  dark.  It  was  a  full  hour  before  the  tent
could  be  made  ready,  or  anything  obtained  from  the  peasants
who  were  sojourning  here,  but  who  had  not  yet  returned  from
the  fields.  Here  our  faithful  Nubian  showed  himself  active  and
useful.

Thursday,  June  ^tli.  On  examining  the  ruins  of  el-Burj
tlus  morning,  our  expectations  were  disappointed.  The  Arabs
had  told  us  much  of  them  ;  but  had  given  an  exceedingly  exag-
gerated report.  Indeed,  it  is  impossible  to  know,  in  ordinary
cases,  how  much  credit  is  to  be  attached  to  their  accounts  ;  and
the  truth  often  turns  out  to  be  as  much  beyond  their  reports,  as
in  this  instance  it  feU  short  of  them.  The  ruins  here  consist  of
the  remains  of  a  square  fortress,  about  two  hundred  feet  on  a
side,  situated  directly  upon  the  surface  of  the  projecting  rocky
hill  above  described.  On  the  eastern  and  southern  sides  a  trench
has  been  hewn  out  in  the  rock,  wliich  seems  once  to  have  ex-
tended quite  around  the  fortress.  The  walls  are  mostly  broken
down,  and  there  remain  no  arches  ;  nor  indeed  is  there  any  thing
to  mark  distinctly  its  probable  age,  or  even  the  character  of  its
architecture.  The  stones  which  compose  the  wall,  are  not
large  ;  and  were  laid  up  with  small  intervening  stones  to  fiU  out
the  crevices  ;  or  possibly  these  latter  may  have  been  driven  in
at  a  later  period. '

Yet  the  general  appearance  of  the  ruins  is  decidedly  that  of
a  Saracenic  structure  ;  and  I  am  disposed  to  regard  it  as  one  of
the  line  of  strong  Saracenic  or  Turkish  fortresses,  which  appears
once  to  have  been  drawn  along  the  southern  frontier  of  Palestine.
Of  these  we  had  now  visited  four,  viz.  at  Kurmul,  Semu'a,  Dho-
heriyeh,  and  this  at  el-Burj.  When  or  for  what  specific  purpose
those  fortresses  were  erected,  we  have  no  historical  account.
They  wovdd  seem,  at  first  view,  not  improbably  to  have  had
their  origin  perhaps  in  the  centuries  before  the  crusades,  during
the  long  feuds  and  bloody  wars  between  the  various  parties  of
the  Muhammedan  empire,  or  between  the  rulers  of  Syria  and
Egypt.  Yet  I  have  been  able  to  find  no  allusion  to  any  one  of
them  in  any  writer,  whether  Christian  or  Arabian  ;  and  it  is
possible  that  they  may  have  been  constructed  even  after  the  Ot-
toman conquest  in  the  sixteenth  century  ;  when  we  know  that
the  fortress  at  Beit  Jibrin  was  again  built  up.^

We  could  hear  of  no  other  fortress  or  ruins  in  all  these  parts.
There  was  said  to  have  been  formerly  a  tower  or  castle  at  el-
Khuweilifeh,  a  place  which  we  could  see  in  the  S.  S.  W.  at  the

'  Compare  the  similar  walla  at  Teffuh,  '  See  above,  p.  25.
p.  71,  above.

Vol.  II.— 19

iii.  6-8

218

FBOM  HEBRON  TO  RAMLEH.

[SEcXm.

distance  of  about  an  hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half,  in  the  edge  of
the  great  plain  ;  but  the  fortress  is  now  level  with  the  ground,
and  only  a  few  loose  stones  and  foundations  mark  its  former  ex-
istence. The  place  is  known,  at  the  present  day,  chiefly  as  a
well  on  the  road  between  Dhoheriyeh  and  Gaza,  where  the  Ti-
yahah  Arabs  water  their  flocks.  It  seems  however  to  have  ever
been  a  watering-place  of  importance  ;  and  as  such  is  mentioned
in  connection  with  the  movements  of  Saladin's  troops  south  of
el-Hasy,  near  the  close  of  the  twelfth  century.'  We  would
gladly  have  gone  thither  ;  but  our  time  did  not  permit  the  ex-
cursion.

The  ruins  of  el-Burj  are  situated  very  near  the  border  of  the
hilly  region  towards  the  western  plain  ;  which  latter  we  coidd
here  overlook  to  a  great  distance.^  Around  the  castle  are  some
remains  of  huts,  and  many  caves  in  the  rocks,  which  seem  once
to  have  been  inhabited  as  a  sort  of  vUlage  ;  and  were  now  usu-
ally occupied  by  a  few  poor  families  from  Dura,  who  come  hither
to  pasture  their  flocks  and  raise  tobacco.  At  the  present  time,
other  families  of  the  defeated  party  in  Dura  had  also  taken  up
their  quarters  here.  The  men  gathered  about  us  this  morning,
and  were  friendly  in  their  demeanour.

Just  as  we  were  setting  off,  however,  a  great  clamour  arose,
in  consequence  of  the  disappearance  of  one  of  our  pistols.  It
had  been  yesterday  in  the  care  of  our  servant  Ibrahim,  and  was
now  missing  ;  and  our  servants  and  muleteers  charged  the  peo-
ple, and  particularly  one  man,  with  having  stolen  it.  This  was
not  improbable  ;  for  these  Fellahin  covet  nothing  so  much  as
arms  ;  and  especially  now,  when  they  had  been  so  recently  again
disarmed.  The  noise  became  very  great ;  and  ended  at  length
in  a  determination  on  the  part  of  our  followers,  to  take  the
Sheikh  and  the  suspected  person  before  a  higher  Sheikh,  at  the
distance  of  an  hour.  As  however  this  waste  of  time  would  have
been  a  greater  loss  to  us  than  both  the  pistols  ;  and  there  was
moreover  no  proof,  that  the  one  in  question  had  not  been  lost  by
Ibrahim  himself ;  we  interfered  to  stop  the  quarrel,  and  proceed-
ed on  our  journey.  Our  plan  was  to  keep  among  the  hills  as
far  as  to  'Ain  Shems,  visiting  on  the  way  Terkumieh  and  Beit
Nusib.

Leaving  el-Burj  at  6.40,  we  returned  on  our  road  of  last
evening,  for  twenty  minutes,  to  the  ridge  connected  with  the
Tell  of  Beit  Mirsim.  Here  we  diverged  from  the  former  path
more  to  the  left,  going  N.  N.  E.  through  a  region  of  swelling
hills  and  open  Wadys  covered  with  grain.    At  7.40  we  reached

'  Boliacddin  Vita  Salad,  pp.  231,  233.  viz.  el-Khuweilifeh  about  S.  25°  W.  Uin
Comp.  Vol.  I.  p.  207.  er-Rumamin  about  S.  25^  AV.    Zalc  S.

'  From  el-Burj  we  got  but  few  bearings,    60°  W.    Beit  Mirsim  N.  15°  E.

iii.  8,  9

Jtok  7.]

HARVEST  SCENE.  IDHNA.

219

Um  esli-Shukaf  on  a  broad  cultivated  ridge,  where  there  was
once  a  village.  Here  were  many  threshing-floors  thickly  covered
with  grain  ;  but  the  village  itself  is  level  \vith  the  ground.  A
large  party  of  the  people  from  Diira  were  now  here,  threshing
out  the  wheat  which  they  had  reaped  in  the  valleys  around ;
living  without  houses  under  the  open  sky,  or  in  cellar-Hke  caves.
They  inquired  quite  anxiously,  when  we  (the  Franks)  were  com-
ing to  take  possession  of  the  country.^

After  a  stop  of  twenty  minutes,  we  passed  on  ;  and  seeing
three  paths  before  us,  we  called  back  to  the  people  to  inquire
which  was  our  road  to  Idhna.  The  reply  was  "  Doghry,
Doghry  !  "  that  is.  Straight  ahead  !  although  this  applied  to  all
the  roads  before  us,  just  as  well  as  to  one,  and  strictly  to  neither
of  them.  It  was  some  time  before  we  could  get  a  more  definite
direction.  Indeed,  this  indefiniteness  and  want  of  precision
seems  interwoven  in  the  very  genius  of  the  eastern  languages
and  character.  Whenever  we  inquired  the  way,  the  first  answer
was  always  the  everlasting  Doghry  I  Straight  ahead  !  although
we  perhaps  might  have  to  turn  at  a  right  angle  five  minutes
afterwards.  Having  here  found  our  road,  we  went  on,  and  at  8|
o'clock  passed  among  the  ruins  of  Beit  'Auwa,  covering  low
hills  on  both  sides  of  the  path,  exhibiting  foundations  of  hewn
stones,  from  which  all  that  can  be  inferred  is,  that  here  was  once
an  extensive  town.  At  9.20  there  was  another  site  of  scattered
foundations  on  the  road,  called  Deir  Samit.  In  going  up  an  as-
cent soon  afterwards,  the  tent  and  luggage  sHpped  off,  and  de-
tained us  for  fifteen  minutes.  We  came  at  9.40  to  a  cistern  by
the  way  side,  on  the  level  top  of  a  broad  ridge.  Close  by  were
other  scattered  ruins,  marking  the  site  of  el-Morak  ;  here  too
were  many  threshing-floors  in  fuU  operation.  Fifteen  minutes
further  on  was  another  similar  site,  after  descending  from  the
ridge.  At  10.20  we  fell  into  the  road  from  Dawaimeh  to  Idhna  ;
and  reached  the  latter  place  fifteen  minutes  later.

Here  we  halted  at  the  door  of  our  old  friend,  the  Sheikh,
whose  hospitable  breakfast  we  had  formerly  left  in  the  lurch.^
He  now  welcomed  us  with  a  smile  ;  and  when  we  asked  for  a
guide  to  the  next  village,  he  offered  to  go  with  us  himself.  So
"  he  arose  and  saddled  his  ass  ; "  or  rather,  threw  his  cloak  over
the  animal ;  and  in  ten  minutes  we  were  again  upon  our  way  ;
the  Sheikh  intimating  as  he  mounted,  that  he  hoped  we  would
show  him  "  charity,"  which  means  a  bakhshish.  Setting  ofl'  at
103  o'clock,  our  way  led  down  the  broad  Wady  Feranj  N.  N.  E.
until  11.10,  when  we  left  it  running  down  towards  Beit  Jibrm,

'  From  Um  esh-Shukaf,  Taiyibeh  bore  ^  For  an  account  of  our  former  visit  to
N.  GO  E.  Idhna  N.  40°  E.  Wely  seen  Idhna  (Jedna),  and  the  hospitality  of  the
from  Dawaimeh  N.  20°  W.  Sheikh,  see  above,  p.  70.

Ui.  9-11

220

FROM  HEBRON  TO  RAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xm.

and  turned  up  a  branch  Wady  towards  Terkumieli  on  a  course
nearly  east.  In  this  we  came  after  ten  minutes  to  a  well  in  the
path,  called  Bir  es-Sifala,  ten  or  twelve  feet  deep  with  good
water,  and  surrounded  by  many  flocks.  At  11.35  our  course
became  E.  N.  E.  and  just  beyond  the  head  of  the  valley,  we
came  at  11.50  to  Terkiimieh.

This  village  lies  near  the  foot  of  the  high  mountain,  on  a  low
rocky  ridge  or  swell,  extending  from  east  to  west  between  the
head  of  the  Wady  we  had  ascended  and  another  on  the  north,
running  down  westerly  to  the  Feranj.  The  usual  road  from
Gaza  through  Beit  Jibrin  to  Hebron  passes  along  up  this  north-
ern valley  ;  the  distance  from  Beit  Jibrin  is  reckoned  at  two  and
a  half  hours.  Taiyibeh  on  the  mountains  bore  S.  40°  E.  We
could  perceive  here  no  ruins  ;  but  the  stones  of  earher  structures
have  apparently  been  employed  in  building  the  present  houses.
The  name  identifies  this  place  with  Tricomias,  an  episcopal  see
of  the  First  Palestine,  enumerated  in  the  earliest  and  latest
ecclesiastical  Notitice  ;  but  of  which,  until  the  present  time,
there  is  no  further  notice  whatever.  Eeland  could  only  conjec-
ture, and  with  reason,  that  it  was  somewhere  in  the  region  of
Gaza. '

Here  we  made  a  long  halt  for  rest,  as  the  day  was  exceed-
ingly warm.  We  spread  our  carpets  beneath  the  shade  of  the
fig  trees,  which  are  here  large  and  fine  ;  and  were  soon  visited
by  the  Sheikh  and  others  of  the  chief  inhabitants,  who  demeaned
themselves  kindly  and  courteously.  There  was  a  strong  northwest
wind,  blowing  directly  from  the  sea,  over  the  great  plain  and
hills  ;  yet  so  hot  as  to  afford  no  refreshment.  The  thermometer
at  noon,  sheltered  behind  the  trunk  of  a  large  fig  tree,  the  cool-
est spot  we  could  find,  stood  at  97°  F.  and  exposed  to  the  wind,
though  still  in  the  shade,  it  rose  to  103°.  Indeed  the  heat,  as
reflected  from  the  whitish  rocks  and  stones  around,  was  almost
insupportable.

We  set  off  again  at  2.25,  proceeding  about  N.  7°  E.  across
the  Hebron  road  and  the  Wady  in  which  it  lies  ;  and  after  pass-
ing another  swell,  came  into  the  head  of  a  broad  cvdtivated  val-
ley, Wady  es-S.    Le  Another  Tricomias  is  mentioned  in  the

Quien  Oricns  Chr.  III.  p.  G78. — Cedrcnus  Notitia  Bignitat.  as  situated  in  Arabia

speaks  of  a  Tricomis  (Tpf/fu/xij)  in  Pales-  Petra^a  in  the  region  of  Areopolis;  p.  220

tine,  but  seem')  not  to  have  meant  this  ed.  Pancirol.  Reland  ib.  p.  231.

iii.  11,  12

Jtok  7.]

BEIT  NUSIB.

221

have  a  solid  arch  ;  we  attempted  to  enter,  but  were  driven  back
by  myriads  of  fleas.  Near  by  are  the  foundations  of  a  massive
building,  apparently  of  greater  antiquity,  one  hundred  and
twenty  feet  long  by  thirty  broad  ;  its  purpose  we  could  not
divine.  There  were  also  fragments  of  columns.  Euined  foun-
dations are  also  seen  further  south  on  another  mound.'

I  have  already  had  occasion  to  remark  the  identity  of  this
place,  with  the  Nezih  of  the  plain  of  Judah,  the  Nasib  of  Euse-
bius  and  Jerome.'^  Eusebius  sets  it  at  nine  Eoman  miles  from
EleutheropoHs,  and  Jerome  at  seven.  The  latter  seems  to  be
correct ;  for  its  distance  from  Beit  Jibrin  is  apparently  a  little
less  than  that  of  Terkumieh,  which  is  reckoned  at  two  and  a
half  hours.

Thus  far  to-day,  our  journey  had  been  through  the  region  of
hills,  between  the  mountains  and  the  plain,  gradually  approach-
ing the  former.  The  way  had  led  along  valleys  and  over  hills  ;
the  Wadys  being  everywhere  filled  with  grain  which  the  peasants
were  reaping,  or  planted  with  millet ;  while  the  hiUs  are  mostly
given  up  to  pasturage.  It  is  a  rich  and  fertUe  region,  and  once
teemed  with  an  abundant  population  ;  as  is  shoAvn  by  the
numerous  former  sites,  now  in  ruins  or  level  with  the  ground.
We  were  exceedingly  struck  with  the  multitude  of  these  mourn-
ful tokens  of  ancient  prosperity,  so  strongly  contrasted  with  the
present  state  of  desertion  and  decay. — At  Terkumieh  and  Beit
Nusib  we  were  very  near  the  steep  ascent  of  the  mountains  ;  but
for  the  remainder  of  the  day,  our  road  led  down  the  Wady  es-Sur
on  a  northerly  course,  which  again  brought  us  gradually  away
from  the  mountains  and  nearer  to  the  plain.

We  left  Beit  Nusib  at  3^  o'clock  ;  dismissing  our  friend  the
old  Sheikh  of  Idhna  with  a  '  charity,'  which,  as  we  were  sorry
to  perceive,  seemed  to  leave  on  his  mind  no  favourable  impres-
Bion  as  to  our  charitable  propensities.  We  foUowed  down  the
vaUey,  which  is  broad  and  arable,  with  swelling  hiUs,  on  a  course
N.  N.  W.  for  half  an  hour,  and  then  N.  N.  E.  At  3.55,  we
passed  a  well  called  Bir  el-Kaus  ;  five  minutes  further  -was
another,  Bir  el-Ghaul ;  and  at  4.5,  we  came  to  a  third,  Bir  es-
Sur,  giving  name  to  the  Wady.  Opposite  the  first  well,  on  the
right,  are  ruined  foundations  upon  a  hill.  The  bed  of  the  Wady
above  these  wells  showed  signs  of  stagnant  water,  with  mud  and
patches  of  weeds.

The  name  of  this  well  and  Wady,  (es-Sur,)  led  us  to  search
on  the  adjacent  hills,  which  just  here  are  very  rocky,  in  order  to

'  From  Beit  Nusib,  Beit  'Atab  bore  N.  '  Josh.  15,  43.    Onomast.  art.  Neesih.

21°  E.    Jeba'h  N.  41°  E.    Beit  tjla  N.  We  had  already  heard  of  this  place  seve-

76°  E.    Terkumieh  S.  7°  W.    Um  Burj  ral  times:  see  above,  pp.  16,  17,  54,  57.
N.29°W.

Vol.  n.— 19*  iii.  12-14

222

FROM  HEBRON  TO  RAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xm.

discover,  whetlier  any  town  or  fortress  miglit  have  once  stood
here,  bearing  perhaps  the  name  of  Beth-zur  ;  though  the  chief
fortress  of  that  name,  one  of  the  strongest  of  Judea,  obviously
lay  upon  the  mountains  not  far  distant  from  Halhul  and  He-
bron. '  Our  search  here  was  in  vain  ;  we  could  perceive  no  trace
of  foundations  either  in  the  valley  or  upon  the  hills  ;  except  the
ruins  of  a  small  well  built  village  on  an  eminence,  about  twenty
minutes  distant  in  the  E.  S.  E.

We  left  the  well  at  4.35  ;  and  kept  on  N.  by  E.  down  the
valley,  which  now  opens  more  towards  the  right,  and  receives
several  broad  cultivated  tributaries,  coming  from  near  the  moun-
tains. After  fifteen  minutes  we  got  sight  of  Beit  Nettif,  the
end  of  our  day's  journey,  bearing  north.  At  5j  o'clock,  we  came
to  the  road  from  Jerusalem  to  Gaza,  which  here  crosses  the  val-
ley and  intersects  our  path  ;  the  latter  being  the  usual  road  from
Hebron  to  Ramleh  and  Yafa.  This  Gaza  road  is  a  branch  of
the  ancient  way,  which  we  had  formerly  seen  in  coming  from
Jerusalem  ;  the  other  branch  having  passed  on  towards  Askelon
down  Wady  el-Musurr.'^  At  some  distance  on  the  right,  a
ruin  was  visible  on  a  hUl ;  near  which  this  road  was  said  to
lead.

Here,  in  the  broad  valley,  at  the  intersection  of  the  roads,
stands  an  immense  Butm  tree  {Pistacia  Terehintlms),  the
largest  we  saw  anywhere  in  Palestine,  spreading  its  boughs  far
and  wide  like  a  noble  oak.  This  species  is  without  doubt  the
terebinth  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  under  the  shade  of  such  a
tree,  Abraham  might  well  have  pitched  his  tent  at  Mamre.'
The  Butm  is  not  an  evergreen,  as  is  often  represented  ;  but  its
small  feathered  lancet-shaped  leaves  fall  in  the  autumn,  and  are
renewed  in  the  spring.  The  flowers  are  small  and  followed  by
small  oval  berries,  hanging  in  clusters  from  two  to  five  inches
long,  resembling  much  the  clusters  of  the  vine  when  the  grapes
are  just  set.  From  incisions  in  the  tnmk  there  is  said  to  flow  a
sort  of  transparent  balsam,  constitiiting  a  very  pure  and  fine
species  of  turpentine,  with  an  agreeable  odour  like  citron  or  jes-
samine and  a  mUd  taste,  and  hardening  gradually  into  a  trans-

■  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  217,  n.
Comp.  Joseph.  Ant.  12.  9.  4.  Kelaiid
Pala'st.  p.  6r)8.— The  Beth-zur  of  the  cm-
gaders  and  of  the  following  centuries,  was
at  the  fountain  of  St.  Philip  in  Wady  ol-
Werd ;  see  Vol.  I.  p.  4G!) ;  also  p.  Gf),  above.

*  See  above,  pp.  15,  20.

'  Hob.  nbx  terebinth,  distinguished
from  V^X  ooi.  Is.  6,  13.  Hos.  4,  13.  In
the  first  passage  the  Engl,  version  has  tcil
(linden  ■ ;  and  in  the  second  elm ;  else-
where usually  oak,  Gen.  35,  4.  Judg.  6,

iii.  14, 15

11.  19.  2  Sam.  18,  9.  14.— For  the  iden-
tity of  the  Butm  of  the  Arabs  with  tlie
Pistacia  Terebinthus  of  botanists,  see  Cel-
sii  Hierobot.  I.  pp.  36,  37.  This  is  also
confirmed  to  me  by  the  distinguished  nat-
uralist, Prof.  Ehrenberg  of  Berlin,  who
himself  obseiTed  it  in  the  east.  See  gen-
erally Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  Edit.  10.  Tom.  II.
p.  1290.  Willd.  Spec.  Plant.  T.  IV.  ii.  p.
752.  See  also  a  description  and  drawing
in  Ilayno's  Beschr.  der  Arzney-Gowiichse
Bd.  XIU.  19.

JOSK  8.]

THE  BUTM.     BEIT  KETTIF.

223

parent  gum.'  In  Palestine  nothing  seems  to  be  known  of  this
product  of  the  Butm.  The  tree  is  found  also  in  Asia  Minor
(many  of  them  near  Smyrna),  Greece,  Italy,  the  south  of
France,  Spain,  and  in  the  north  of  Africa  ;  and  is  described  as
not  usually  rising  to  the  height  of  more  than  twenty  feet.*  It
often  exceeded  that  size  as  we  saw  it  on  the  mountakis  ;  but
here  in  the  plains  it  was  very  much  larger.

We  kept  on  down  Wady  es-Siir,  and  at  5^  o'clock  reached
the  point  where  it  bends  more  northwest.  "We  now  passed  ob-
liquely over  the  low  hill  which  here  runs  down  between  it  and
the  Musurr  ;  crossed  (about  a  quarter  before  five)  the  latter
Wady,  coming  from  the  east,  with  the  other  branch  of  the  an-
cient road ;  and  further  on  another  smaller  Wady,  coming  from
the  northeast  along  under  the  hill  of  Beit  Xettif.  These  three
unite  and  form  Wady  es-Sumt,  a  fertile  and  beautiful  plain
already  described.^

We  now  ascended  the  steep  and  high  hill  on  which  Beit
Nettif  Hes,  and  encamped  again  at  6.25  upon  our  olc^  spot,  now
surrounded  by  threshing-floors  full  of  sheaves  of  wheat.  Our
former  acquaintances  received  us  with  a  welcome.  We  found
the  place  hTng  higher  than  we  had  before  supposed  ;  the  weather
having  then  been  hazy  and  foggy.  The  atmosphere  was  now
clear,  and  we  enjoyed  a  superb  sunset  ;  the  great  western  plain
lighted  up  by  the  mellow  beams,  and  the  sim  itself  lingering  to
disappear  below  the  glittering  waves  of  the  Mediterranean.^

Friday,  June  8th.  The  object  of  our  journey  to-day,  was
to  be  a  visit  to  the  ruins  of  'Ain  Shems  ;  to  search  for  the  long
lost  Ekron  ;  and  then  reach  Ramleh.  We  rose  early,  and  were
not  comforted  by  the  prospect  of  a  very  warm  and  oppressive
day.  The  thermometer  stood  in  our  tent  at  76°  F.  but  rose  to
83°  in  the  open  air  before  sunrise.  We  had  engaged  over  night
a  guide  for  'Ain  Shems  and  'Akir  ;  but  although  we  were  ready
at  half  past  4  o'clock,  yet  the  guide  did  not  make  his  ap-
pearance ;  and  it  was  therefore  4.55  when  we  at  length  set  off.
The  sun  was  rising  gloriously  ;  and  the  numerous  herds  and
flocks  of  the  village,  wending  their  way  to  their  pastures  among
the  hills,  presented  an  animating  and  pleasing  view.

From  Beit  Nettif,  'Ain  Shems  bears  X.  12°  W.  and  our  way
led  in  that  direction  down  the  hiU  ;  and  then  wound  along  and
across  several  small  Wadys  all  running  towards  the  left,  and
over  the  low  ridges  between.  Yarmuk,  Neby  Bulus,  and  Beit
el-Jem  al,  aU  ruins,  lay  at  our  left  on  or  among  the  hills.  At

'  Terebinthia  Cypria,  sen  pistacia,  sen    north  coast  of  Africa  and  also  around
de  Chio. — This  is  usually  adnlterited,  and    Mount  Lebanon,
is  now  seldom  found  in  the  shops.  '  See  above,  p.  20.

'  Hayiie  L  c.  Ehrenberg,  in  the  course  '  For  our  former  visit  to  Beit  Nettif^  sea
of  his  travels,  found  the  Butm  on  the    above,  pp.  15-20.

iii.  15-17

224

FROM  HEBRON  TO  RAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xm

length  we  came  into  a  broader  Wady,  coming  from  the  left  and
nmning  north,  which  apparently  receives  higher  up  the  smaller
ones  we  had  crossed.  In  this  vaUey  was  a  half  stagnant  muddy
brook,  and  a  well  called  Bir  en-Nahl,  in  which  the  turbid  water
was  even  with  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Here  at  6.10  we
stopped^  half  an  hour  for  breakfast  ;  the  site  of  'Ain  Shems
being  within  view,  only  fifteen  minutes  distant,  bearing  N.
30°  E.  We  reached  it  at  length  at  6.55,  in  an  hour  and  a  half
from  Beit  Xettif.

The  name  'Ain  Shems  imphes  a  fountain  ;  but  there  is  now
here  no  water  of  any  kind,  thus  called.  The  place  to  which  the
Arabs  give  this  name,  consists  of  the  ruins  of  a  modem  Arab
village  of  moderate  size,  with  a  Wely,  all  evidently  built  up
with  ancient  materials.  But  just  on  the  west  of  this  village,
upon  and  around  the  plateau  of  a  low  swell  or  mound  between
the  Surar  on  the  north  and  a  smaller  Wady  on  the  south,  are
the  manifest  traces  of  an  ancient  site.  Here  are  the  vestiges  of
a  former  extensive  city,  consisting  of  many  foundations  and  the
remains  of  ancient  walls  of  hewn  stone.  The  materials  have
indeed  been  chiefly  swallowed  up,  in  the  probably  repeated  con-
structions of  the  modem  village  ;  but  enough  yet  remains  to
make  it  one  of  the  largest  and  most  marked  sites,  which  we  had
anywhere  seen.  On  the  north,  the  great  Wady  es-Surar,  itself
a  plain,  runs  off  first  west  and  then  northwest  into  the  great
plain  ;  while  on  the  south,  the  smaller  Wady  comes  down  from
the  southeast,  and  uniting  with  the  one  down  which  we  had  trav-
elled, they  enter  the  Surar  below  the  ruins.  Beyond  this  latter
valley,  on  a  high  point  of  the  northern  ridge,  is  seen  a  Wely
bearing  N.  20°  E.  marking  the  site  of  Sur'ah,  the  ruins  of  which
lie  just  on  the  other  side  below  the  brow.'

Both  the  name  and  the  position  of  this  spot,  seem  to  indi-
cate the  site  of  the  ancient  Beth-shemesh  of  the  Old  Testament.
That  city  is  described  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  as  seen  from  the
road  leading  from  Eleutheropolis  to  Kicopolis  (Amwas),  at  ten
Roman  miles  from  the  former  city  ;  and  as  they  assign  nearly
the  same  distances  from  EleutheropoHs  to  Zorah,  Zanoah,  and
Jarmuth,  it  is  obxious  that  Beth-shemesh  lay  in  the  \"icinity  of
these  places.  And  so  we  had  already  foimd  it,  surrounded  by
Zanii'a  in  the  east,  Sur'ah  in  the  N.  N.  E.  and  Yarmuk  in  the
southwest.  Indeed,  from  the  existence  of  these  names,  and
their  coincidence  with  the  accounts  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  we  •
had  been  able  chiefly  to  trace  out  and  fix  the  site  of  Eleuthero-
polis at  Beit  Jibrin.*    The  words  Beit  (Beth)  and  'Ain  are  so

'  Other  bearings  from  'Ain  Shems  were  :       '  See  the  details  as  given  above,  pp
B&tasheh  N.  4.5  W.    Urn  Jina  S.  82'  W.    20,  58.
Kheishum  S.  50  W.  Beit  el-JcmiJ  S.  8'  W.

iii.  17,  18

JCNE  8.]

'ain  shems,  beth-shemesh.

225

very  common  in  the  Arabic  names  of  Palestine,  that  it  can
excite  no  wonder  should  there  be  an  exchange,  even  without  any
ob\'ious  ground.  In  the  same  manner,  the  ancient  Beth-shemesh
(Heliopolis)  of  Egypt,  is  known  in  Arabian  writers  as  'Ain
Shems  ;  although  at  present  the  name  is  applied  specifically,
only  to  a  well  at  some  distance  from  its  site.'

Beth-shemesh  lay  on  the  border  of  Judah,  and  belonged  to
that  tribe  ;  although  it  is  not  enumerated  in  the  list  of  its
cities,  except  as  having  been  assigned  from  it  to  the  priests.'
In  the  days  of  Samuel,  it  became  celebrated  for  the  return  of
the  ark  from  the  Philistines,  and  the  trespass  of  the  inhabitants
against  the  same  ;  for  which  they  were  smitten  of  the  Lord.'
In  later  times  it  was  the  residence  of  one  of  Solomon's  twelve
purveyors,  and  became  the  scene  of  the  defeat  of  Amaziah  king
of  Judah  by  Jehoash  king  of  Israel  ;  it  was  also  conquered  by
the  Philistines  from  king  Ahaz  with  other  cities  of  the  plain/
We  hear  no  more  of  Beth-shemesh  until  the  time  of  Eusebius
and  Jerome,  who  incorrectly  assign  it  to  the  tribe  of  Benja-
min f  and  from  their  age  onward,  it  appears  to  have  remained
unknown  or  forgotten  until  the  present  day.'

The  Ir-shemesh  once  mentioned  on  the  border  of  Dan  and
Judah,  seems  without  much  question  to  have  been  the  same
with  Beth-shemesh.^  Of  Eshtaol,  which  also  lay  in  the  vicini-
ty, we  could  find  no  trace.'

"  Jer.  43,  13.    See  VoL  I.  p.  25.

'  Josh.  15,  10.  21,  16.  1  Chr.  6,  59.
Not  mentioned  in  the  valley,  with  Eshtaol
and  Zorah  and  other  cities  which  lay
around  it.  Josh.  15,  33-35.

'  1  Sam.  6,  9-20.  Joseph.  Ant.  6.  1.
3.  Josephus  does  not  elsewhere  mention
Beth-shemesh.

•  1  K.  4,  9.-2  K.  14,  11.  12.  2  Chr.
25,  21.— 2  Chr.  28,  18.

'  Onomast.  art.  Bethsamis.

"  Brocardus  indeed  mentions  it ;  but  in
a  manner  so  confused,  as  to  show  that  he
is  writing  from  no  personal  knowledge,  and
only  from  theory ;  c.  10.  p.  186.  He  pla-
ces Gath  four  leagues  south  of  Joppa  (near
Jabneh),  and  Beth-shemesh  two  leagues
south  of  Gath,  which  of  course  brings  it
near  the  sea.  Then  he  makes  Accaron
(Ekron)  four  leagues  west  of  Beth-shemesh.
The  absurdity  is  so  glaring,  that  one  must
suspect  a  corraption  in  the  text.

'  Josh.  19,  41  —In  Josh.  15,  10  we  find
the  northern  border  of  Judah  running  by
Beth-shemesh,  Timnah,  Ekron,  and  Baalah,
to  the  sea ;  and  of  these  places  Beth-she-
mesh and  Ekron  are  e.x'pressly  assigned  to
Judah  ;  vs.  4.5.  46.  21,16.  In  Josh.  19,
41-44  we  have  the  like  places  along  '  the
coast'  of  Dan;  Ir-shemesh,  Thimnathah,

ui.

Ekron,  Baalath.  Of  course  Ir-shemesh
(Beth-shemesh)  and  Ekron  can  only  be
here  mentioned  as  marking  the  border;
and  jot  as  originally  cities  of  Dan,  though
afterwards  assigned  to  that  tribe.  Further,
in  the  same  passage,  we  find  Ir-shemesh,
Shaalabin,  and  Ajalon  (^lb"'S<)  placed  to-
gether; and  In  1  Kings  4,  9  we  have
also  Shaalbim,  Beth-shemesh,  and  Ajalon
These  coincidences  seem  most
decisively  to  identify  Ir-shemesh  and  Beth-
shemesh. — This  identity  is  rejected  by  Re-
land,  on  the  ground  of  a  remark  of  Jerome,
Comm.  in  Ezek.  48,  21. 22  ;  where  in  speak-
ing of  the  territory  of  Dan  he  enumerates
"  Ailon  et  Selebi  et  Emmaus,  quae  nunc
appellatur  Nieopolis  ;  "  as  if  for  Ajalon,
Shaalbim,  and  Beth-shemesh,  as  above.
But  there  is  here  no  evidence  that  Jerome
was  even  thinking  of  Beth-shemesh  at  all ;
and  if  he  did  thus  actually  confound  it
with  Emmaus,  it  probably  arose  from  the
form  given  to  it  by  the  Seventy,  viz.  ir6\is
'Xaniiavi  (^afits,  Shemesh),  Josh.  19,  41 ;
which  he  took  for  'A/xixaovs  or  'Efinaovs.
See  Reland  Falsest,  pp.  168,  656.  Miinchner
Gel.  Anzeigen  1836.  No.  245.  pp.  926,  927.

"  Josh.  15,  33.  19,  41.  Judg.  14,  31.
Onomast.  art.  Est  haul.

226

FROM  HEBRON  TO  RAMLEH.

[Sue.  XIII,

We  left  tlie  site  of  'Ain  Shems  at  7.10,  and  crossing  ob-
liquely the  plain  of  the  SQrfir  N.  N.  W.  reached  in  ten  minutes
its  water-bed  near  the  northern  hills.  Here  is  a  well,  about
fifteen  feet  deep  to  the  surface  of  the  water,  called  not  Bir
Shems  nor  'Ain  Shems,  as  one  might  expect,  but  Bir  eth-
Themed.  The  path  now  ascends  gradually  and  obliquely  the  hill
of  Sur'ah  in  the  same  direction,  which  here  declines  gently
towards  the  west ;  it  is  the  same  spur  of  the  mountains,  which
I  have  already  described,  as  running  out  along  the  Surar  to  the
plain.*

Near  the  top,  at  7f  o'clock,  we  had  on  our  right  the  wide-
spread ruins  of  Rafat.  Here  we  could  see  the  Surar  running
off  northwest  and  then  N.  N.  W.  through  the  plain,  a  broad
low  tract  of  exceedingly  fertile  land,  skirted  by  low  hills  and
gentle  swells.  But  I  do  not  remember  that  we  saw  any  appear-
ance of  another  like  valley  coming  into  it  from  the  south  ;  as
would  probably  have  been  the  case,  did  Wady  es-Sumt  actually
thus  form  a  junction  with  it,  as  supposed. We  now  descended
into  a  valley  among  hills  ;  where  at  8  o'clock  we  stopped  a  mo-
ment at  a  small  spring  of  running  water.

We  very  soon  came  out  into  the  great  plain,  properly  so
called  ;  although  it  is  here  more  undulating  than  we  had  seen  it
further  south  towards  Gaza,  and  might  even  be  called  hilly.
We  still  kept  on  N.  N.  W.  At  some  distance  on  our  right,  a
long  line  of  rocky  hills,  a  spur  from  the  mountains,  extended
out  westwards  into  the  plain.  The  country  was  mostly  tilled,
though  not  fully.  At  half  past  eight,  we  passed  the  ruins  of  a
village  called  Beit  Far  ;  and  at  9  o'clock  had  the  large  village
of  Khulda  on  a  hill  ten  minutes  distant  on  our  right,  apparently
connected  with  the  spur  just  described.  Fifteen  minutes  later
we  came  to  a  large  well  in  a  valley  among  the  swells,  fitted  up
with  troughs  and  reservoirs,  with  flocks  waiting  around.  Here
two  men  were  drawing  water  "  with  the  foot,"  by  means  of  a
large  reel,  as  already  described,  pulling  the  upper  part  towards
them  with  their  hands,  and  pushing  with  their  feet  upon  the
lower  part.'  We  stopped  here  ten  minutes  for  our  animals  to
drink.  At  a  short  distance  on  the  northeast,  perhaps  eight  or
ten  minutes,  was  the  large  village  of  Saidon.

Setting  off  again  at  9.25,  we  soon  left  the  Ramleh  road,
which  keeps  on  in  the  same  course,  and  turned  more  to  the  left,
about  N.  W.  by  W.  towards  the  village  of  'Akir.  After  a  few
minutes,  we  had  a  distinct  view  of  Ramleh.  At  10  o'clock  there
was  a  spring  in  a  valley  on  our  path  ;  and  ten  minutes  beyond
it  a  miserable  little  village  on  the  left,  called  el-Mansurah.  We

'  See  above,  p.  6.  '  See  above,  p.  22 ;  and  Note  II,  end

'  Ibii  of  Vol.  I.

iiL20  21

Jxnrz  8.]

'akir,  EKRON".

227

now  travelled  across  a  wide  tract  of  low  flat  land,  the  level  bed
of  a  broad  Wady  coming  from  the  northeast  and  passing  on  to
join  the  Surar,  as  it  crosses  the  plain  and  obUquely  approaches
the  sea.  Before  us,  at  the  distance  of  an  hour  or  more,  was  a
short  line  of  hills  running  nearly  parallel  with  the"  coast,  which
shut  out  the  region  of  Yebna  from  our  view.  The  Surar  passes
behind  these  hills,  being  first  joined  on  their  left  by  the  Wady  in
which  we  now  were  ;  and  there  takes  the  name  of  Wady  Rubin.
'Akir  lies  on  the  rise  of  land  on  the  northwestern  side  of  the
Wady  we  were  crossing  ;  and  as  we  drew  near,  the  path  led
through  well  tUled  gardens  and  fields  of  the  richest  soil,  all  upon
the  low  tract,  covered  with  vegetables  and  fruits  of  great  variety
and  high  perfection.    We  reached  'Akir  at  11  o'clock.

Here  we  made  a  mid-day  halt  of  several  hours,  beneath  some
trees  fully  exposed  to  the  wind,  on  the  north  of  the  village.  Our
fears  of  a  day  of  oppressive  heat  were  more  than  verified.  There
was  a  slight  haze  before  the  sun;  and  the  wind  was  blowing
strongly  from  the  northwest  directly  from  the  adjacent  sea  ;  yet
it  seemed  charged  with  a  glow,  as  if  it  came  from  a  scorched
desert.  The  thermometer  sheltered  behind  the  trunk  of  a  tree
stood  at  noon  at  105°  F.  and  held  in  the  sun  rose  only  to  108°.
The  shade  of  the  scattered  olive  trees  was  so  small  and  slight,
that  it  availed  us  little  as  a  protection  against  the  sun's  rays.

'Akir  lies  not  far  from  the  line  of  hills  above  described,  which
here  bound  the  plain  on  the  west,  and  behind  which  the  Surar
passes  on  obliquely  to  the  sea.'  It  is  of  considerable  size  ;  but
in  the  village  itself  we  could  perceive  nothing  to  distinguish  it
from  other  modern  villages  of  the  plain.  Like  them  it  is  built  of
unburnt  bricks  or  mud  ;  and  exhibits  to  the  eye  of  the  traveller,
no  marks  of  antiquity.  We  were  unable  to  fix  the  direction  of
Yebna  ;  and  Ramleh  was  hidden  by  the  intervening  swells.^

There  seems  no  reason  for  doubt,  that  'Aldr  answers  to  the
ancient  Ekron.  The  radical  letters  of  the  Arabic  name  are  the
same  as  those  of  the  Hebrew  ;  and  the  position  too  corresponds

•  Other  places  bore  from  'Akir  as  fol-
lows :  Sur'ah  S.  50 '  E.  El-MansCrah  S.
45°  E.  Kheishum  S.  33°  E.  Tell  Zakari-
ya  S.  25°  E.  Tell  es-S"ifieh  S.  1 '  W.  Kut-
rah  S.  50^  W.   MughAr  S.  65'  W.

*  Yebna  is  situated  on  a  small  eminence
on  the  west  side  of  the  Wady  Riibin,  an
honr  or  more  distant  from  the  sea  ;  Irby
and  Mangles  p.  182.  [57.]  Corresp.  d'Ori-
ent,  V.  pp.  373,  374.  According  to  Scholz,
there  are  here  the  ruins  of  a  former  church,
afterwards  a  mosk ;  Reisp,  p.  14f).  Be-
tween it  and  the  sea  are  the  ruins  of  a  Ro-
man bridge  over  the  water  of  Wady  Rubin,
with  high  arches,  built  of  very  large  stones;

Irby  and  Mangles  ibid.  Scholz  p.  147.  On
the  eastern  side  of  the  Wady,  on  a  small
eminence,  is  the  tomb  or  \Vely  of  Rubin
(Reuben)  the  son  of  Jacob,  from  which
the  Wady  here  takes  its  name  ;  it  is  men-
tioned by  Mejr  ed-Din  (in  1495)  as  having
been  formerly  a  great  place  of  pilgrimage
for  the  Muhaminedans,  and  it  still  remains
so  in  a  degree ;  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.  p.  138.
Irby  and  Mangles  p.  183. — For  the  an-
cient J.ibneh,  see  Reland  Pal.  p.  822.  Le
Quien  Oriens  Chr.  III.  p.  587.  The  cru-
saders built  here  the  fortress  Ibelin  ;  see
above,  p.  C6,  n.  5.

iii.  21-23

228

FROM  HEBRON  TO  EAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xni.

to  all  we  know  of  Ekron.  That  city  was  the  northernmost  of  the
five  cities  of  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  ;  and  was  situated  upon
the  northern  border  of  Judah ;  while  the  other  four  cities  lay  within
the  territory  of  that  tribe.'  Eusebius  and  Jerome  describe  it  as
a  village  of  Jfews  between  Azotus  ( Ashdod)  and  Jamnia,  towards
the  east ;  that  is  to  say,  to  the  eastward  of  a  right  line  between
those  places  ;  and  such  is  the  actual  position  of  'Akir  relative
to  Esdud  and  Yebna  at  the  present  day.*

The  ancient  Ekron  was  at  first  assigned  to  Judah  as  upon
its  border  ;  but  was  afterwards  apparently  given  to  Dan,  though
conquered  by  Judah.  ^  It  afterwards  became  remarkable  in  con-
nection with  the  capture  of  the  ark  by  the  Philistines,  which,
was  sent  back  from  Ekron  upon  a  new  cart  drawn  by  two  milch^
Mne  ;  and  these  being  left  to  their  own  course  took  the  "  straight
way"  to  Beth-shemesh,  the  nearest  point  of  entrance  to  the
mountains  of  Judah.^  In  coming  therefore  from  'Ain  Shems  to
'Akir  we  might  almost  be  said  to  have  foUowed  the  track  of  the
cart,  on  which  the  ark  was  thus  sent  back.  After  David's  vic-
tory over  Goliath  in  Wady  es-Sumt,  the  Philistines  were  pur-
sued to  Ekron ;  and  at  a  later  day  the  prophets  utter  denuncia-
tions against  it  along  with  the  other  cities  of  the  Philistines.'
But  from  that  time  onward,  except  the  slight  notice  of  Eusebius
and  Jerome  above  cited,  no  further  mention  of  Ekron  appears
until  the  time  of  the  crusades.  This  great  plain  and  the  cities
of  the  adjacent  coast,  were  the  scenes  of  many  of  the  exploits
of  the  warriors  of  the  cross  ;  and  in  the  writings  of  that  age
the  name  of  Accaron  (Ekron)  is  spoken  of,  as  still  extant  in  the
region  where  we  now  find  'Akir.*

Since  that  time  until  the  present  day,  Ekron  has  again  been
utterly  overlooked  by  all  Frank  travellers  ;  although  several
must  have  passed  veiy  near  to  it  on  their  way  between  EsdM  and
Eamleh.'  Yet  the  ^Christians  of  both  Gaza  and  Ramleh  have
the  tradition,  that  'Akir  is  the  ancient  Ekron  ;  and  the  Muslim
Sheikh  of  the  village  itself,  told  us  of  his  own  accord  that  such
was  the  belief  among  the  inhabitants.  The  absence  of  all  re-
mains of  antiquity  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  circumstance,

'  Josh.  13,  3.    15,  11.  47.  mus;"  Fulch.  Carnot.  23,  in  Gest.  Dei  p.

'  Onoinast.  art.  Accaron.  404.    Brocardus  also  says  the  name  was

"Josh.  15,11.  45.    19,43.    Judg.  1,  still  extant  at  a  place  four  leagues  west  of

18.    Joseph.  Ant.  5.  1.  22.  ib.  5.  2.  4.  Beth-shemesh;  c.  10.  p.  18G.    Marin.  Sa-

♦  1  Sam.  5,  10.    6,  1-18.  nut.  p.  165.   R.  Parchi  also  mentions  Ek-

'  1  Sam.  17,52. — Jer.  25,20.  Am.  1,  ron  as  east  of  Jabneh ;  see  Zunz  in  Asher's

8.    Zeph.  2,  4.    Zcch.  9,  5.  7.    Comp.  Benj.  of  Tud.  II.  p.  441.
above,  p  66  and  n.  4.  '  So  Von  Troilo  in  A.  D.  1066,  p.  349.

'King  Baldwin  marched  in  A.  D.  1 100  Volney,  Voyage  II.  p.  310.    Riihiirdson  in

from  Jerusalem  to  A.skelon,  through  Azo-  1818,  Travels  II.  p.  207.    Irby  and  Man-

tus  (Esdud),   "  inter  quani  ct  Jamiiiiim  gles  in  the  same  year  passed  more  to  the

quae  super  mare  sita  est,  Accaron  dhnisi-  left,  by  Yebna;  Travels  p.  182.  [5G,  57.J
iii.  23.24

JmiK  8.]

EKRON  RAMLEH.

229

that  probably  the  ancient  town,  like  the  modem  villages  cf  the
plain,  and  like  much  of  the  present  Gaza,  was  built  only  of  un-
burnt  bricks.  EsdM,  as  to  the  identity  of  which  with  Ashdod,
no  one  doubts,  has  in  hke  manner  no  remains  of  antiquity  ;  and
ancient  Gath,  for  aught  we  know,  is  swept  from  the  face  of  the
earth.'  The  same  Sheikh,  however,  an  intelligent  man,  informed
us,  that  here  at  'Akir,  and  in  the  adjacent  fields,  they  often  dis-
cover cisterns,  the  stones  of  hand-niills,  and  other  relics  of  the
former  place.

The  great  plain,  in  the  region  where  we  had  now  crossed  it,
like  the  same  in  the  direction  of  Gaza,  is  entirely  given  up  to
the  cultivation  of  grain,  chiefly  wheat  and  barley  ;  and  the  crops
were  very  fine.  Many  fields  of  millet  were  also  interspersed,
with  their  beautiftil  green  ;  and  we  noticed  also  sesame  in  many
places.  The  peasants  were  now  in  the  midst  of  the  wheat-har-
vest, or  rather  were  near  its  close  ;  the  reapers  were  yet  busy  in
the  fields,  followed  as  usual  by  female  gleaners  almost  as  numer-
ous. We  saw  also  many  women  reaping.  In  some  places  the
poorer  peasants,  for  want  of  neat  cattle,  w^ere  treading  out  their
grain  wdth  donkeys  ;  and  we  often  saw  the  women  beating  out
with  a  stick  the  handfuls  they  had  gleaned.*  In  one  instance  a
poor  woman  was  pounding  out  her  gleanings  with  a  stone.

We  left  'Akir  at  2.50  for  Kamleh,  on  a  course  about  N.  E.^
N.  Between  these  places,  the  plain  is  less  fertile,  and  is  com-
paratively little  cultivated.  The  approach  to  Eamleh  is  over  a
tract  of  heavy  sand,  which  continues  even  among  the  olive
groves  and  gardens  lying  around  the  town  upon  this  side.  We
reached  Ramleh  at  twenty  minutes  before  5  o'clock.

With  some  difficulty  we  found  our  way  to  the  house  of
'Abud  Murkus  (Marcus)  the  American  consular  agent,  an
upright  wealthy  Arab  of  the  Greek  church,  whose  acquaintance
we  had  already  made  at  Jerusalem.  He  and  his  eldest  son  were
absent  at  Yafa  ;  but  we  were  received  with  great  kindness  by
the  famUy.  The  second  son,  a  young  man  of  eighteen  or  twenty
years,  did  the  honours  of  the  house  ;  and  conducted  us  to  an
"  upper  room,"  a  large  airy  hall,  forming  a  sort  of  third  story
upon  the  flat  roof  of  the  house.  As  we  entered,  the  mistress  of
the  family  came  out  of  her  apartment  and  welcomed  us  ;  but
we  saw  no  more  of  her  afterwards.  In  our  large  room,  we  had
opportunity  to  arrange  our  toilette  a  little,  for  the  first  time,
after  three  weeks  of  dwelling  in  a  tent  and  travelling  mostly  in
deserts.  Sherbet  was  brought,  which  in  this  instance  was  lemon-
ade ;  and  then  coffee.  Our  youthful  host  now  proposed,  in  the
genuine  style  of  ancient  oriental  hospitality,  that  a  servant

'  See  above,  p.  33,  u,  2.    Ibid.  pp.       «  See  above,  p.  45.    Ruth  2,  17.
66,  67.

Vol.  II.— 20  iii,  24-26

230

ER-KAMLEH.

[Seo.  xnL

should  wasli  our  feet.  This  took  me  by  surprise  ;  for  I  was  not
aware  that  the  custom  still  existed  here.  Nor  does  it,  indeed,
towards  foreigners  ;  though  it  is  quite  common  among  the  natives.
"We  gladly  accepted  the  proposal,  both  for  the  sake  of  the  re-
freshment and  of  the  scriptural  illustration.  A  female  Nubian
slave  accordingly  brought  water,  which  she  poured  upon  our  feet
over  a  large  shallow  basin  of  tinned  copper  ;  kneeling  before  us,
and  rubbing  our  feet  with  her  hands,  and  wiping  them  with  a
napldn.  It  was  one  of  the  most  gratifying  minor  incidents  of
our  whole  journey.'

While  dinner  was  preparing,  we  had  time  to  walk  out  and
take  a  view  of  the  town  ;  and  also  to  ascend  the  lofty  tower
which  is  seen  far  and  wide,  as  the  traveller  approaches  Eanileh.
Our  host  accompanied  us,  and  also  a  younger  brother,  a  lad  of
twelve  or  fourteen  years  of  age.  The  town  lies  upon  the  eastern
side  of  a  broad  low  swell  in  the  sandy  though  fertile  plain  ;  and
the  streets  have  therefore  a  slight  declivity  towards  the  east.
Like  Gaza  and  Yafa,  it  is  surrounded  by  olive  groves,  and  gar-
dens of  vegetables  and  delicious  fruits  ;  the  latter  enclosed  by
impenetrable  hedges  of  prickly  pear.  Occasional  palm  trees  are
also  seen,  as  well  as  the  Khanib  and  the  sycamore.  The  streets
are  few  ;  the  houses  are  of  stone,  many  of  them  large  and  well-
built.  There  are  several  mosks,  one  or  more  of  which  are  said
to  have  once  been  churches  ;  and  there  is  here  one  of  the  largest
Latin  convents  in  Palestine,  which  however  we  did  not  visit."
The  vaulted  cisterns  on  the  north  of  the  town,  we  also  did  not
see.^  The  place  is  supposed  to  contain  about  three  thousand  in-
habitants ;  of  whom  nearly  one  third  part  are  Christians,  chiefly
of  the  Greek  rite,  and  a  few  Armenians.  The  great  caravan
road  between  Egypt  and  Damascus  passes  through  Ramleh.

The  chief  object  of  our  attention  was  the  tower  above  men-
tioned, which  is  situated  some  ten  minutes  west  of  the  town,  on
the  highest  part  of  the  swell  of  land.  It  stands  in  the  midst
of  the  ruins  of  a  large  quadrangular  enclosure,  which  has  much

'  Gen.  18,  4  "Let  a  little  water,  I  pray
you,  be  brought,  and  wash  your  feet."
19,  2.  Luke  7,  44.  Comp.  "l  Sam.  25,
41.   John  13,  .5.

-  Most  Frank  travellers  stop  at  this  con-
vent. As  such,  it  is  not  older  than  tlie
18th  century.  Before  that  time  th^re  was
here  only  a  liospitium  or  Khan  for  pilgrims,
purchased  or  built  by  Philip  the  Good,
duke  of  Burgundy  after  A.  D.  1420,  and
served  by  the  monks  of  tlie  Latin  convent
at  Jerusalem  ;  though  it  was  often  lel't  un-
tenanted. So  Gumpenbcrg,  Tucher,  Brey-
denbach,  and  Kabri,  Rcissb.  pp.  442,  057,
104,  240.    Quaresmius  IL  pp.  7,  8.  Co-

iii.  26.  27

tovic.  p.  142.  B.  de  Salignaco  found  it  de-
serted in  1522  ;  and  also  Sandys  in  ICIO;
de  Salign.  Tom.  VL  c.  3.  Sandys  p.  118.
So  late  as  1G97,  Morison  describes  it  as
"  un  hospice  passablement  bien  bati  et
commode ;  "  p.  543.  According  to  Korte,
the  present  building  was  erected  not  long
before  his  day,  i.  e.  in  the  early  part  of  the
18th  century;  Reifc  pp.  47,  48.  Comp.
Yon  Egmond  u  Hcynian  I.  p.  310. — The
monks  make  their  convent  occupy  the  site
of  the  house  of  Nicodenius.  Quaresmius  L
c.  etc.  etc.

'  Pococke  U.  i.  p.  4.  Prokssch  p.  88.

June  8.]

THE  TOWED.

231

the  appearance  of  having  been  once  a  splendid  Khttn  ;  indeed
the  arches  on  the  southern  and  eastern  sides  are  still  standing.
Under  the  middle  of  the  area,  or  perhaps  nearer  the  southern
side,  are  extensive  subterranean  vaults,  resting  on  arches  of  solid
masonry,  and  lighted  from  above.  These  are  of  good  workman-
ship, and  perfectly  dry  and  clean  ;  and  have  very  much  the
aspect  of  storehouses  or  magazines  for  the  deposit  of  the  mer-
chandise, which  might  once  have  passed  through  the  Khan.

The  tower  is  towards  the  northwest  part  of  the  enclosure  ;
and  is  at  present  wholly  isolated,  whatever  may  have  been  its
original  construction.  It  is  of  Saracenic  architecture,  square,
and  built  of  well  hewn  stone  ;  its  windows  are  of  various  forms,
but  all  with  pointed  arches.  The  corners  of  the  tower  are  support-
ed by  tall  slender  buttresses  ;  while  the  sides  taper  upwards  by
several  stories  to  the  top.  The  exterior  reminded  me  not  a  little
of  the  ancient  Eed  tower  in  Halle  ;  though  this  of  Ramleh  is
more  slender  and  graceful,  and  also  more  ornamented.  It  is
built  of  sohd  mason-work,  except  a  narrow  staircase  within,
winding  up  to  the  external  gallery.  This  latter  is  also  of  stone,
and  is  carried  quite  around  the  tower  a  few  feet  below  the  top.
We  judged  the  altitude  of  the  whole  tower  to  be  about  one  hun-
dred and  twenty  feet.'

From  the  top  of  this  tower  there  is  a  vdde  view  on  every  side,
presenting  a  prospect  rarely  surpassed  in  richness  and  beauty.
I  could  hken  it  to  nothing  but  the  great  plain  of  the  Rhine  by
Heidelberg  ;  or  better  still,  to  the  vast  plains  of  Lombardy,  as
seen  from  the  cathedral  of  Milan  and  elsewhere.  In  the  east,
the  frowning  mountains  of  Judah  rose  abruptly  from  the  tract
of  hills  at  their  foot  ;  while  on  the  west,  in  fine  contrast,  the
glittering  waves  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea  associated  our  thoughts
with  Europe  and  distant  friends.  Towards  the  north  and  south,
as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  the  beautiful  plain  was  spread  out
like  a  carpet  at  our  feet,  variegated  with  tracts  of  brown  from
which  the  crops  had  just  been  taken,  and  with  fields  still  rich
with  the  yellow  of  the  ripe  corn,  or  green  with  the  springing
millet.  Immediately  below  us,  the  eye  rested  on  the  immense
olive  groves  of  Ramleh  and  Lydda,  and  the  picturesque  towers  and
minarets  and  domes  of  these  large  villages.  In  the  plain  itself
were  not  many  villages  ;  but  the  tract  of  hills  and  the  mountain
side  beyond,  especially  in  the  northeast,  appeared  as  if  studded
with  them  ;  and  as  now  seen  in  the  reflected  beams  of  the  setting
sun,  they  seemed  hke  white  villas  and  hamlets  among  the  dark

'  Prokesch  says,  there  are  128  steps  of    to  each  step  cannot  he  relied  on  as  exact,
nine  inches  each ;  which  together  with  the    Raise,  p  39.    Scholz  gives  the  number  of
basement  and  the  part  above  the  gallery,    steps  at  125  ;  Reise  p.  148.    Von  Egmond
would  not  differ  materially  from  our  esti     and  Heyman  at  122  ;  Reizen  I.  p.  312.
mate.    But  the  specification  of  nine  inches

iii.  27-29

232

ER-RAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xm.

hills  ;  presenting  an  appearance  of  thriftiness  and  beauty,  wldch
certainly  would  not  stand  a  closer  examination.

We  here  obtained  a  large  number  of  bearings,  and  might
have  taken  many  more.  Our  young  host  was  well  acquainted
with  the  region  around  ;  but  he  was  now  so  taken  up  with  ex-
amining distant  objects  through  our  telescopes,  that  he  did  not
always  stop  to  look  at  a  place  before  he  told  its  name.  For  this
reason,  there  may  be  doubt  as  to  the  accuracy  of  some  of  the
names  of  places  which  we  wrote  down,  especially  of  the  minor
and  remoter  ones  ;  though  in  general  they  are  correct.  We
wished  much  to  find  the  direction  of  Yafa  ;  which  lies  three
hours  distant,  somewhere  towards  the  N.  N.  W.  But  we  were
not  able  to  arrive  at  any  certainty  respecting  it ;  as  nothing  was
here  visible  to  mark  its  site.  Through  one  of  the  gaps,  between
the  peaks  of  the  eastern  mountains,  we  could  distinguish  what
we  held  to  be  the  high  point  and  mosk  of  Neby  Samwil,  with
which  we  were  already  well  acquainted  ;  and  in  the  south
several  known  places  were  visible,  serving  to  connect  our  former
routes  with  Kamleh.*

Of  the  places  recorded  in  the  note,  Beit  Dejan  and  el-
Mejdel  are  at  least  ancient  names  f  and  Beit  Nebala  is  perhaps
a  scriptural  one.'  Besides  these,  Jimzu  and  Yalo  are  likewise
ancient  ;  and  we  saw  them  more  fully  on  our  way  to  Jerusalem.
Kubab,  or  as  it  is  likewise  called,  Beit  Kubab,  and  also  Latron,*
are  on  the  direct  road  to  the  latter  city  ;  the  former  on  one  of
the  first  hills  two  hours  from  Kamleh  ;  and  the  latter  an  hour
beyond  at  the  foot  of  Wady  'Aly,  through  which  the  road  as-
cends, though  still  an  hour  from  the  "  Gate  of  the  valley,"  as  it
is  called.  'Amwas,  the  ancient  Emmaus  or  Nicopolis,  we  coidd
not  make  out  ;  it  was  said  to  be  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  north  of
Latron  towards  Yalo.'

We  lingered  upon  the  tower  until  near  sunset,  enjoying  the

'  The  following  are  the  bearings  from  Judah  further  south,  Josh.  15,  41 ;  and  an-

the  tower  of  Ramleh,  beginning  in  the  N.  other  in  the  tribe  of  Asher,  Josh.  19,  27.

W.  and  proceeding  towards  the  right :  Beit  Ensebins  and  Jerome  however  place  a  large

Dejan  H  hour  distant  N.  5°  W.    Safiriyeh  village  called  Caphar  Dagon  (Arabic  Kefr

N.  11"  E.    el-Mejdel  N.  35°  E.    el-Mu-  Dejan)  in  the  region  between  Diospolis  and

zeiri'ah  N.  40' E.    Kuleh  N.  46°  E.    Deir  Jamnia;  of  which  perhaps  this  name  and

Tureif  N.  53°  E.    Ludd  N.  57°  E.    Beit  place  are  the   remains.     Ononiast.  art.

Nebala  N.  64°  E.    Deir  Abu  Mesh'al  N.  Beth  Da^'in. — The  form  el-Mejdel  is  the

68"  E.    Na'lin  N.  76°  E.    Budrus  N.  80°  Heb.  Migdol,  Greek  Magdala ;  but  Scrip-

E.    Daniyal  E.    Ras  Kerker  S.  86°  E.  ture  mentions  no  place  of  that  name  in

Jhnzu  S.  82°  E.    Neby  Samwil  S.  66°  E.  these  parts.

'Anabeh  S.  65°  E.    Yalo  S.  55°  E.    el-  '  Is  this  perhaps  the  Neballat  of  Neh.

Kubab  S.  54°  E.   LStron  S.  46'  E.   Kliei-  11,  34,  mentioned  along  with  Lod  or  Lydda?

shum  S.  15°  E.    Tell  Zakariya  S.  9°  E.  *  For  Latron  see  in  Vol.  III.  Sect.  Ill,

'  The  form  Beit  Dejan  is  obviously  the  under  April  27th,  1852.

Hebrew  Beth-Dagon ;  but  no  place  of  that  '  For  'Amwas,  see  the  reference  in  the

name  occurs  in  Scripture  in  this  region,  preceding  note.
There  was  a  Both-Dagon  in  the  plain  of
iiL  29-31

THE  TOWER.  HOSPITALITY.

233

surpassing  beauty,  in  which  the  mountains  of  Judah  and  the
plain  of  Sharon  revealed  themselves  before  us.  Returning  to
the  house  of  our  friends,  we  found  their  hospitality  meantime
had  not  been  dormant ;  a  dinner  of  many  dishes  was  awaiting
us,  the  most  abundant  indeed  which  we  anywhere  met  with  in
Palestine.  'Abild  Murkus  himself  returned  about  9  o'clock  ;
bringing  word  that  the  plague  had  now  disappeared  in  Yafa,
and  that  the  town  (which  like  Jerusalem  had  been  long  shut
up)  was  to  be  open  on  Sunday. '  Several  neighbours  came  in  to
learn  the  news  ;  and  carpets  and  mats  were  spread  for  the  com-
pany in  the  open  air  on  the  flat  roof,  adjacent  to  the  room  we
occupied.  Here  we  revelled  in  the  delightful  coolness  of  the
evening,  after  the  sultry  heat  of  the  day.

The  household  establishment  of  our  host  was  large,  and  very
respectable  in  its  appointments.  Of  the  many  females  it  con-
tained, we  saw  none  except  the  mother  of  the  family,  who
welcomed  us  at  our  entrance,  and  the  Nubian  slave  who  washed
our  feet.  Indeed,  although  Christians,  the  customs  of  oriental
life  seemed  to  prevail  here  in  some  force,  and  the  females  were
sedulously  kept  out  of  view.  Whenever  we  passed  down  stairs
from  our  upper  room,  word  was  given  below,  in  order  that  they
might  get  out  of  the  way.  The  eldest  son  was  married,  and  his
wife  lived  as  a  daughter  in  the  family.  This  indeed  is  the  usual
custom,  the  remains  of  ancient  patriarchal  usage  ;  and  it  is  not
unfrequent,  that  parents  thus  see  several  children  and  many
grandchildren  clustering  around  them,  and  their  household  in-
creasing so  as  to  include  what,  in  other  circumstances,  would
form  six  or  eight  families.  For  this  reason,  any  estimate  of  the
population  of  a  place  in  Palestine  from  the  number  of  house-
holds, must  rest  upon  no  solid  foundation.

It  was  near  11  o'clock  before  the  company  separated,  so  that
we  could  lay  ourselves  down  to  rest  ;  although  we  were  exces-
sively fatigued  from  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day.  During
the  evening,  we  sent  off  Komeh  and  one  Mukary  with  the  tent
and  luggage  to  Jerusalem,  by  the  direct  road  over  Kuryet  el-
'Enab  ;  in  order  that  the  tent  might  be  ready  to  receive  Mr
Lanneau  and  our  companion,  whose  quarantine  would  expire  in
the  morning.  We  ourselves  concluded  to  take  the  great  ancient
road  over  Lydda  and  Beth-horon  ;  intending  also  to  set  off  very
early,  as  there  was  a  prospect  of  another  sultry  day.  Our  ser-
vants, as  being  Muhammedans,  were  not  permitted  to  enter  the
house,  except  at  our  express  call ;  and  it  was  with  some  difficul-

•  We  learned  nothing  more  of  Yafa,  ex-  Greeks,  Greek  Catholics,  Armenians,  and

cept  what  Mas  often  been  told.    The  pop-  a  few  Latins.     The  mean  geographical

ulation,  as  we  heard  from  several  quarters,  position  of  Yafa  is  Lat.  32°  03'  06"  N.  and

is  estimated  at  ahout  7000  souls ;  of  whom  Long.  34°  44'  24"  E.  from  Greemvich.  See

nearly  one  half  are  Christians,  including  Berghaus'  Memoir  p.  26.

Vol.  II.— 20*  ui.  31.  32

234

ER-RAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xin.

ty,  that  we  obtained  permission  for  Ibraliim  to  sleep  before  our
door,  in  order  that  he  might  be  at  hand  in  the  morning.

We  would  gladly  ourselves  have  slept  upon  the  roof  beneath
the  open  sky,  in  preference  to  the  close  air  of  any  room  ;  but
this  privileged  spot  was  already  in  the  possession  of  others.
Beds  were  spread  for  us  in  our  upper  room,  consisting  of  thick
quilts  underneath,  and  another  quilt  of  silk  in  which  to  wrap
ourselves.  But  the  night  beneath  a  roof  was  hot ;  and  the  house
like  all  others  in  Palestine  not  free  from  fleas  ;  so  that  I  did
nothing  but  toss  about  in  feverish  half  slumber  aU  night.  Here
my  companion's  long  experience  in  similar  oriental  annoyances,
gave  him  the  advantage  ;  and  his  rest  was  more  tranquil  than
mine.  I  several  times  rose  and  looked  out  through  the  lattices,
as  the  bright  moonlight  fell  upon  the  group  of  sleepers  on  the
roof,  and  envied  their  lot.

Let  us  now  look  out  for  a  moment  at  the  historical  questions
connected  with  er-Kamleh.

The  name  er-Ramleh'  signifies  "  the  Sand  ; "  and  the  place
is  first  mentioned  under  this  name  by  the  monk  Bernard,  about
A.  D.  870.'^  Adamnanus,  about  A.  D.  697,  makes  no  allusion
to  it ;  although  he  speaks  of  the  memorials  of  St.  George  at
Lydda.'  All  this  tallies  well  with  the  account  of  Abulfeda,
drawn  from  earlier  Arabian  writers,  that  Eamleh  is  not  an  an-
cient city,  but  was  founded  by  Suleiman,  son  of  the  Khalif  'Abd
el-Melek,  in  the  early  part  of  the  eighth  century,  after  he  had
destroyed  Ludd.  A  palace  of  'Abd  el-Melek  had  already  occu-
pied the  spot.*  "William  of  Tyre  and  Marinus  Sanutus  give
the  same  testimony.^  The  place  soon  became  flourishing,  and  is
celebrated  by  Araloian  writers.*  Edrisi  about  A.  D.  1150,  calls
Eamleh  and  Jerusalem  the  two  principal  cities  of  Palestine  ;
and  describes  the  former  as  pleasant  and  well  peopled,  with
markets  and  commerce  and  revenue.''  Before  the  time  of  the
crusades,  it  was  surrounded  by  a  waU  with  a  castle  and  twelve

*  We  adopt  the  form  er-Ramleh  as  being  la  civitas — quam  post  tempora  seductoris
already  common.  Written  strictly  accord-  Mahumeth,  ejus  successores  Arabum  princi-
ing  to  our  system  of  orthography,  it  would  pes,  veteres  tradunt  historiae,  fnndasse."
he  er-tiu7nleh.  Marin.  Sanut.  p.  152,  "Hanc  civitatem

'  Beniardus  de  Loc.  Sanct.  10,  "  Dein-  xdificaverunt  Arabes  prope  Lyddam,  quum

de  veneraut  Alarixa  (el-'Arish) ;  de  Ala-  percgriui  prinio  iverunt  ad  partes  illas  post

rixa  in  lianiula,  juxta  quam  est  monaste-  tempora  Mahumeti."

rium  bcati  Goorgii  Martyris."  "  Some  place  here  the  tomb  of  Lokmao

'  Ad;imnaims     4.  p.  521.  ed.  Mabillon.  the  Wise;  see  d'Hcrbelot  Bihlioth.  Ori-

*  Abulfeda;  Tab.  Syr.  cd.  Kiihler  p.  79.  ent.  art.  Ramlah.

'Abd  cl-Melek  and  bis  two  sons  cl-VVclid  '  Edrisi  par  Jaubert,  p.  339.  Abulfeda

and  Suleiinan,  held  the  throne  i'rom  A.  D.  1.  c.   Mejr  ed-Din  in  Fundgr.  des  Orients

705  to  720.  II.  p.  135.
'  Will.  Tyr.  lO.  17,  "Est  autem  Uamu-

iii.  o2-34

Junk  8.]

HISTORICAL  NOTICES.

235

gates  ;  and  with  each  of  the  four  princij)al  gates,  towards  Ydfa,
Askelon,  Jerusalem,  and  Nabulus,  there  were  connected  markets
and  a  mosL'

The  crusaders  in  A.  D.  1099,  on  their  march  from  Antioch
to  Jerusalem,  having  celebrated  the  day  of  Pentecost  at  Cfesarea,
directed  their  course  to  Lydda,  where  they  found  the  splendid
tomb  and  church  of  St.  George.  Count  Robert  of  Flanders,
with  five  hundred  knights,  was  sent  forward  to  reconnoitre  the
neighbouring  Ramleh  ;  and  foxmd  the  gates  open  and  the  city
deserted  of  inhabitants.  The  host  of  crusaders  followed,  and
took  up  their  quarters  in  Ramleh  for  three  days,  recruiting
themselves  with  the  abundance  of  provisions,  which  the  inhabi-
tants had  left  beliind  in  their  flight,  flere  they  celebrated  a  fes-
tival to  St.  George,  who  had  already  aided  them  in  the  battle
near  Antioch  ;  and  with  due  formality  installed  him  as  their
patron  saint.  His  tomb  at  Lydda  was  made  the  seat  of  the
first  Latin  bishopric  in  Palestine  ;  and  Robert,  a  priest  from
Rouen  in  Normandy,  was  on  the  spot  appointed  bishop,  and
received  tithes  from  the  pilgrims.  The  new  see  was  endowed
with  the  cities  of  Ramleh  and  Lydda,  and  the  lands  belonging  to
them.  On  the  fourth  day  the  army  proceeded  towards  Jerusalem.*

From  its  position  between  Jerusalem  and  the  coast,  Ramleh
formed  an  important  post  for  the  crusaders  ;  and  continued  gen-
erally in  their  hands  while  they  held  possession  of  the  Holy  City,
and  long  afterwards.  About  A.  D.  1177  the  place  was  burned
by  the  renegade  Ivelin.^  In  A.  D.  1178  Saladin  was  totally
defeated  in  the  vicinity  by  the  Chiistians  under  king  Baldwin
IV ;  but  in  1187,  after  the  decisive  battle  of  Hattin,  the  whole
plain,  with  Yafa,  Askelon,  and  also  Jerusalem,  fell  into  his
hands.*  On  the  approach  of  Richard  of  England  in  A.  D.  1191,
Saladin  caused  the  fortifications  of  Askelon  to  be  dismantled  ;
and  the  fortress  of  Ramleh  and  the  church  of  Lydda,  as  well  as
other  castles  in  the  plain,  to  be  razed.''  In  the  truce  made  be-
tween Richard  and  Saladin  in  the  following  year,  it  was  stipu-

'  Mejr  ed-Din  1.  c.  p.  136.

'  See  in  the  Gesta  Dei :  Rob.  Monach.  p.
73.  Baldric,  p.  130.  Raimund  de  Ag.  p.
173.  Fulch.  Cam.  p.  8!)6.  Will.  Tyr.
7.  22.  Also  Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  I.  p.
268. — The  homage  paid  to  St.  George  by
the  crusaders,  probably  led  to  his  greater
renown  in  Europe,  where  he  was  adopted
as  the  patron  saint  of  England  and  several
other  countries.  In  consequence  of  the
vicinity  of  Ramleh  and  Lydda,  the  two
have  been  sometimes  confounded  ;  and  the
church  and  story  of  St.  George  placed  at
the  former  ;  so  Phocas  de  Loc.  Sanct.  29.
Anna  Comnena  in  Alexiade  hb.  XI.  p.  328.

Willebr.  ab  Oldenb.  in  L.  Allat.  Symmikta,
Col.  Agr.  1653.  p.  145.  Acta  Sanctor.  Apr.
Tom.  III.  p.  142.  Schweigger  in  Reissb.
II.  p.  113.  Comp.  Reland  Patest.  p.  960.
'  Will.  Tvr.  21.  21.

*  Will.  Tyr.  21.  23,  24.  Bohaedd.
Vit.  Salad,  p.  46.  Abnlfed.  Annal.  A.  H.
573.  Wilken  1.  c.  III.  ii.  p.  186.— Bo-
haedd. 1.  c.  p.  72.    Abulfed.  1.  c.  A.  H.

583.

Bohaedd.  p.  202.  Abulfed.  Ann.  A.
H.  587.  Reinaud  Extraits  p.  331.  Mejr
ed-Din  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.  p.  136.
Gaufr.  Vinisauf  p.  362.  Wilken  Gesch.
der  Kreuzz.  IV.  p.  426.

iii.  34.  35

236

ER-RAMLEH.

[Sec.  Xm.

lated,  that  the  plain  and  coast  from  Tyre  to  Yafa,  including  the
half  of  Eamleh  and  Lydda,  should  remain  in  the  hands  of  the
Christians.'  In  A.  D.  1204  Eamleh  was  wholly  given  up  to
them,  and  appears  to  have  continued  chiefly  in  their  posses-
sion until  A.  D.  1266,  when  it  was  finally  taken  from  them  by
the  Sultan  Bibars.*  In  the  subsequent  centuries,  it  is  often
mentioned  as  the  resting  place  of  pilgrims  and  travellers,  on
their  way  between  Yafa  and  Jerusalem.'  About  1547  Belon
found  it  almost  deserted  ;  scarcely  twelve  houses  being  inhabited,
and  the  fields  mostly  untilled.''

With  the  history  of  Muhammedan  Eamleh,  the  tower  above
described  on  the  west  of  the  town,  stands  in  close  connection.
This  structure  has  long  been  a  stone  of  stumbling  to  travellers  ;
who  have  mostly  been  content  to  follow,  in  this  case,  as  in  so
many  others,  an  indefinite  monastic  tradition.  In  aU  Frank
writers,  down  to  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  I  find  no
allusion  to  the  spot.  At  that  time,  about  A.  D.  1555,  Bonifa-
cius  of  Eagusa  speaks  of  it  as  the  site  of  a  former  Christian
church,  dedicated  to  the  Forty  Martyrs  of  Sebaste  in  Armenia  ;
this  is  repeated  by  Zuallart  and  Cotovicus,  cited  with  approba-
tion by  Quaresmius,  and  followed  by  most  other  travellers.^  In
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  we  begin  to  find  it
regarded  as  one  of  Helena's  churches."  In  the  present  century,
it  has  become  fashionable  to  refer  these  ruins  to  the  time  of  the
crusades,  as  having  been  a  convent  and  church  erected  by  the
knights  Templars,  and  dedicated  to  the  Forty  Martyrs.^  The
tower  in  question  has  usually  been  held  to  have  belonged,  as  a
belfry,  to  the  ancient  church.'

'  Bohaedd.  pp.  258,  259.    Reinand.  Ex-  building ;  p.  39.  Scholz  ascribes  only  d»-

traits  p.  356.     Ganfr.  Vinisanf  p.  422.  terns  to  Helena ;  p.  148.

Abulfed.  Annal.  A.  H.  588.  Wilken  FV'.  p.  '  This  report,  current  apparently  among

569.  the  monks,  seems  to  be  first  mentioned  in

^  Abulledre  Ann.  A.  H.  601.    Reinaud  Turner's  Tour  in  the  Levant,  1815,  Tom.

Extraits  p.  498.    Wilken  VII.  p.  493.  II.  p.  282.    Scholz  gives  the  same  account

'  See  for  the  hospitium  and  convent,  p.  quite  circumstantially,  p.  148 ;  and  is  fol-

230,  n.  2,  above.  lowed  by  Prokesch,  p.  39  ;  Monro,  I.  p.

*  Observat.  p.  140.    Panlus  Samml.  I.  94  ;  Salzbacher,  II.  p.  24.  The  latter  tra-

p.  256.  veller  has  the  merit  of  uniting  the  two

'  Bonif.  de  perenn.  Cultu  Terras  Saiict.  conjectural  traditions ;  making  Helena  first

lib.  II.    Quaresmius  II.  p.  7,  8.    Zuallart  build  tlie  church,  and  the  Templars  repair

p.  112.    Cotovicus  p.  141.    So  Monconys  it. — According  to  Michaud,  the  remains

I.  p.  293.    Doubdan  p.  488.    Pococke  II.  of  several  tombs  of  Christian  knights  are

i.  p.  4.    Chateaubriand  I.  p.  419.  Par.  found  here  ;  but  I  cannot  learn  that  this

1837,  etc.  etc.  account  rests  on  any  better  authority  than

"  This  is  probably  a  mere  hypothesis  of  Surius  in  1645,  who  affirms  the  same  thing,
the  monks  ;  I  find  it  first  mentioned  by  No  other  traveller  .speaks  of  any  such  re-
Van  Egmond  and  Heyman,  I.  p.  311  ;  and  mains,  nor  did  we  see  or  hearof  any.  Surius
then  again  only  very  recently  by  Salz-  Pelerin  p.  358.  Corr.  d'Orieut  IV.  p.  1 76.
bacher  in  1 838  ;  II.  p.  24.  Prokesch  in-  »  Monconys  I.  p.  299.  Von  Troilo
deed  speaks  of  a  church  of  Helena  in  Reisebeschr.  p.  85.  Morison,  p.  544.  Cha-
Ramleh,  but  ."erms  to  mean  some  other  teaub.  Itin.  I.  p.  419.

iii.  35-37

JniK  8.]

HISTORY  OF  THE  TOWER.

237

That  Christian  churches  existed  at  Ramleh  before  the  age
of  the  crusades,  we  know  from  the  testimony  of  Eutychius,
patriarch  of  Alexandria.  He  relates,  that  during  the  reign  of
the  Egyptian  Khalif  el-Muktadir,  early  in  the  tenth  centurj-,  the
Muslims  rose  in  tumult  and  destroyed  the  churches  of  St.  Cos-
mas  and  St.  Cyriacus  in  Eamleh,  and  others  in  Askelon  and  Csesa-
rea ;  which,  on  complaint  to  the  Khalif,  he  ordered  to  be
rebuilt  '  That  during  the  long  possession  of  the  city  by  the
Frank  Christians,  other  churches  and  also  convents  were  erected,
is  highly  probable  ;  though  I  have  been  able  to  find  no  histori-
cal trace  of  it  whatever.  The  first  Christian  notice  of  the  tower
and  surrounding  quadrangle,  as  we  have  above  seen,  is  from  the
sixteenth  centur}-  ;  and  the  first  reference  of  it  to  the  Templars
occurs  in  the  nineteenth.  Yet  there  seems  to  be  no  evidence,
that  the  Templars  ever  had  an  establishment  at  Eamlch  ;  it  is
found  in  no  list  of  their  possessions  ;  although  their  houses  at
Yafa  and  G-aza  and  elsewhere  in  the  vicinity,  are  enumerated  ;
and  an  establishment  so  large  as  this  obviously  once  was,  could
not  well  have  been  passed  over,  had  it  made  part  of  their  pos-
sessions.^ Thus  there  is  no  historical  evidence,  that  the  spot  in
question  was  ever  occupied  by  a  Christian  church  at  all ;  and
also  no  traditional  evidence,  reaching  further  back  than  the  six-
teenth century.

On  the  other  hand  there  is  decisive  evidence,  both  historical
and  architectural,  of  the  Muhammedan  origin  of  the  whole
structure,  as  it  at  present  exists.  The  remaining  arches  of  the
quadrangle  are  obviously  Saracenic  ;  and  the  tower  itself  was  no
less  obviously  erected  as  a  minaret  ;  although  the  form  and  style
are  peculiar.  It  is  solid  within,  except  the  staircase  ;  has  the
usual  external  gallery  above  ;  and  has  neither  place  for  a  bell,
nor  any  thing  else  in  common  with  the  tower  of  a  church.
Further,  an  Arabic  inscription  over  the  door,  which  we  read,
bears  the  date  of  A.  H.  710,  corresponding  to  A.  D.  1310 ;
showing  the  time  when  the  tower  was  commenced.  This  is
further  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  Mejr  ed-Din,  the  author
of  a  valuable  Arabic  history  of  Jerusalem  and  several  other
towns,  written  in  A.  D.  1495.  He  relates,  that  the  Khalif
Na.sir  Muhammed  Ibn  Kalawun,  (who  was  restored  to  the
throne  of  Egypt  in  A.  D.  1310,)  built  here  a  miaaret,  unique
for  its  loftiness  and  elegance,  which  was  finished  in  A.  H.  718.
This  allows  eight  years  for  the  completion  of  the  work.^

'  Entyohii  .Uinales  IL  pp.  512,  513.  '  Mejr  ed-Din  in  Fundgr.  des  Orients

Oxon,  lf;.58.  n.  p.  1.36. — Volney  mentions  the  inscrip-

'  See  a  list  of  the  establishnients  of  the  tion  over  the  door,  as  recording  that  this

Templars  in  the  province  of  Jemsalem,  in  tower  was  built  by  Self  ed-D^n  ;  Voyage

MOnter'sStatutenbucb  des  Orrlensder  Tern-  IL  p.  308.    If  this  name  actually  stands

pelherrn,  I.  pp.  418,  41'J.    Berl.  1794.  in  the  inscription,  it  is  probably  in  con-

iii.  i'7j  38

238

ER-RAMLEH,

[Sec.  Xm.

The  same  writer  informs  us,  that  the  ancient  mosk,  with
which  this  minaret  was  connected,  was  situated  outside  of  the
town,  and  surrounded  by  many  tombs.  In  his  day  it  was  known
as  the  White  mosk  ;  though  little  of  the  ancient  structure  re-
mained. It  had  been  built  originally  by  Suleiman,  son  of  'Abd
el-Melek,  the  founder  of  Ramleh,  on  liis  accession  to  the  Khali-
fate  in  A.  D.  717  ;  and  was  renewed  during  the  reign  of  Saladin
by  a  person  of  his  court  in  A.  D.  1190,  a  year  before  the  dis-
mantling of  Ramleh  by  that  Sultan.'  Another  Arabian  writer,
el-KhCilil  Ibn  Shahin  edh-Dhaliiry,  about  A.  D.  1450,  speaks  of
the  same  White  mosk  at  Ramleh  as  particularly  worthy  of
admiration  ;  and  mentions  also  its  subterranean  crypts,  in  which
forty  companions  of  the  prophet  were  said  to  be  interred.*
There  is  probably  some  connection  between  this  legend  and  that
of  the  forty  Christian  martyrs,  whom  the  Latins  hold  to  be
buried  here  ;  but  which  of  the  two  is  the  original,  it  may  be
difficult  to  determine.

I  have  above  remarked,  that  the  remains  of  the  quadrangle
have  much  the  appearance  of  a  large  and  splendid  Khan,  while
the  crypts  resemble  subterranean  magazines  ;  and  such  a  Khan
would  here  be  entirely  in  its  place,  on  the  great  caravan  road
between  Egypt  and  Damascus.  Yet  we  have  no  historical  or  tra-
ditional evidence  to  any  such  fact.  If  then,  as  Arabian  writers
seem  to  represent,  the  whole  was  once  a  mosk,  this  quadrangle
probably  formed  an  enclosure,  similar  to  that  of  the  Haram  esh-
Sherif  at  Jerusalem,  surrounding  a  court  in  which  the  mosk  or
mosks  were  erected.  The  chambers  along  the  walls  of  the  quad-
rangle, may  then  have  served  for  the  attendants  of  the  mosks,
and  for  Derwishes,  as  is  stiU  the  case  at  J erusalem.  The  mosks
themselves  have  disappeared  ;  perhaps  the  materials  have  been
employed  for  the  erection  of  other  buildings  in  the  town  itself
Scholz  relates,  that  there  are  inscriptions,  importing  that  the
Muslims  after  the  crusades  bmlt  three  mosks  within  this  quad-
rangle ;  a  large  one  on  the  north,  and  two  smaller  ones  on  the
southern  side,  with  two  saint's  chapels  in  the  middle.  This
would  be  much  like  the  present  arrangement  of  the  Haram  at
Jerusalem  ;  but  our  attention  was  not  called  to  the  subject  at
the  time  ;  and  I  regret  that  tliese  inscriptions  escaped  our
notice.^  IVIejr  ed-Din  certifies  also  to  the  building  of  mosks  at
Ramleh,  in  the  time  of  the  Khalif  Nasir  Muhammed  above

nection  with  the  mention  of  Kalawun,  the  '  See  Extracts  from   cdh-Dhahiry  in

father  of  NJsir,  who  bore  that  appellation,  Rosenmiillcr's  Analecta  Arabioa,  Pars  III.

and  died  A.  II.  (!89,  twenty  years  before  p.  18  of  the  Arabic;  pp.  ^7,  38,  Lat.

the  building  of  the  tower. — For  the  views  '  Scholz  Kcise  etc.  p.  148.    There  may

of  some  later  travellers,  see  Ritter  Erdk.  perhaps  he  some  doubt  as  to  the  int«rpre-

XVI.  p.  ")8.'>  sq.                         ■  tation,  if  not  as  to  the  existence  of  these

'  Mejr  ed-I)in.  1.  c.  pp.  136,  137.  inscriptions.

iii.  38-40

Jose  8.]

NOT  RAMAH.

239

mentioned  ;  which,  in  the  writer's  day,  like  the  rest  of  the  place,
were  in  ruins.'

We  may  now  inquire,  whether  there  is  any  evidence  to  con-
nect the  present  Ramleh  v/ith  an  ancient  Ramah  ;  either  the
Eamathaim-Zophim  of  Samuel,  or  the  Arimathea  of  the  New
Testament  ?  Since  the  time  of  the  crusades,  such  a  connection
has  heen  generally  assumed,  chiefly  upon  the  strength  of  a  sup-
posed identity  or  resemblance  of  the  two  names,  supported  by
the  ancient  mention  of  a  Ramah  or  Ramathem  in  the  vicinity.

That  a  place  palled  Ramathem  or  Ramatha  did  anciently
exist  in  this  region,  somewhere  not  far  distant  from  Lydda,
admits  of  little  question.  In  the  letter  of  Demetrius  Nicator  to
Lasthenes,  preserved  in  the  first  book  of  Maccabees  and  by  Jose-
phus,  he  speaks  expressly  of  three  distiicts,  Apherima,  Lydd^
and  Ramathem,  which  had  been  annexed  to  Judea  from  Sama-
ria.'^ Further,  both  Eusebius  and  Jerome  mentiqp  an  Armatha
Sophim  in  the  Tamnitic  region  near  to  Lydda,  and  regard  it  as
the  city  of  Samuel  and  the  Arimathea  of  the  New  Testament.'
This  testimony  is  decisive,  as  to  the  existence  of  a  place  and
district  called  Ramathem,^  not  far  from  Lydda,  and  within  the
region  or  toparchy  of  Thamna.

But  does  this  evidence  go  to  show  any  connection  between
this  Ramathem  and  the  modern  Ramleh  In  itself  it  certainly
does  not ;  and  after  having  had  the  subject  long  before  my  mind,
I  am  constrained  to  admit,  that  the  balance  of  probabilities
seems  to  be  against  the  identity  of  the  two.

First,  the  two  names  Ramah  (Ramathem)  and  Ramleh,
instead  of  being  identical  or  even  kindred,  are  totally  diverse
both  in  etymology  and  meaning.  Ramleh  signifies  "  sand,"  and
is  thus  appropriately  applied  to  the  town  as  situated  in  a  sandy
plain  while  Ramah  is  "  a  height,  hill,"  and  is  therefore  here
wholly  inapplicable.    The  names  too  come  from  different  roots,

'  Fundgr.  de!5  Or.  II.  p.  136.  sepelivit ;  et  Nobe  urbem  quondam  sacer-

"  Kal  Toiis  Tpcij  v6}ioui,  'A2.    Brocardus,  c.  10.  p.  186.  Comp.

♦  Josh.  19,  45.  Reland  Palajst.  pp.  569,  570.— Ar.^i.f,  so

'  .loseph.  Ant.  16.  5.  2,  Ka  of  the  mountain,  he  descended  directly  by  a  path  which
took  him  some  distance  north  of  Latron,  though  that  place  was
in  sight,  and  so  to  Ramleh.^  This  however  could  not  have  been
a  much  travelled  road.

From  the  time  of  Jerome,  nothing  more  appears  of  Beth-
horon  until  the  present  century.  The  crusaders  seem  not  to
have  recognised  the  name,  or  at  least  do  not  mention  it.  Bro-
cardus  and  Marinus  Sanutus  indeed  speak  of  the  lower  town  ;
but  apparently  only  with  reference  to  scriptural  authority,  and
not  as  eye  or  ear  witnesses.'  The  long  line  of  pilgrim  travellers
since  the  crusades,  have  almost  uniformly  taken  the  direct  route
between  Ramleh  and  Jerusalem,  and  have  heard  nothing  of
Beth-horon.  In  A.  D.  1801,  by  some  chance,  Dr  Clarke  wan-
dered hither  from  Kuryet  el-'Enab,  and  recognised  the  ancient
appellation  in  the  present  name  Beit  U'r.^    Since  then  it  ap-

'  The  most  direct  intimation  of  sucli  a  places,  as  she  had  already  done  in  passing
road,  is  perhaps  the  notice  of  Eusebius  fVoin  Cajsarea  to  Nicopolis,  travelling  in
and  Jerome,  that  Kirjath-jcarim  lay  nine  vnrious  directions  in  the  plain.  It  is  hard-
miles  from  JElia.  on  the  way  to  Diospolis.  ly  t()  be  supposed,  that  there  shonlJ  not
If  Kirjath-jearim  was  the  same  with  the  have  existed  a  direct  way  between  Nicopolis
present  Kuryet  cl-'lCnab,  this  notice  would  and  Jerusalem,  as  now ;  though  the  easier
be  decisive.  Onomast.  art.  Carialhiarim.  road  may  still  have  been  by  Beth-horon.
— At  any  rate,  the  fact  that  Jerome  makes  "  Descript.  of  the  East,  II.  i.  p.  50 ;
Paula  travel  from  Nicopolis  to  Jerusalem  comp.  p.  6.

by  way  of  Beth-horon,  (see  Text  above,)       ^  Brocard.  c.  9.  p.  184.    Marin.  Sanut.

is  of  no  weight  to  prove  that  the  direct  p.  240.

road  did  not  then  exist ;  she  took  the       ■*  Clarke's  Travels,  etc.  Pt.  XL  Vol.  L

longer  route  in  order  to  visit  remarkable  p.  628  sq.  4to.
iu.  60-62

Jmre  9.]

BETH-HORON.  AIJALOK.

253

pears  not  to  have  been  visited  again,  until  some  of  our  friends
took  it  in  their  way  from  Yafa  to  Jerusalem,  a  few  days  before
we  set  off  on  this  excursion.'

The  inhabitants  of  Beit  'Ur  seemed  to  be  mostly  absent,
probably  in  the  fields  or  the  plain,  at  work  during  the  harvest.
We  found  several  women,  and  at  length  also  one  active  old  man
drawing  water  at  a  neighbouring  well.  He  led  us  to  the  roof  of
a  house,  where  we  had  a  wide  and  very  distinct  view  of  the
count r)'  around  Beth-horon  and  towards  the  sea,  with  all  of-
which  he  seemed  well  acquainted.  The  prospect  included  the
hill  country  and  the  plain,  as  far  on  the  right  and  left  as  the  eye
could  reach.  The  prominent  towns  were  Eamleh  and  Lydda  ;
we  could  not  make  out  Yafa.  Towards  the  north  were  several
places,  which  we  had  formerly  seen  from  Ram-AUah  ;  particu-
larly Ras  Kerker,  a  castle  among  the  hills. Between  us  and
Ramleh  we  looked  down  upon  a  broad  and  beautiful  valley  at
our  feet,  formed  by  the  junction  of  Wady  Suleiman,  the  Wa-
dys  on  the  north  and  south  of  Beit  'Ur,  and  others.  This
valley,  or  rather  plain,  runs  out  W.  by  N.  quite  through  the
tract  of  hills,  and  then  bends  off  towards  the  great  western
plain.  It  is  called  Merj  Ibn  'Omeir  ;  and  we  thought  we  per-
ceived its  further  course  to  be  on  the  right  of  the  hills  on  which
Khulda  stands.  This  however  was  an  enor  ;  for  this  Merj  is
drained  by  the  Wady  'Atulla,  which  passes  down  just  north  of
el-Kubab  and  Lydda.  ^

The  interest  of  this  fine  plain  or  valley  is  enhanced,  by  its
probable  connection  with  a  remarkable  event  of  biblical  history.
Upon  the  side  of  the  long  hill  wliich  skirts  the  valley  on  the  south,
we  could  perceive  a  small  village  in  the  W.  S.  W.  called  Yalo,
which  name  cannot  well  be  any  other  than  the  ancient  Aijalon,
the  ancient  city  of  that  name  in  the  tribe  of  Dan.*  We  find
that  city  coupled  with  Beth-shemesh  and  Zorah  and  Socoh  and
Ekron  which  might  seem  to  imply  that  it  lay  much  further
south  ;  but  it  is  at  the  same  time  in  like  manner  coupled  with
Gimzo,  which  we  had  passed  to-day.'  Jerome  informs  us,  that
the  Hebrews  of  his  day  placed  Aijalon  about  two  Roman  miles
from  Nicopolis,  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  if  this  be  reckoned
on  the  road  by  Beth-horon,  it  would  correspond  well  to  the
position  of  Yalo.^  Eusebius  assigns  the  Aijalon  of  Dan  to  the
same  vicinity.'     There  can  therefore  be  little  question,  that

'  Messrs  Xicolayson  and  Paxton.     See  III.   Sect.  Ill,  under  Apr.  26th,  1852.

Paxton's  Letters,  Lett.  XX.  p.  227.  Lond.  "  The  Sept.  and  Eusebius  write  this  name

»  Is  this  perhaps  the  Calcalia  of  the  k'lKdv.  Epiphanius  has  it  'la\u,  adv.  Hter.

crusaders,  to  wliich  the  renegade  Ivelin  lib.  II.  p.  702.    Reland  Pal.  p.  553.

marched,  after  burning  Ramleh  and  be-  '  Josh.  19,  42.   2  Chr.  11,  10.    28,  18.

sieging  Lydda  for  a  time  in  vain  ?    WilL  •  2  Chron.  28,  18.

Tyr.  21.  21.  ^  Onomast.  art.  Aialon  (A'lKdn).

•  See  more  in  respect  to  Yalo  in  Vol  '  Ibid,  art  Aialon  (  At\^y).

Vol.  II.-22  ii,/62,  63  •

254

FROM  BAMLEH  TO  JERUSALEM.

[Sec,  XHL

this  village  marks  the  site  of  the  ancient  Aijalon  ;  and  that
the  broad  Wady  on  the  north  of  it,  is  the  valley  of  Aijalon  so
renowned  in  the  history  of  J oshua.  Here  it  was,  that  this  leader
of  Israel,  in  pursuit  of  the  five  kings,  having  arrived  at  some
point  near  upper  Beth-horon,  looked  back  towards  Gibeon  and
down  upon  the  noble  vaUey  before  him,  and  uttered  the  cele-
brated command  :  "  Sun,  stand  thou  still  on  Gibeon  ;  and  thou,
Moon,  in  the  valley  of  Aijalon."'

A  little  to  the  right  of  Yalo,  and  in  the  plain  at  some  dis-
tance fi-om  the  foot  of  the  same  hUl,  a  village  was  pointed  out
to  us  called  Beit  Nubah.  This  probably  represents  the  Nohe
of  Jerome  ;  which  also  in  his  day  was  regarded  by  some  as  a
Bethannaba,  eight  Eoman  miles  eastward  from  Diospolis.*  Je-
rome appears  to  refer  to  this  place,  when  he  makes  Paula,  in  the
vicinity  of  Lydda  and  Arimathea,  see  Nobe  ;  where  he  seems  to
suppose  the  priests  were  slain  ;  though,  as  we  have  seen,  the
Nob  of  the  priests  must  have  been  in  sight  of  Jerusalem.^  In
the  age  of  the  crusades,  Beit  Nubah  became  celebrated  ;  first,
as  the  site  of  the  "  CasteUum  Arnaldi,"  erected  by  the  patriarch
and  citizens  of  Jerusalem  in  order  to  protect  the  approaches  to
that  city  ;*  and  then  as  the  place  to  which  Richard  of  England,
in  June  A.  D.  1192,  led  his  army  from  Askelon  on  their  way  to
besiege  Jerusalem.  There,  having  lingered  for  several  weeks
ingloriously,  the  English  monarch  turned  back  with  his  troops  to
Eamleh  and  Joppa ;  and,  after  concluding  a  truce  with  Saladin,
soon  left  the  country.^  From  the  notices  connected  with  this
march,  it  appears  that  Beit  Nubah  lay  near  the  western  plain,  on
the  great  road  between  el-Jib  and  Eamleh.  It  is  mentioned  by
Willebrand  of  Oldenberg  upon  the  same  road  in  A.  D.  1211,  and
again  by  Brocardus  ;^  but  seems  to  have  been  AvhoUy  lost  sight
of  from  that  day  to  the  present  time.

Among  the  towns  lying  upon  the  mountains  south  of  Beth-
horon,  one  was  pointed  out  to  us  (though  doubtfiiUy)  towards  the

'  Josh.  10,  12.  Eusebius  and  Jerome
place  the  valley  of  Aijalon  on  the  east  of
Bethel,  and  near  Gibeali  and  Ramah  of
Benjamin ;  in  a  direction  wholly  opposite
to  that  in  which  Joshua  was  pursuing  the
Amorites  ;  Onomast.  art  A  ialon.  {AlKii/j.).
Yet  Jerome,  in  relating  that  Paula  as-
cended from  Nicopolis  to  Jerusalem  by
way  of  the  two  Beth-horons,  makes  her
leave  on  her  right  hand  the  Aijalon  and
Gibeon  where  Joshua  commanded  the  sun
and  moon  to  stand  still ;  Epitaph.  I'aula;,
p.  673,  ed.  Mart.

'■'  Hieron.   Ep.  86  ad  Eustoch.  Epit.
Paulse,  p.  673,  ed.  Mart.  Onomast.  art.
Anob.   Keland  Pal.  p.  661.
•     iii.  63-65

"  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  464.

'  Will.  Tyr.  14.  8.  He  speaks  of  the
place  as  "  Nube,  qui  hodie  vulgari  appella-
tione  dicitur  Bettenubfe."  Wilken  Gesch.
der  Kr.  II.  p.  615.

'  Gaufr.  Vinisauf  5.  49  sq.  p.  399  sq.
Also  6.  6,  9.  p.  408  sq.  This  writer  calls
the  place  "  Betcnoble  "  and  "  Betenopolis."
Jac.  de  Vitr.  100.  p.  1123.  Bohaeddin
Vit.  Salad,  pp.  203,  230,  243.  Wilken
Gesch.  der  Kr.  IV.  pp.  r)08-r)33.

"  Willebr.  ab  Oldenb.  Itin.  p.  146,  in
Allatii  Symmikta,  Col.  Agr.  1653.  Bro-
cardus, c.  10.  p.  186.  Brocardus  writes
"  Bethnopolis,"  and  makes  it  the  same  as
Nob  of  the  priests.

Jusz  9.]

BEIT  NUBAH.  EL-KUBEIBEH.

255

south,  as  el-Kubeibeh,  where  it  has  formerly  pleased  the  monks
to  fix  the  site  of  the  village  Emmaus  of  the  New  Testament ;
whither  the  two  disciples  were  going  from  Jerusalem,  as  Jesus
met  them  and  went  with  them.'  According  to  Pococke,  who
visited  the  spot,  it  hes  about  an  hour  in  a  westerly  direction
from  Neby  Samwil  ;  and  in  travelling  to  it  from  the  latter  place,
he  left  the  village  of  Biddu  on  the  right,  and  Beit  Surik  on  the
left ;  further  west  and  more  towards  the  north  he  saw  Beit
'Enan,  which  we  also  could  now  see.*

To  this  hypothesis  of  the  monks  there  is  the  objection,  that
its  position  is  not  in  accord  with  the  language  of  Luke,  whether
the  latter  ought  to  read  sixty  stadia,  or  more  probably  one  hun-
dred and  sixty ;  el-Kubeibeh  being  at  least  three  hours,  or  more
than  seventy  stadia  distant  from  Jerusalem.^  To  this  we  may
add,  that  there  never  was  the  slightest  ground  for  connecting  el-
Kubeibeh  in  any  way  with  Emmaus  ;  nor  is  there  any  trace  of
its  having  been  so  connected,  before  the  fourteenth  century.*

The  bearings  of  these  and  other  places,  as  seen  from  the
upper  Beth-horon,  are  given  in  the  note  below.^

The  land  around  upper  Beth-horon  is  exceedingly  rocky,
affording  httle  opportunity  for  tillage.  We  left  the  place  at
12  o'clock,  and  continued  to  ascend  gradually  among  rocky  and
desolate  hills,  having  all  the  characteristics  of  a  desert.  The
ground  was  in  general  so  strewed  with  rocks,  that  it  was  some-
times difficult  to  find  the  way  ;  once  we  missed  the  path,  and

'  Luke  24,  13-35.  Gallen,  1606.   In  the  course  of  the  six-

*  Descr.  of  the  East.  II.  i.  pp.  49,  50.  teenth  century,  the  transfer  became  com-
Pococke  says  "  three  miles,"  which  is  his  plete ;  Kubeibeh  appears  henctforth  as
■usual  reckoning  for  an  hour.  Comp.  also  Emmaus,  and  the  place  at  the  foot  of  the
Nan,  Voyage  p.  502  sq.  mountain  took  the  name  of  "  Castellum

'    See  more  in  connection  with  'Am-  boni  Latronis  ; "  whence  the  present  Ara-

wSs,  in  Vol.  DX  Sect.  Ill,  under  Apr.  bic  name  Latron.    So  Zuallart,  p.  242,

27th,  1852.  comp.  p.  113.    Cotovicus,  p.  315,  comp.

*  The  crusaders  and  the  pilgrims  of  the  p.  143.  Quaresmins  II.  p.  719  sq.  comp.
following  centuries,  appear  to  have  fixed  p.  12  sq. — All  these  writers  and  travellers,
Emmaus  and  Nicopolis  at  Lltron,  on  the  wherever  they  may  place  Emmaus,  regard
way  from  Ramleh  to  Jerusalem  ;  near  the  it  as  Nicopolis ;  making  no  distinction
church  dedicated  to  the  Maccabees,  which  between  the  village  and  the  city  Emmaus,
may  not  improbably  mark  the  traditional  nor  even  inquiring  whether  it  was  60  or
site  of  Modin  ;  see  above,  p.  232;  also  pp.  160  stadia  from  Jerusalem.

6,  7.     So  Fulchcr  Camot.  18,  p.  396.  '  Bearings  from  upper  Beth-horon,  begin-

Will.  Tyr.  7.  24.  Jac.  de  Vitry,  c.  63.  p.  ning  in  the  southeast  and  proceeding  towards

1081.    Brocardus,  c.  10.  p.  186.    Marin,  the  right:  Biddu  S.  24°  E.  (.')  et-Tireh

Sanut  pp.  146,  249.    Tucher  in  Reissb.  S.  10°  E.    Beit 'Enan  S.  11°  W.    Y;Jo  S.

p.  058.    Breydenbach  ibid.  p.  105.— Yet  66°  W.    Beit  Nilbah  S.  70'  W.  el-Kubab

in  the  fourteenth  century  there  are  traces,  W.    Khurbata  N.  85' W.    Ramleh  N.  71°

as  if  a  new  hypothesis  had  already  be-  W.    Ludd  N.  64°  W.    Beit  'Ur  the  lower,

gun  to  transfer  the  site  up  the  mountain  to  N.  60'  W.    Suflfa  N.  57°  W.    Deir  Kadi'-

Kuboibeh.    Thus  Ludolf  de  Suchem  seems  N.  30°  W.    Deir  Abu  Mesh'al  N.  10°  W.

to  speak  of  Emmaus  as  in  the  region  of  Has  Kerker  N.    Beit  EUu  N.  8°  E.  Deir

Neby  Samwil ;  Itin.  p.  92.  Reissb.  p.  850.  Bezi'a  N.  10'  E.    Janieh  N.  12°  E.  Aba

So  too  Tschudi  in  1519  places  it  expressly  Zeitiin,  a  Wely,  E.
two  hours  from  Jerusalem;  p.  115.  St.

iii.  65-67

256

FROM  RAMLEH  TO  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  Xni.

lost  ten  minutes  in  finding  it  again.  Add  to  this,  the  way  was
winding,  and  our  horses  wearied  ;  so  that  from  Beth-horon  to  el-
Jib  our  rate  of  travel  was  not  greater  than  with  camels.  At
1.50,  we  came  out  upon  the  top  of  the  whole  ascent,  and  reached
the  edge  of  the  plain  on  the  west  of  el-Jib.  Here  we  had  Beit
'Ur,  el-Jib,  and  Neby  Samwil,  all  in  sight  at  once.'  At  this
spot  too  was  the  site  of  a  former  village,  the  name  of  which  we
could  not  learn,  as  we  had  no  guide  and  met  no  peasants.  We
could  here  look  down  into  Wady  Suleiman  on  our  right,  which
begins  to  descend  directly  from  the  western  end  of  the  plain ;
and  could  perceive  the  other  road  as  it  comes  up  that  valley.

We  kept  on  our  way  towards  el-Jib  ;  and  at  2.25  turned  out
of  our  path  into  the  fields  on  our  right,  to  visit  the  neglected
well  already  mentioned,  Bir  el-'Ozeiz.'^  It  is  nineteen  feet  in
diameter,  and  nearly  filled  up  with  earth  ;  being  only  eight  feet
to  the  water,  which  also  is  very  scanty.  Losing  ten  minutes  by
this  detour,  we  proceeded  along  under  the  northern  side  of  the
lull  of  el-Jib  ;  and  at  2.50  stopped  for  a  few  minutes  at  the
fountain  in  the  cavern.^

From  el-Jib  to  Jerusalem,  our  horses  felt  the  impulse  of
travelling  towards  home  ;  and  were  somewhat  more  active,  though
still  jaded.  We  did  not  care  this  time  to  climb  the  steep  ascent
to  Neby  Samwil ;  and  therefore  took  the  road  by  Beit  Hanina,
which  passes  down  the  valley  at  the  northeast  end  of  the  ridge
of  Neby  Samwil.  This  is  the  drain  of  the  whole  plain  around
el-Jib,  except  at  its  western  extremity  ;  and  forms  one  of  the
heads  of  the  great  Wady  Beit  Hanina.^  Leaving  the  fountain
at  3  o'clock,  we  soon  entered  and  proceeded  down  the  valley,
which  is  narrow,  rocky,  and  rugged.  The  path  keeps  along  the  •
bottom  nearly  to  Beit  Hanina,  where  it  gradually  ascends  to  the
village.  We  reached  this  place  at  3.50  ;  it  stands  upon  the
rocky  ridge  running  down  between  the  Wady  we  had  descended,
and  another  similar  one  coming  from  the  tract  around  er-Kam.
The  village  is  not  large,  and  is  tolerably  well  built  of  stone.
The  land  around  is  exceedingly  rocky,  affording  little  room  for
tillage  ;  but  there  are  many  olive  trees  round  about,  which
seemed  flourishing.    Neby  Samwil  here  bore  N.  72°  W.

From  Beit  Hanina  we  again  descended  gradually  into  the
valley  ;  and  having  passed  the  fork  where  the  eastern  branch
comes  in,  after  a  while  ascended  obliquely  the  eastern  hill,  in
order  to  cross  over  it  in  the  direction  of  Jerusalem.  This
brought  us  to  the  upper  part  of  the  branch  Wady,  up  which

•  They  bore  as  follows :  Beit  Ur,  N.  65°  '  For  our  former  visit  to  el-Jib,  ae*

W.    el-Jib,  S.  27"  E,  Neby  Samwil,  S.  Vol.  I.  pp.  454-457.

5°  E.  *  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  465.

'  See  Vol.  I.  p.  455,
iii.  67,  68

Junk  9.]

ARRIVAL.  QUARANTINE.

257

the  road  from  Neby  Samwil  leads  ;'  and  falling  into  tliis  road
we  ascended  the  rocky  slope  to  the  tombs  of  the  Judges,  which
we  passed  at  4.50,  and  reached  our  tent  before  the  Damascus
gate  at  twenty  minutes  past  5  o'clock.  Komeh  had  pitched  the
tent,  according  to  our  directions,  not  far  from  the  gate,  under
the  shade  of  the  olive  trees  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  a  ploughed
field.  Yet  after  long  search,  we  too  could  find  no  better  place. —
The  owner  of  the  horses  was  awaiting  our  arrival  before  the
gate  ;  but  the  refractory  Mukary  did  not  make  his  appearance.

Here  we  were  soon  joined  by  Mr  Lanneau  and  our  companion
in  travel,  who  had  put  ofi"  coming  out  of  the  city  until  our  arrival.
They  now  came  with  bag  and  baggage,  their  own  and  ours  ;
Mr  Lanneau  intending  to  go  down  to  Yafa.  They  had  kept  a
strict  quarantiQe  of  a  week  in  his  own  house,  under  the  charge
of  a  guardiano,  or  health  officer  of  the  government.  This  man,
as  we  learned  later  at  Beirut,  was  himself  a  few  days  afterwards
taken  with  the  plague  and  died.

Vol.  n.— 22*

'  See  Vol.  I.  p.  461.

iii.  68,  69

SECTION  XIY.

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  KAZARETH  AND  MOUNT  TABOR.

We  spent  three  days  in  our  tent  before  the  gates  of  Jerusa-
lem. The  first  was  the  Christian  Sabhath  ;  which  was  never
more  welcome  to  us  than  now,  after  three  and  a  half  weeks  of
constant  travel  and  exposure,  accompanied  often  by  high  excite-
ment and  consequent  exhaustion.  It  was  to  us  a  day  of  rest
greatly  needed  ;  and  we  passed  it  in  recalling  the  thrilling  asso-
ciations, and  renewing  and  fixing  the  impressions,  connected  with
the  consecrated  scenes  around  us.  It  was  our  last  Sabbath  at
Jerusalem.

The  situation  of  affairs  in  the  Holy  City  had  not  improved
during  our  absence.  It  had  been  shut  up  the  day  after  our
departure  ;  and  now,  for  more  than  three  weeks,  aU  direct  com-
munication with  the  country  had  been  cut  ofi".  Ten  thousand
persons  were  thus  confined  within  the  narrow  streets  and  their
own  stUl  narrower  and  filthy  dwellings,  without  fresh  air  and
without  fresh  provisions  or  vegetables,  except  so  far  as  a
scanty  supply  of  the  latter  was  to  be  obtained  at  the  gates.
Under  such  circumstances  the  wonder  was,  not  that  the  plague
did  not  abate,  but  that  it  had  not  increased  its  ravages.  Yet  this
seemed  not  to  have  been  the  case  ;  the  instances  of  contagion
were  scattered  and  occasional,  as  before  ;  and  the  disease  contin-
ued to  exhibit  the  same  character  for  some  weeks  longer ;  the
city  not  having  been  again  thrown  open  untU  July."

A  Hakim  Bashi,  a  physician  of  the  government,  had  arrived
from  Alexandria  soon  after  the  shutting  up  of  the  city  ;  to
whom  the  management  of  the  health  department  was  intrusted.
As  a  special  favour,  our  friends  had  been  permitted  by  him  to
perform  the  necessary  quarantine  in  their  own  house,  instead  of
the  wretched  public  establishment ;  and  had  thus  escaped  many

'  The  piaffe  has  since  prevailed  in  Je-
rasalem,  both  in  1839  and  1840.  In  the
former  year  at  least,  as  I  am  informed,  the

uL  70,  71

city  was  again  shut  np  during  the  month
of  March.

Sec.  XrV.]

JERUSALEM  SHUT  UP.

259

of  the  privations  and  annoyances,  to  wliich  they  must  otherwise
have  been  subjected.  We  were  struck  with  the  pallid  hue  of
the  inhabitants  whom  we  saw,  and  of  our  friends  in  particular.
The  latter  presented  a  strong  contrast  to  our  own  dark  visages  ;
which,  after  so  long  an  exposure  to  the  burning  suns  of  the
'Arabah  and  the  glowing  winds  of  the  Sephela,  had  become
scorched  to  a  bronze,  deeper  even  than  the  ordinary  Arab  com-
plexion.

In  the  city,  of  course,  aU  business  was  at  a  dead  stand  ;
the  stranger  merchants  had  departed,  and  none  could  come  in
from  abroad,  either  to  buy  or  seU.  The  labours  and  schools  of
our  missionary  friends  were  wholly  interrupted.  Many  of  the
inhabitants  had  preferred  to  quit  the  city,  and  were  living  in  the
fields  or  wandering  among  the  villages.  The  e\Tls  attendant
upon  such  a  state  of  things  may  be  imagined  better  than  de-
scribed ;  they  have  already  been  sufl&ciently  alluded  to.'  The
Mutesellim,  Sheikh  Mustafa,  who  was  absent  at  Dura  and
Hebron  when  Jerusalem  was  shut  up,  had  pitched  his  tent  just
outside  of  the  Damascus  gate,  where  he  transacted  all  his  busi-
ness without  entering  the  city.  The  markets  too  were  held  at
the  Damascus  and  Yafa  gates.  A  double  fence,  having  an
interval  of  six  or  eight  feet,  was  erected  around  the  gate  on  the
outside,  enclosing  a  considerable  extent  of  ground.  To  this
fence  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  could  come  on  the  inside,  and
the  people  of  the  countrj'  on  the  outside  ;  while  health  officers
walked  to  and  fro  in  the  intervening  space,  each  equipped  with  a
stout  staff.  All  the  traffic  was  carriea  on  through  the  lines  of
this  fence  and  across  the  intervening  interval  of  six  o^"  eight
feet.  Here  the  pro\'isions  brought  by  the  country  people  were
first  handed  in,  and  then  passed  to  the  other  side  by  the  guar-
diano  ;  and  the  money  in  like  manner  transferred  from  the  city
to  the  country  side,  after  being  dropped  into  water  or  vinegar.
But,  wo  to  the  hands  or  fingers,  on  either  side,  that  ventured
too  far  within  the  pale  !  The  attendants  were  ever  on  the  watch
as  to  this  point ;  and  a  no  very  gentle  thwack  with  the  staff,
seemed  to  be  not  less  a  matter  of  zest  to  them,  than  of  pain  to
the  offending  party.

How  it  was  possible  for  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and
especially  for  the  numerous  poorer  classes,  to  hold  out  under
such  a  state  of  things,  I  am  unable  to  conceive.  The  city  had
been  shut  up  on  a  single  day's  notice,  and  for  an  indefinite
time  ;  so  that  no  one,  of  course,  could  make  preparation  for
such  an  emergency.  Nothing  could  come  into  the  city  but
pronsions,  and  little  or  nothing  passed  out  except  money  ;  and

»  See  Vol  I.  p.  248  sq.   Vol.  H  pp.  1,  80,  211.

iii.  71,  72

260  FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  NABTJLUS.  [Sec.  XIV.

of  this  the  vast  majority  of  the  inhabitants  had  little  or  none
in  store.  Already  the  complaint  was  imiversal,  that  the  daily
purchases  in  the  markets  had  exhausted  the  stock  of  small
coins  ;  so  that  it  was  next  to  impossible  to  give  or  obtain
change.

Nevertheless,  permission  could  be  obtained  to  enter  the  city
by  authority  of  the  Hakim,  preceded  and  followed  by  officials
of  the  quarantine,  to  prevent  all  contact  with  the  people  and
forbidden  objects.  The  English  travellers  whom  we  had  met  at
Hebron,  and  who  were  now  encamped  on  the  southwest  of  the
city  beyond  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  availed  themselves  of  such  a
permission,  to  visit  the  interior  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  in  our  case
there  was  no  motive  to  do  so,  strong  enough  to  counterbalance
the  accompanying  risk  and  trouble.  With  our  friends,  who
still  remained  in  the  city,  we  had  frequent  communications  from
the  walls  ;  and  once  both  Messrs  "Whiting  and  Nicolayson  with
their  families  came  out,  accompanied  by  a  health  officer,  and
met  us  for  an  hour  or  two  under  the  terebinth  at  the  northwest
corner  of  the  city.  Here  we  bade  each  other  farewell  ;  and  I
am  sure  I  shall  forget  their  affectionate  kindness  only  when  I
forget  Jerusalem.

Thus  passed  the  days  of  our  last  sojourning  at  the  Holy
City.  We  made  on  Monday  (June  11th)  the  excursion  to  Beth-
any, which  has  already  been  described."  In  this,  in  writing  up
our  journals,  and  in  packing  and  preparing  for  our  long  journey
northwards,  the  time  was  fully  occupied.  I  had  indeed  hoped  to  be
able  to  make  the  excursion  to  the  convents  of  St.  Saba  and  St.
John,  as  formerly  planned  but  the  necessity  of  reaching  Beirtlt
in  time  to  meet  the  English  steamer  on  the  8  th  of  July,  com-
pelled us  to  forego  this  purpose,  and  bend  our  steps  northwards
without  delay.  We  engaged  seven  spirited  mules,  to  take  us  to
Nazareth  and  Damascus,  or  wherever  we  might  choose  to  go,  at
fifteen  piastres  a  day,  and  half  price  when  we  did  not  travel.  We
obtained  also  a  clean  bill  of  health  from  the  Hakim,  which
might  enable  us  to  avoid  the  quarantine  regulations  established
in  various  places,  against  all  comers  from  Jerusalem.

Wednesdaij,  June  I3th.  Having  made  our  arrangements,  so
far  as  possible,  over  night,  we  rose  early,  hoping  to  set  off  in  good
season.  But  the  packing  and  loading  of  the  first  morning  on  a
journey,  always  occupies  more  time  than  on  the  subsequent
days  ;  because  cver}'thing  has  to  be  first  distributed,  and  the
loads  balanced  and  arranged,  in  the  order  which  afterwards
remains  unchanged.  As  too  we  were  now  leaving  Jerusalem  for
the  last  time,  we  took  with  us  aU  our  baggage  ;  which  had  not

>  See  Vol  I.  p.  431.
iii.  72-74

•  See  aboTO,  p.  1.

Junk  13.]

LAST  VIEW  OF  THE  HOLY  CITY.

261

been  the  case  on  our  previous  excursions.  Mr  Lanneau  also
was  setting  off  for  Yafa  at  the  same  time,  intending  to  take  the
camel  road,  and  thus  accompany  us  for  an  hour  upon  our  way.
We  had  this  time  but  two  muleteers,  both  owners  and  partners
in  the  animals  they  drove  ;  one,  the  elder  and  principal,  from
Jerusalem,  and  the  other  from  Safed.  Each  took  along  also  a
donkey  for  his  own  occasional  use  ;  one  of  them  a  fine  sleek
animal,  the  other  gaunt  and  shaggy,  like  a  scarecrow.  \Yith  all
our  exertions,  it  was  6|  o'clock  before  we  were  able  to  set  off;
and  then  the  muleteers  had  to  go  to  the  gate  of  the  city  after
grain.  We  passed  on  by  the  tomb  of  Sheikh  Jerafy  at  6.55  ;
and  reaching  the  top  of  Scopus,  stopped  there  for  a  quarter  of
an  hour,  to  wait  for  our  attendants,  and  to  take  our  farewell  view
of  the  Holy  City.

The  emotions  which  crowd  upon  the  mind  at  such  a  moment,
I  leave  for  the  reader  to  conceive.  The  historical  associations
connected  with  the  city  and  the  various  objects  around,  cannot
but  be  deeply  interesting  even  to  the  infidel  or  the  heathen  ;  how
much  more  to  the  heart  of  the  believer  !  Wha,t  a  multitude  of
wonderful  events  have  taken  place  upon  that  spot !  What  an
influence  has  proceeded  from  it,»  affecting  the  opinions  and
destinies  of  individuals  and  the  world,  for  time  and  for  eter-
nity !

If  my  feelings  were  strongly  excited  on  first  entering  the
Holy  City,  they  were  now  hardly  less  so  on  leaving  it  for  the  last
time.  As  we  had  formerly  approached,  repeating  continually
the  salutation  of  the  Psalniist :  "Peace  be  within  thy  waUs,  and
prosperity  within  thy  palaces ; "  so  now  we  could  not  but  add  :
"For  our  brethren  and  companions'  sakes  we  will  now  say,
Peace  be  within  thee  ! "  *  Her  palaces  indeed  are  long  since
levelled  to  the  ground  ;  and  the  haughty  Muslim  now  for  ages
treads  her  glory  in  the  dust.  Tet  as  we  waited,  and  looked
again  from  this  high  ground  upon  the  city  and  the  surrounding
objects,  I  could  not  but  exclaim  :  Beautiful  for  situation,  the
joy  of  the  whole  earth,  is  Mount  Zion,  on  the  sides  of  the
north,  the  city  of  the  great  King  ! "  *  One  long  last  look  ;  and
then  turning  away,  I  bade  those  sacred  hills  farewell  for  ever.

We  proceeded  on  our  way.'  At  7f  o'clock  we  passed
Sha'fat  five  minutes  on  our  left  ;  and  at  8.10,  the  old  founda-
tions near  the  foot  of  the  descent  beyond.*  A  few  steps  further,
the  camel  road  to  Eamleh  goes  off  obliquely  towards  el-Jib,
passing  on  the  right  of  the  intervening  hills. '  Here  we  parted
from  our  friend  and  host  Mr  Lanneau,  to  whose  unwearied

'  Ps.  122,  7.  8.  salem  was  about  N.  by  E.  J  E.  -srhile  el-

*  Ps.  48,  2.  Bireh  bore  N.

*  At  this  point  our  directiMi  from  Jere-       *  See  VoL  L  p.  577.

iii.  74,  75

262

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  NABTTLUS.

[SEa  XIV

kindness  and  attention  we  had  been  so  mucli  indebted  in  Jeru-
salem ;  he  going  towards  Yatii,  and  we  keeping  on  towards  el-
Bireh.  AVe  passed  the  ruined  Khan  opposite  er-Ram  at  a
quarter  before  nine,  having  er-Eam  on  our  right  ;  and  at  9.35
the  ruins  of  'Atara  were  on  our  left.'  Twenty  minutes  later  we
were  on  the  ridge  which  separates  the  valley  we  had  ascended
from  that  south  of  el-Bireh  running  to  the  Jordan  ;  and  keep-
ing around  the  head  of  this,  we  reached  the  fountain  southwest
of  el-Bireh  at  10  o'clock.^

We  halted  here  for  nearly  half  an  hour,  in  order  to  procure  a
guide  ;  intending  to  take  the  way  leading  by  the  village  of
Jufna,  which  lies  west  of  both  the  branches  of  the  great  Nabu-
lus  road.  "VVe  foimd  a  small  caravan  of  camels  resting  at  the
fountain,  laden  with  wheat,  which  they  were  transporting  from
Nabulus  to  Bethlehem.  The  men  were  baking  a  large  round
flat  cake  of  bread,  in  the  embei-s  of  a  fire  of  camel's  and  cow-
dung.  Taking  it  out  when  done,  they  brushed  off  the  ashes
and  divided  it  among  the  party,  offering  us  also  a  portion.  I
tasted  it,  and  found  it  quite  as  good  as  the  common  bread  of  the
country.  They  had  no  other  provisions.  These  were  men  of
Bethlehem  ;  and  this  is  the  .common  fare  of  persons  travelling
in  this  manner.

Having  obtained  a  guide,  we  set  off  again  at  twenty-five
minutes  past  10  o'clock  ;  proceeding  along  on  the  west  side  of
the  village  of  Bireh,  without  entering  it.  The  Nabulus  road
here  divides  into  two  branches  ;  one  passing  near  Bethel  and  by
'Ain  Yebrud,  the  other  lying  more  west ;  they  unite  again
further  on,  at  or  before  'Ain  el-Haramiyeh.  We  followed  the
western  branch  for  ten  minutes  beyond  the  village  ;  and  then  at
10.40  diverged  fi-om  it  more  towards  the  left,  on  a  course  N.  N.
E.  At  11  o'clock  the  way  led  along  the  side  of  a  small  shallow
pond  on  our  left,  called  el-Balu'a  ;  it  was  now  dry ;  but  in
winter  the  water  rims  from  it  eastward  towards  the  Jordan.
Keeping  on  north,  we  very  soon  crossed  the  water-shed,  where
the  land  begins  to  decline  gradually  towards  the  northwest.  At  a
quarter  past  eleven,  a  ruin  called  Kefr  Murr  was  on  a  hill  at  our
right  ten  minutes  distant ;  and  we  began  to  look  down  into  the
valley  of  Jufna,  and  to  meet  with  a  few  stunted  bushes.  It  is
rather  a  peculiar  feature  of  the  whole  region  around  Jerusalem,
that  while  trees  of  various  kinds  are  not  infrequent,  shrubs  and
bushes  are  rarely  to  be  seen.

We  were  somewhat  surprised  to  find  here  the  evident  traces
of  an  ancient  paved  road,  entirely  similar  to  the  Eomau  roads  of

'  For  all  these  places  and  the  aspect  of  also  of  our  former  visit  to  el-Bireh,  tee
the  country,  see  Vol.  1.  pp.  57.">-579.  Vol.  L  pp.  -tal—loS.

'  For  an  account  of  tins  fountain,  and

iii.  75-77

JONE  13.]

JUFNA,  GOPHNA.

263

Italy  and  other  regions.  It  was  obviously  of  old  a  public,  and
probably  a  military  way,  between  the  cities  of  Gophna  and
Jerusalem  ;  the  great  road  apparently,  which  in  ancient  times,
as  now,  led  along  the  summit  of  the  high  mountainous  tract,
from  the  plain  of  Esdraelon  through  Neapolis  and  Gophna  to
the  Holy  City.  The  pavement  still  remains  entire  for  a  very
considerable  distance.  At  llh  o'clock  a  small  ruin  called  Arnu-
tieh  was  on  our  right  ;  and  we  soon  began  to  descend  by  a
branch  Wady  into  the  deep  valley  in  which  Jufna  lies.  After
fifteen  minutes,  there  was  a  fountain  on  our  left  with  running
water,  and  flocks  round  about.  The  great  Wady  before  us
here  runs  northeast,  and  has  its  beginning  at  some  distance  to  the
left,  north  of  Ram- Allah,  from  which  it  is  separated  by  another
deep  Wady  passing  down  west.  This  of  Jufna  also  afterwards
curves  around  to  the  northwest  and  runs  off  to  the  western  sea.  It
here  spreads  out  into  a  small  fertile  plain,  lying  very  deep,  in
which  Jufna  stands,  surrounded  by  high  hills.  We  reached  the
place  at  12  o'clock,  an  hour  and  a  half  from  el-Bireh.

We  stopped  for  lunch  a  few  rods  short  of  the  village,  under
a  large  walnut  tree,  Hke  the  English  walnut,  the  first  we  had
seen.  Close  by  were  also  two  Meis  trees,  (Cordia  myxa  of
botanists,)  tall  and  beautiful,  with  round  tops  and  large  leaves  ;
from  the  berries  of  which  bird  lime  is  made.  The  walnut  tree
was  growing  within  the  precincts  of  an  ancient  church,  which
the  Christian  Sheikh  of  the  vdage,  whom  we  sent  for,  said  was
dedicated  to  St.  George.  It  must  have  been  quite  large  ;  and
many  limestone  columns  with  which  it  was  ornamented,  are  lying
around,  or  their  fragments  standing  upright  ;  but  there  were  not
enough  of  the  foundations  remaining  above  ground  to  enable  us  to
take  the  dimensions.  Under  the  tree,  a  small  enclosure  contains  an
altar,  on  which  mass  is  still  sometimes  celebrated  ;  and  also  the
ancient  baptismal  font  of  limestone,  partly  buried  in  the  ground.
This  latter  measured  five  feet  in  diameter,  three  and  a  half  feet
high,  and  two  feet  nine  inches  deep  within  ;  the  inside  being
excavated  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  with  the  corners  rounded.  In
the  village  itself,  which  lies  just  across  the  bed  of  the  Wady,  are
the  ruined  walls  of  a  castle,  which  may  perhaps  be  of  the  age
of  the  crusades.

The  whole  valley,  and  the  sides  of  the  mountains  around,
are  very  fully  cultivated,  and  abound  in  olives,  vines,  and  fig
trees,  belonging  to  this  and  the  neighbouring  villages.  Around
the  village  itself  are  also  numerous  apple,  pear,  fig,  pomegran-
ate, apricot,  and  some  walnut  trees.  The  landscape  on  every
side  is  rich,  and  indicates  a  high  degree  of  fertility  and  thrift.
The  present  inha"bitants  of  Jufna  are  all  Christians  ;  they
number  only  forty-two  taxable  men  ;  which  gives  a  population

264

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  NABULU8.

[Sec.  XIV.

of  not  more  than  two  hundred  souls.  After  the  rehellion  of
1834,  twenty-six  men  were  taken  to  Eg^-pt  and  put  into  the
public  works,  whence  they  have  never  returned.  Not  long
since,  one  of  their  two  priests  went  to  Egypt  to  look  after  them,
and  died  there.'

In  respect  to  Jufna,  both  the  name  and  the  position  show
conclusively,  that  it  is  the  ancient  Gophna  of  Josephus,  Ptole-
my, and  the  Peutinger  Tables  ;  a  name  which  does  not  appear
in  this  form  in  Scripture.''  Eusebius  places  it  fifteen  Roman
mUes  from  Jerusalem  on  the  way  to  Neapolis,'  and  the  Tables
at  sixteen  ;  we  travelled  over  the  interval  iu  rather  more  than
four  and  a  half  hours,  and  found  the  traces  of  the  ancient  public
road.  It  appears  from  Josephus  to  have  been  a  strong  place.
Like  Lydda,  it  was  taken  by  Cassius,  and  the  inhabitants  sold
into  slavery  ;  from  -which  they  were  released  by  a  decree  of
Antony.*  It  became  later  the  head  of  a  Toparchy  ;  was  cap-
tured by  Vespasian  ;  and  Titus  passed  through  it  on  his  march
from  Samaria  to  the  siege  of  Jerusalem.^  But  since  the  days
of  Eusebius,  all  memory  of  it  seems  to  have  perished.  The
writers  of  the  times  of  the  crusades  appear  not  to  mention  the
name  ;  nor  do  I  find  a  single  notice  of  it  in  any  tradition  or
traveller.  The  name  Gophna  stands  indeed  upon  some  modern
maps,  in  this  vicinity  ;  but  simply,  as  it  would  seem,  on  the
authority  of  Eusebius.

We  left  Jufna  at  1.40  without  a  guide  ;  and  following  down
the  valley  northeast  twenty-five  minutes,  reached  'Ain  Sinia  at
five  minutes  past  two  ;  another  village,  surrounded  in  Uke  man-
ner with  vineyards  and  fruit  trees.  Near  by  were  also  gardens
of  vegetables,  watered  from  a  well.  The  bed  of  the  valley  had
here  some  standing  water  ;  and  a  branch  Wady  came  in  from
the  southeast,  up  which  we  could  see  'Ain  Yebrud  on  the  top  of
a  hiU.

'  From  Jufna  we  took  the  following
bearings :  Bir  ez-Zeit  a  small  Christian
village  half  an  hour  distant,  N.  45  W.
Tell  'Asur  with  a  Wely,  N.  48'  E.  Ye-
brud, half  an  honr  distant  on  the  western
branch  of  the  Nabulus  road,  N.  C.3'  E.
'Ain  Yehrud,  on  the  eastern  branch,  about
S.  70  E.  Durah,  S.  C8  E  — Tell  'Asur
we  had  also  seen  formerly  from  'Alya,  el-
Bireh,  and  Ram-Allah  ;  see  Vol.  I  pp.  448,
452,  453.  Is  this  perhaps  the  Hazor  of  Benja-
min, Neh.  11,  .3.3?  If  80,  there  is  here  the
same  change  from  Heth  [Hj  to  'Ain,  as  in
Beit  'Ur  from  Beth-Horon  ;  see  above,  p.
251  and  n.  1.

*  Ptolem  4.  10.  Reland  Falsest  pp.
461.  81C.    There  is  a  possibility  that  the

iii.  78-80

name  Gophna  may  come  from  the  Ophni
of  Benjamin,  Josh.  18,  24.  In  this  case
there  mast  have  been  a  change  of  the
Hebrew  Ain  (r)  into  Girael  (  J),  which
sometimes,  though  rarely,  took  place.  It
mat/  have  come  in  this  instance  through
the  Greek,  where  the  change  was  common.
See  Gesenius'  Heb.  Lex.  letters  3  and  5.

'  Onomast.  art.  ValUs  Botri,  tpdpayi
fiSrpvos.  This  article  is  not  translated  by
Jerome.  It  speaks  for  the  ancient  fertility
of  the  valley,  that  it  was  then  held  by
some  to  be  the  vale  of  Eshcol.

*  See  pp.  244,  245,  above.  Joseph.  Ant.
14.11.2.  ibid.  U.  12.  2  sq.   B.J.  1.11.2.

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  3.  3.  5.  ib.  4.  9.  9.  ib
5.  2.  1.    Comp.  C.  2.  2,  3.

JCSE  13.]

JILJILIA,

265

The  main  valley  here  bends  north  ;  the  cultivation  continued
as  we  advanced  ;  first  chiefly  olives,  and  then  fig  trees.  At  2^
o'clock  a  side  valley  came  in  from  the  west ;  and  all  the
mountains  around  the  wide  space  thus  opened,  presented  the
aspect  of  like  cultivation.  Fifteen  minutes  later,  the  large
village  of  'Atara,  appeared  on  the  summit  of  a  high  hill,  seen
up  through  a  small  side  Wady,  bearing  northwest  and  distant
about  half  an  hour.  It  might  almost  seem,  as  if  this  was  the
scriptural  Ataroth  of  the  border  of  Ephraim  ;  or  at  least  that
of  which  Eusebius  speaks  within  that  tribe.'

We  kept  on  down  the  valley  ;  and  at  2.55  minutes  a  branch
of  considerable  size  came  in  from  the  E.  S.  E.  We  ought  to
have  gone  up  this  lateral  Wady,  and  thus  reached  the  usual
Nabulus  road  ia  a  narrow  valley  called  Wady  el-Jib,  in  wliich  is
the  fountain  'Ain  el-Haramiyeh  on  that  road.*  But  our  mule-
teers professed  to  know  the  way,  and  kept  on  down  the  main  val-
ley until  3.20.  Here  it  becomes  very  narrow,  turns  northwest,
and,  under  the  name  of  Wady  el-Belat,  soon  begins  to  descend
the  mountain  towards  the  western  plain.  We  now  discovered
that  we  were  out  of  our  road  ;  and  after  a  delay  of  ten  minutes,
by  the  direction  of  a  peasant,  we  began  to  climb  the  steep  hill
on  the  north,  along  a  small  water-course,  but  without  any  path.
The  ascent  was  very  difficult ;  but  we  came  out  at  length  after
half  an  hour  on  the  top  ;  where  we  found  table  land  and  a  fine
plain,  with  people  gathering  the  harvest.  Here  we  struck  a
path  ;  and  continuing  on  north,  came  at  twenty  minutes  past
four,  to  the  large  village  of  Jiljilia.

The  poor  people  of  this  place  had  never  before  seen  Franks  in
their  village,  and  seemed  frightened  at  our  coming  ;  at  first  they
even  denied  its  name.  The  probable  cause  of  this  we  after-
wards found  out  at  Sinjil.  The  place  stands  very  high,  near
the  western  brow  of  the  high  mountain  tract.  It  affords  a  very
extensive  view  out  over  the  great  lower  plain  and  sea ;  while  at
the  same  time  the  mountains  of  Gilead  are  seen  in  the  east.
Far  in  the  N.  N.  E.  too,  we  could  see  for  the  first  time  a  lofty
dark  blue  mountain  ;  which  we  afterwards  found  to  be  no  other

'  Josh.  16,  2.  7.    Onomast.  art.  Atha-  of  onr  lists ;  and  the  name  of  Wady  el-Jib

roth,  'ApxiarapiiA.  Ensebius  says  merely  :  doubtless  comes  from  the  former.  See

w6\ts  n''   E.  6,  5.    Vespasian  marches  from  Neapo  is  to

KOriyut  N.  42  '  E.    Abu  el-'Auf  N.  15'  Coreae  the  first  day,  and  the  next  to  Jed-

E.    'Ar.ik  el-Ghufir  N.  4°  W.    Sekakeh  oho;  B.  J.  4.  8.  1.    Both  these  speciHca-

K.  13    W.    Fiirkha  N.  CO'  W.    Ji]j;lia  tions  accord  well  with  the  position  of

W. — Kuriyut  perhaps  the  Cores  (Kopeat)  Kfiriydt.

iii.  83,  84

268

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  NABULUS,

[Sec.  XIV.

they  would  not  go  away  in  less  than  a  day.  Tliis  man  was  a
common  peasant  of  Jiljilia,  and  could  have  heard  this  story  only
from  the  mouths  of  neighbours  of  his  own  class.  On  inquiring
further  at  Sinjil,  we  found  that  the  place  in  question  lay  not
very  far  from  the  road,  and  might  he  visited  by  a  small  circuit.
As  the  position  seemed  to  answer  well  to  that  of  Shiloh,  we
determined  to  go  thither.  We  therefore  sent  off  our  servants,
with  the  luggage,  on  the  direct  road  by  Khan  el-Lubban  ;  and
taking  a  guide,  proceeded  ourselves  in  the  direction  of  Turmus
'Aya.

We  were  ready  to  set  off  early,  but  were  delayed  by  our
muleteers.  The  hospitality  which  we  had  found  so  common  in
the  southwest  of  Judah,  no  longer  exists  on  this  great  road  ;  too
many  Franks  have  passed  here,  not  to  have  taught  the  people
to  take  payment  for  everything.  Yet  we  did  not  find  them
unreasonable  in  their  demands.  We  finally  set  off  at  6  o'clock,
descending  by  a  very  steep  path  from  the  vUlage  to  the  bottom
of  the  northern  valley,  where  we  crossed  the  J erusalem  road,  and
then  proceeded  eastward  over  the  fine  plain.  We  reached
Turmus  'Aya  at  6|  o'clock,  situated  on  a  low  rocky  mound  in
the  level  valley.  The  plain  swells  out  beyond  into  a  beautiful
oval  basin,  extending  towards  the  east  for  an  hour  or  more,  shut
in  by  picturesque  hUls.  It  was  now  covered  mostly  with  the
deep  green  of  the  springing  millet,  interspersed  with  yellow
fields  of  ripe  wheat.

Leaving  Turmus  'Aya  at  our  right,  we  turned  up  a  small
Wady  N.  N.  E.,  in  which  after  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  we
passed  the  water-shed,  and  found  the  valley  beginning  to  de-
scend towards  the  north.  We  came  at  7  o'clock  to  the  ruins  of
Seilun,  surrounded  by  hills,  but  looking  out  through  the  small
valley  we  had  traversed,  towards  the  plain  on  the  south.  Hardly
five  minutes  before  reaching  the  proper  site,  is  an  ancient  ruin,  a
tower,  or  perhaps  a  small  chapel,  about  twenty-eight  feet  square
inside,  v/ith  walls  four  feet  thick.  Within  are  three  prostrate
columns,  with  Corinthian  capitals  lying  separate.  The  stone
which  forms  the  upper  part  of  the  doorway,  is  ornamented  on
the  outside  with  sculptured  work,  an  amphora  between  two  chap-
lets.  Along  the  outer  wall,  a  defence  or  buttress  of  sloping
masonry  has  been  built  up,  obviously  at  a  later  period.  The
Arabs  call  tliis  ruin  the  mosk  of  Seilun.  As  we  came  up,  three
startled  owls  flew  off  in  dismay.

The  main  site  consists  of  the  ruins  of  a  comparatively
modern  village,  covering  a  small  Tell ;  which  is  separated  from
the  higher  mountain  on  the  north  by  a  deep  narrow  Wady,
coming  from  the  east  and  running  down  towards  Khan  el-
Lubban.    On  the  east  and  west  of  the  Tell  are  two  small,

iii.  84-86

June  14.]

SEILUN,  SHILOH.

269

though  wider  Wadys,  running  down  north  into  the  former ;
while  towards  the  south  the  Tell  connects  with  the  slope  running
up  from  the  plain  of  Turmus  'Aya,  but  rises  considerably  above
it.  The  position  is  in  itself  a  fine  one  for  strength,  if  it  were
ever  fortified  ;  though  it  is  commanded  by  the  neighbouring
hills.  Among  the  ruins  of  modern  houses  are  many  large
stones,  and  some  fragments  of  columns,  showing  the  place  to
have  been  an  ancient  site.  At  the  southern  foot  of  the  Tell  is  a
small  ruined  mosk,  standing  partly  beneath  a  noble  oak  tree.'

Our  guide  told  us  of  a  fountain  up  through  the  narrow  valley
towards  the  east.  We  went  thither,  and  found  that  the  valley
here  breaks  through  a  ridge,  and  is  at  first  shut  in  by  perpendic-
ular walls  of  rock  ;  then  follows  a  more  open  tract ;  and  here,
at  the  left,  fifteen  minutes  from  SeUun,  is  the  fountain.  The
water  is  excellent ;  and  issues  from  the  rocks  first  into  a  sort  of
artificial  well,  eight  or  ten  feet  deep  ;  and  thence  into  a  reser-
voir lower  down.  Many  flocks  and  herds  were  waiting  round
about.  In  the  sides  of  the  narrow  valley  are  many  excavated
tombs,  now  much  broken  away  ;  near  the  fountain  are  also
several  tombs,  and  one  in  an  isolated  block.  We  returned
down  the  valley,  and  followed  it  through  on  the  north  side  of
SeilAn.

The  proofs  that  SeUun  is  actually  the  site  of  the  ancient
Shiloh,  lie  within  a  small  compass  ;  and  both  the  name  and  the
position  are  sufficiently  decisive.  The  fall  form  of  the  Hebrew
name  was  apparently  Sliilon,  as  we  find  it  in  the  gentUe  noun
Shilonite  ;  and  Josephus  writes  it  also  both  Silo  and  Siloun.^
The  position  of  Shiloh  is  very  definitely  described  in  the  book
of  Judges,  as  "on  the  north  side  of  Bethel,  on  the  east  side  of
the  highway  that  goeth  up  from  Bethel  to  Shechem,  and  on  the
south  of  Lebonah."'  Eusebius  and  Jerome  place  it,  one  ten
and  the  other  twelve  Eoman  miles  from  Neapolis,  in  the  region
of  Acrabatene."  With  the  exception  of  these  confiised  and
probably  conjectural  distances,  all  the  other  circumstances
correspond  exactly  to  Seilun  ;  for  we  were  here  on  the  east  of
the  great  road  between  Bethel  and  Shechem  (Nabulus),  and  in

*  The  only  bearings  from  Seilun  were  :       *  Onomast.  art.  Selo.    These  distances

Turmus  'Aya  S.  S.  W.    Sinjil  S.  50°  W.  are  both  incorrect :   for  the  village  of

Abu  el-'Auf,  S.  82°  W.  Lebonah  (Lubban)  is  itself  more  tha^ii  four

'  The  Hebrew  exhibits  various  fonos,  hours  or  12  Roman  miles  south  of  Nabulus.

e.  g.  iib'^'S  1  K.  2,  27.  aL  n'SU  Josh.  18,  Or  Jerome  may  perhaps  have  estimated

1.  8.  aL  ib^d  Judg.  21  21.  al.  ibb  the  distance  on  a  straight  course,  passing  on
T„j»  oi    iQ   .1      r^^tj  ^^^^  '^^  Lubban;  in  which  case  his

.         f  'oo  I'o  1.     T  r,  -.  ^  12  miles  would  be  less  far  out  of  the  way,

1  K.  11,       U,  15.    bee  Gesenms  Lex.  though  still  too  short.    The  text  also  may

Heb.  art.  n'S^ia  . — Josephus,  SiAcJ  Antiq.  have  been  corrupted  ;  that  of  Eusebius  is

8.  7.  7.    ibid.  8.  11.  1.    2iAoC>' Antiq.  5.  certainly  so,  for  the  word  Neapolis  has

1.  19,  20.    ibid.  5.  2.  9,  12.  fallen  out.

'  Judg.  21,  19.

.  Vol.  II.-23*  Ui.  86,  87

270

FEOM  JERUSALEM  TO  KABTJLUS.

[SEa  XIV.

passing  on  towards  the  latter  place,  we  came  after  an  hour  to
the  village  of  Lebonah,  now  el-Lubban.

Here  then  was  Shiloh,  where  the  tabernacle  was  set  up  after
the  country  had  been  subdued  before  the  Israelites  ;  and  where
the  last  and  general  division  of  the  land  was  made  among  the
tribes.'  The  ark  and  tabernacle  long  continued  here  ;  from  the
days  of  Joshua  during  the  ministry  of  all  the  Judges,  until  the
close  of  Eli's  life  ;  and  here  Samuel  was  dedicated  to  God,  and
his  childhood  spent  in  the  sanctuary.''  In  honour  of  the  pres-
ence of  the  ark,  there  was  "  a  feast  of  the  Lord  in  Shiloh  yearly,"
during  which  "  the  daughters  of  Shiloh  came  out  to  dance  in
dances  ; "  and  it  was  on  such  an  occasion,  that  they  were  seized
and  carried  off  by  the  remaining  Benjamites  as  wives.'  The
scene  of  these  dances  may  not  improbably  have  been  somewhere
around  the  fountain  above  described.  From  Shiloh  the  ark
■was  at  length  removed  to  the  army  of  Israel ;  and  being  cap-
tured by  the  Philistines,  returned  no  more  to  its  former  place.*
Shiloh  henceforth,  though  sometimes  the  residence  of  prophets,
as  of  Ahijah  celebrated  in  the  history  of  Jeroboam,'  is  neverthe-
less spoken  of  as  forsaken  and  accursed  of  God.'  It  is  men-
tioned in  Scripture  during  the  exile,  but  not  afterwards  ;  and
Jerome  speaks  of  it  in  his  day  as  so  utterly  in  ruins,  that  the
foundations  of  an  altar  could  scarcely  be  pointed  out.^

From  that  time  onward,  the  place  of  Shiloh  appears  to  have
been  iitterly  forgotten  in  ecclesiastical  tradition  ;  and  I  find  no
further  notice  of  its  position  until  the  time  of  the  crusaders.
These  soldiers  of  the  cross  found  Shiloh  at  Neby  Samwil ;  and
there  too  monks  and  pilgrims  continued  to  find  it,  without  much
variation,  until  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century.^  Yet  early
in  the  fourteenth  century,  R.  Parchi  rightly  describes  the  place
as  on  the  left  of  the  traveller  proceeding  towards  Jerusalem  ;
and  as  then  called  Sailun.'  It  would  seem,  too,  as  if  Bonifa-
cius  was  acquainted  with  the  true  site.  Speaking  of  the  way
from  Jerusalem  to  Shechem  (Nabulus ),  he  says:  "At  fifteen
miles  north  of  el-Bireh  there  is  a  large  hospitium  in  a  valley,
with  a  fountain  outside  ;  and  not  far  off  on  the  right  is  Sliiloh,
where  an  altar  and  ruined  church  are  seen."'"    This  certainly

'  Josh.  18,  1-10.  Epitaph.  Paula  p.  676,  ed.  Mart.  "Quid

*  1  Sam.  c.  1— t.  narrem  Silo,  in  qua  altare  dirutum  hodie-
'  Judg.  21,  19-23.  que  nionstratur?  "

*  1  Sam.  c.  4-6.  «  Benj.  of  Tudela  p.  78,  "  St.  Samuel
»  1  K.  11,  29.  12,  15.  14,  2  sq.  of  Shiloh,  the  ancient  Shiloh."  Brocardm

*  Ps.  78,  60  sq.  Jer.  7,  12.  14.  26,  6.  c.  9.  p  184.  Marinus  Sanut.  p.  249.
'  Jer.  41,;').  Hieron.  Comm.  in  Sophon.  Breydenbach    in   Reissb.   p.    130,  136.

i.  14  sq.    "  Vix   ruinarum   parva  vcs-  Adrichomius  p.  30.    See  Vol.  I.  p.  459.
tigia  in  magnis  quondam   urbibns  cer-       9  gee  in  Asher's  Benj.  of  Tud.  II.  p.  435.
uimus.  Silo  tabernaculura  et  area  Domini       '°  l)e  perenn.  Cultu  Terne  Sanct.  quoted

fiiit;  vix  altaris  fundamenta  monstrantur."  by  Quaresmius  Tom.  II.  p.  798.
ui.  87-89

June  14.]

SHILOH.     KHAN  EL-LUBBAN,

271

accords  well  with  the  position  of  Seiliin  relative  to  KhSn  el-
Lubban  ;  which  itself  is  nearly  live  and  a  half  hours  from
el-Bireh.

But  if  the  true  position  was  thus  for  a  time  known,  it  was
again  soon  forgotten  ;  for  at  the  close  of  the  same  century,
Cotovicus  places  Shiloh  at  twelve  miles  north  of  el-Bireh  upon
the  top  of  a  high  mountain,  the  highest  in  Palestine;'  and
although  Quaresmius  professes  to  adopt  the  report  of  Bonifa-
cius,  yet  it  is  easy  to  see  from  the  confusion  of  his  language,
and  the  various  other  opinions  which  he  rejects,  that  no  certain
and  definite  knowledge  of  the  place  was  then  extant. Since
that  time,  so  far  as  I  can  find,  no  further  attempts  have  been
made  to  ascertain  the  site  of  Shiloh.'

Leaving  SeUun  at  8  o'clock,  we  followed  down  the  valley,
which  takes  the  name  of  Wady  el-Liibban,  by  a  rapid  descent
N.  W.  by  W.  for  twenty  minutes,  passing  a  well  on  our  left.
The  valley  then  turns  west,  and  becomes  level  and  fertile ;  the
fields  of  miUet  were  green  and  beautiful,  perhaps  a  foot  high  ;
and  here,  for  the  first  and  only  time,  we  saw  people  at  work
weeding  the  miUet  with  a  sort  of  hoe  ;  but  without  loosening
the  earth  around  the  plants.  The  valley  lies  lower  than  that  by
Sinjil ;  for  our  ascent  to  Seilun  was  much  less  than  our  subse-
quent descent.  At  8.35  was  another  well ;  and  fifteen  minutes
later  we  were  opposite  the  Khan  el-Lubban,  lying  perhaps  five
minutes  distant  southwest,  at  the  south  end  of  the  charming  little
plain  into  which  the  valley  here  enters,  and  at  the  foot  of  the
mountain  over  which  the  direct  road  comes  from  Sinjil.  We
had  avoided  this  mountain  by  taking  the  route  of  Seilun,  where
the  ridge  is  broken  through  by  valleys.  This  Khan  is  now  in
ruins  ;  near  by  it  is  a  fine  fountain  of  running  water.  From
it  the  beautiful  oval  plain  extends  north  about  fifteen  minutes,
with  perhaps  half  that  breadth,  lying  here  deep  among  high
rocky  hills.  On  the  slope  of  the  mountain  in  the  northwest  is
Been  the  village  of  Lubban  ;  while  about  the  middle  of  the
western  side,  a  narrow  chasm  through  the  mountain,  carries  off
the  waters  of  the  plain  and  surrounding  tract.  This  is  the
Wady  el-Lubban,  which  we  had  seen  from  Jiljilia  as  it  runs  to
join  Wady  el-Belat,  and  so  to  the  'Aujeh  in  the  lower  western
plain.  ^

Our  course  was  now  north  through  this  fine  basin  ;  here  we
again  fell  into  the  Jerusalem  road,  and  came  up  with  our

-  Cotovic.  Itin.  p.  336.     The  author  show  it  at  Khan   el-Luhban ;    p.  405.

here  evidently  confounds  Neby  Samwil  Schubert  at  Sinjil  speaks  of  "  Silun "  as

with  this  more  northern  position  of  Shiloh.  lying  in  the  northeast,  but  he  did  not  visit

'  Quaresmius  II.  p.  796-799.  it;  Reise  III.  p.  130.

'  Troilo  in  1667  says  the  site  was  utterly  *  See  above,  p.  266.
unknown  ;  though  the  Greeks  professed  to

iii.  89,  SO

272

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  NABULUS.

[Sbc.  XIV.

servants  and  luggage,  waiting  for  us  beneath  the  shade  of  some
trees.  We  passed  on,  leaving  them  to  load  up  and  follow  us.
At  9  o'clock  we  were  opposite  the  village  of  Lubban,  situated
on  the  northwest  acclivity,  considerably  above  the  plain.  It
is  inhabited  ;  has  the  appearance  of  an  old  place  ;  and  in  the
rocks  above  it  are  excavated  sepulchres.  There  can  be  little
doubt  of  its  being  the  Lebonah  of  the  Old  Testament,  between
Bethel  and  Shechem.'  The  coincidence  was  suggested  by
Maundrell ;  and  has  ever  since  been  adopted  without  question
by  most  of  those  who  have  noticed  the  village  at  all.*  Yet  R.
Parchi  early  in  the  fourteenth  century  has  likewise  a  correct
mention  of  it  as  the  ancient  Lebonah.^  But  from  the  days  of
the  book  of  Judges  till  the  time  of  the  crusades,  I  am  not  aware
that  there  occurs  any  mention  of  this  name  or  place  ;  unless
perhaps  it  be  the  Beth-leban  of  the  Talmud.*  Brocardus,  and
after  him  others,  call  it  Lemna  and  Lebna  ;  but  appear  to  have
had  no  suspicion  of  its  connection  with  any  ancient  site.'

At  the  northeast  corner  of  the  plain,  where  we  now  were,  an-
other level  valley  comes  in  from  the  east,  through  which  we  issued
from  this  fine  basin.  The  valley  is  at  first  narrow  ;  but  expands
more  and  more  as  the  road  follows  it  up,  until  it  turns  northwards
and  becomes  an  open  plain.  Our  course  was  about  E.  by  N.  for
twenty  minutes  ;  and  then  N.  N.  E.  At  9^  o'clock  the  village
es-Sawieh  was  directly  over  us  on  the  hill  at  our  left,  overhang-
ing the  road.  A  little  further  on,  we  stopped  for  ten  minutes
under  the  shade  of  a  large  tree,  to  let  our  servants  and  baggage
come  up.  At  9.50  we  passed  a  ruined  Khan  on  the  roa,d,  also
called  es-Sawieh,  at  the  upper  part  of  the  plain,  just  upon  the
water-shed,  where  the  land  begins  to  descend  towards  the  north
into  the  next  great  valley  running  west.

Here  we  made  a  very  considerable  descent  along  a  steep
narrow  Wady  ;  and  at  10.5  reached  the  bottom  of  a  large  and
very  stony  vaUey  running  from  east  to  west  or  rather  towards
the  W.  S.  W.  Some  men  from  Ram- Allah  whom  we  met,  said
it  runs  down  to  the  'Aujeh  in  the  western  plain,  uniting  with  it
below  the  castle  of  Ras  el-Ain.  On  our  right,  perhaps  half  an
hour  distant,  were  two  villages  ;  one  on  the  south  side  of  the
valley,  near  the  summit  of  a  high  conical  hill,  called  Kilbalan,
surrounded  by  vineyards  and  large  groves  of  olive  and  fig  trees  ;
the  other  called  Yetma,'  on  the  north  side  of  the  valley  near

■  Judg.  21,  19.  Nabulus  towards  Jerusalem  on  the  right,

'  Maundrell,  March  24.  Reland  Palaest.  c.  7.  p.    178.      Breydcnbach,  copying

pp.  871,  872.  Brocardus,  writes  Lepna ;  Keissb.  p.  128.

'  See  in  Asher's Benj.  of  Tud.  II.  p.  435.  Cotovicus  has  Lebna;  p.  337.  Quares-

*  Reland  I.  c.  mius  makes  no  allusion  to  the  mime  or

'  Brocardus  places  "  Lemna,    casale  place.

valde  pulchrum,"  at  four  leagues  from       °  There  is  reason  to  doubt  the  correct-

iiL  90-92

JUXE  U.]

THE  PLAiy  MUKHXA.

273

the  top  of  the  mountain,  aknost  in  ruins.  These  names,  how-
ever, were  given  to  us  some  time  after  we  had  passed  ;  for  on
the  spot,  we  could  find  no  one  to  inform  us,  nor  could  we  learn
the  name  of  the  valley.'  This  Wady  again  Ues  deeper  than  the
plain  of  el-Lubban  ;  for  our  descent  into  it  was  greater  than
our  ascent  from  that  plain  to  the  water-shed.

From  this  valley  we  had  a  rather  steep  ascent  to  the  summit
of  the  high  ridge  on  the  north.  We  reached  the  top  at  10.35,
having  just  before  passed  the  foundations  of  a  ruined  tower.
Here  we  had  our  first  view  of  the  great  plain  of  Mukhna,  which
stretches  alonsr  for  several  hours  on  the  east  of  the  mountains

o

amons  which  Nabiilus  is  situated.  Those  mountains  were  now
before  us  in  all  their  beauty  ;  Mount  Gerizim,  crowned  by  a
Wely  on  its  highest  point,  bearing  north  ;  just  beyond  it  the
entrance  of  the  valley  of  Nabulus  bearing  nearly  X.  N.  E.  ;
further  north  the  rugged  heights  of  Mount  Ebal ;  and  then  the
fine  plain  extending  apparently  still  beyond  towards  the  N.  X.
E.  skirted  on  its  eastern  side  in  its  whole  length  by  tracts  of
picturesque  though  lower  hills.  Much  as  I  had  read  of  Pales-
tine, and  multitudinous  as  have  been  the  travellers  upon  this
very  road,  I  must  confess  that  the  existence  here  of  such  an
extensive  plain,  running  in  this  direction  from  S.  S.  W.  to  N.  N.
E.  was  almost  utterly  unknown  to  me.  We  could  perceive  our
road  forming  a  waving  Hne  along  the  foot  of  the  high  western
hills,  and  under  Mount  Gerizim,  imtil  it  entered  the  vallev  of
Nabulus,  still  two  hours  distant.

A  s"teep  descent  brought  us  in  twenty  minutes  to  the  south-
em  extremity  of  the  plain,  near  a  cistern  ;  in  tliis  part  indeed  the
plain  comes  almost  to  a  point.  At  11.25  we  crossed  the  dry
bed  of  a  torrent,  which  in  winter  carries  otf  the  waters  of  the
whole  southern  part  of  the  plain  towards  the  west,  forming  a
deep  Wady  through  the  western  hills  ;  but  we  could  neither
learn  its  name,  nor  to  what  stream  it  runs  in  the  great  lower
plain.*  Fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  down  this  valley  on  our  left,
were  two  villages  ;  one  on  the  southern  hills  in  ruins,  called  Kuza ;
the  other  on  the  northern  side  called  'Ain  Abus.  Directly  op-
posite on  our  right,  upon  the  hills  along  the  eastern  side  of  the
plain,  perhaps  forty  minutes  distant,  was  the  large  village  of  Beita.
Just  beyond  this  Wady  we  passed  at  11.35  the  large  and  old
village  of  Hawara,  lying  above  us  on  the  slope  at  our  left.

ness  of  the  name,  as  applied  to  this  village,  in.  Sect.  YU,  under  Mav  12th  ;  aad  Sect

Our  lists  seem  to  give  it  on  the  west  of  III,  under  Apr.  26th,  1852.
the  road.  It  proved  to  be  the  beginning  of  the

'  This  Wady  has  its  head  at  'Akrabeh,  deep  A\  ady  Kanali,  which  runs    to  the

and  passes  down  into  the  western  plain  as  great  plain  fouth  of  Jiljilia,  and  so  to  the

Wady  Kibah.    It  passes  north  of  Rig  el-  'Aujeh.    See  in  Vol.  III.  Sect.  Ill,  mider

'Ain,  and  so  to  the  'Aujeh.    See  in  Vol  Apr.  24th  and  2Gth,  1852.

iii.  92,  93

274

FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  NABULUS.

[Sec.  XIV.

Here  tlie  plain  spreads  out  to  a  greater  width  ;  the  eastern  hills
retiring  somewhat  more.  On  that  side  they  are  quite  irregular
and  rock)^,  and  often  jut  out  into  the  plain  ;  while  on  the  west-
ern side  the  base  of  the  slopes  departs  much  less  from  a  right
line.  The  broad  plain  presented  a  beautiful  appearance  ;  it  is
everywhere  cultivated,  and  was  now  covered  with  the  rich  green
of  millet,  mingled  with  the  yellow  of  the  ripe  grain,  which  the
peasants  were  harvesting.  Yet  the  soil  seemed  less  fertile  than
that  of  most  of  the  plains  we  had  visited.  The  average  width
of  this  plain,  may  be  here  not  far  from  half  an  hour,  or  forty
minutes.

In  passing  along  this  plain  we  fell  in  with  many  people  ;
but  found  more  trouble  in  obtaining  information  from  them,
than  we  experienced  in  any  other  part  of  Palestine.  They
would  hardly  answer  any  of  our  questions  ;  and  although  my
companion  dismounted  and  walked  with  them  a  long  distance,
and  entered  into  conversation  with  them,  yet  it  was  with  the
greatest  difficulty  that  he  could  get  them  to  tell  even  the
names  of  the  various  villages.  We  had  several  times  found
something  of  the  same  reserve  at  first,  and  especially  yesterday
at  Jiljilia  ;  but  why  it  should  be  so  much  greater  here  than  any-
where else,  we  were  at  a  loss  to  conceive.  We  did  not  find  it  in
Nabulus  itself,  nor  further  north  ;  and  it  may  not  improbably
have  been  connected  with  the  general  dread  of  the  governmental
requisitions  now  in  progress.  Perhaps  too  the  appearance  of  our
Egyptian  servants,  carrying  muskets,  may  have  led  them  to
imagine,  that  we  had  some  connection  with  the  government,  and
were  seeking  for  information  which  might  injure  them.  The
peasantry  around  Nabulus,  it  may  be  remembered,  as  well  as
those  around  Hebron,  had  felt  the  stern  vengeance  of  the  Egyp-
tian government,  after  the  rebellion  of  A.  D.  1834.

Another  steep  Wady,  coming  down  from  the  left,  we  passed
at  five  minutes  before  noon  ;  on  which,  high  up  and  o\it  of
sight,  is  the  large  village  or  rather  market  town  of  Baunn.
Half  an  hour  later  we  had  the  little  hamlet  of  Kefr  KuUin
above  us  on  the  side  of  Mount  Gerizim.  Several  villages  were
scattered  along  on  the  eastern  hills  ;  on  that  side  Haudela,
'Awerta,  and  Raujib,  succeeded  each  other.

Instead  of  keeping  along  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  quite
to  the  entrance  of  the  valley  of  Nabulus,  the  road  ascends  and
winds  around  the  northeast  corner  of  Moimt  Gerizim.  We
turned  this  point  at  1  o'clock,  and  entered  the  narrow  valley  run-
ning up  northwest  between  Moimts  Gerizim  and  Ebal  ;  thus
leaving  behind  us  the  plain,  which  extends  still  further  north.
Below  us,  on  the  right,  and  not  far  above  the  edge  of  the  plain,
are  the  ruins  of  a  little  hamlet  called  Bclat ;  further  north  and

Hi.  93.  94

JiTSE  14.]

VALLEY  OF  NABULUS.

275

nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  mouth  of  the  narrow  valley,  stands
a  small  white  building,  a  Wely,  called  J osejjh's  tomb  ;  while
near  the  foot  of  Gerizim  below  Belat,  is  the  ancient  well,  known
as  that  of  Jacob.  Directly  opposite  to  the  mouth  of  the  valley,
among  the  eastern  hills,  a  beautiful  smaller  plain  runs  up  east-
ward from  the  larger  one  ;  and  on  the  low  hills  near  its  entrance
on  the  north,  are  seen  the  three  villages  of  'Azmut,  Deir  el-
Hatab,  and  Salim.

After  turning  the  point  of  the  mountain,  our  path  descend-
ed very  little  ;  yet  so  great  is  here  the  ascent  of  the  narrow
valley,  that  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  we  came  out  upon  its
bottom,  near  a  fine  copious  fountain  in  its  middle,  'Ain  Difneh,
furnished  with  a  reservoir.  Below  the  fountain,  towards  the
east,  a  tract  of  ground  of  three  or  four  acres  had  recently  been
enclosed  as  a  garden  ;  but  as  yet  it  contained  no  trees.  Above
this  point,  we  soon  came  to  the  olive  groves,  where  the  ascent  is
less  rapid,  and  the  soil  hard  and  stony.  On  the  left,  before
reaching  the  city,  at  the  foot  of  Gerizim,  is  a  small  tomb  of  a
Muslim  saint,  called  'Amud  ;  but  of  recent  construction,  as  we
were  informed,  and  containing  nothing  of  antiquity.  At  1^  o'clock
we  were  opposite  the  eastern  end  of  the  long  narrow  town,
which  we  did  not  now  enter.  Keeping  the  road  along  its  north-
ern side,  we  passed  some  high  mounds,  apparently  of  ashes ;
where,  aU  at  once,  the  ground  sinks  down  to  a  valley  running
towards  the  west,  with  a  soil  of  rich  black  vegetable  mould.
Here  a  scene  of  luxuriant  and  almost  unparalleled  verdure  burst
upon  our  view.  The  whole  valley  was  filled  with  gardens  of
vegetables  and  orchards  of  all  kinds  of  fruits,  watered  by  several
fountains,  which  burst  forth  in  various  parts  and  flow  westwards
in  refreshing  streams.  It  came  upon  us  suddenly  like  a  scene
of  fairy  enchantment.  We  saw  nothing  to  compare  with  it  in
all  Palestine.  Here,  beneath  the  shade  of  an  immense  mulberry
tree,  by  the  side  of  a  purling  rill,  we  pitched  our  tent  for  the
remainder  of  the  day  and  night.

The  city  of  Nabulus  '  is  long  and  narrow,  stretching  close
along  the  northeast  base  of  Mount  Gerizim  in  this  small  deep
valley,  half  an  hour  distant  from  the  great  eastern  plain.  The
streets  are  narrow  ;  the  houses  high  and  in  general  well  built,
all  of  stone,  with  domes  upon  the  roofs  as  at  Jerusalem.  The
valley  itself,  from  the  foot  of  Gerizim  to  that  of  Ebal,  is  here
not  more  than  some  five  hundred  yards  wide,  extending  from
southeast  to  northwest.  The  city  lies  directly  upon  the  water-
summit  in  this  valley  ;  the  waters  on  the  eastern  part,  as  we

We  follow  in  this  name  the  orthogra-  pronunciation  of  the  present  day,  it  would
phy  of  Abulfeda,  which  is  probably  the  be  written  Nablus.  Abulf.  Tab.  Syr.  p.  85.
most  correct     According  to  the  vulgar

iii.  95,  96

2*76

NABULUS.

[Sec.  XIV.

have  seen,  flowing  off  east  into  the  plain  and  so  to  the  Jordan ;
while  the  fine  fountains  on  the  western  side  send  off  a  pretty
hrook  down  the  valley  northwest  towards  the  Mediterranean,
This  somewhat  remarkahle  circumstance,  so  far  as  I  can  find,
has  hitherto  heen  noted  by  no  traveller.

Mounts  Gerizim  and  Ebal  rise  in  steep  rocky  precipices  im-
mediately from  the  valley  on  each  side,  apparently  some  eight
hundred  feet  in  height.'  The  sides  of  both  these  mountains,  as
here  seen,  were  to  our  eyes  equally  naked  and  sterile  ;  although
some  travellers  have  chosen  to  describe  Gerizim  as  fertile,  and
confine  the  sterility  to  Ebal.^  The  only  exception  in  favour  of
the  former,  so  far  as  we  could  perceive,  is  a  small  ravine  coming
down  opposite  the  west  end  of  the  town,  which  indeed  is  full
of  fountains  and  trees  ;  in  other  respects  both  mountains,  as
here  seen,  are  desolate,  except  that  a  few  olive  trees  are  scat-
tered upon  them.  The  side  of  the  northern  mountain,  Ebal,
along  the  foot,  exhibits  many  ancient  excavated  sepulchres.
The  southern  mountain  is  now  called  by  the  inhabitants,  Jebel
et-Tiir,^  though  the  name  Gerizim  is  known  at  least  to  the
Samaritans.    The  modern  appellation  of  Ebal  we  did  not  learn.

One  of  our  first  objects  at  Nabulus,  was  to  visit  the  Samar-
itans, that  singular  and  feeble  remnant  of  an  ancient  people,
which  to  this  day  has  survived  the  storms  of  ages  and  of  adverse
influences,  upon  their  native  soil.  Some  men  formerly  from
Beinit  soon  came  around  us  ;  and  an  old  Christian  of  the  Greek
rite  undertook  to  conduct  us  to  the  Samaritans,  to  the  summit
of  Mount  Gerizim,  and  to  Jacob's  well.  We  repaired  to  the
city,  passing  among  luxuriant  groves  of  fig  and  other  fruit  trees,
and  entering  by  a  gate  at  the  western  end.  The  quarter  occu-
pied by  the  Samaritans  is  in  the  southwest  part  of  the  city,
rising  somewhat  upon  the  acclivity  of  Gerizim.  It  is  well  built,
and  the  houses  seemed  solid  and  comfortable.  On  coming  to
the  synagogue  we  found  it  closed.  Several  of  the  Samaritans
came  to  us  ;  but  as  the  priest  was  not  at  hand  to  open  the  door,
we  could  not  now  visit  the  synagogue.  They  offered  us  a  guide,
however,  to  the  top  of  Mount  Gerizim  ;  and  we  determined  to
go  thither  immediately,  and  see  the  priest  on  our  return.  We
set  otF  therefore  at  4  o'clock  on  foot,  attended  by  one  of  the
younger  Samaritans,  an  honest  simple-minded  man.    Our  old

'  According  to  Schubert's  barometrical  to  the  time  of  Benj.  of  Tudela;  who  says

observations,  tlie  town  of  Nahuhis  is  1751  correctly,  that  there  are  fountains  and  fruit

Par.  feet  above  the  sea,  and  tlie  summit  of  trees  on  Gerizim,  that  is,  in  the  ravine

Gerizim  about  2.500  feet,  or  about  the  same  described  in  the  text ;  but  this  is  not  true

as  the  Mount  of  Olives.  This  gives  ToO  feet  of  the  mountain  in  general,  which  is  03

for  the  height  of  the  mountain  above  the  baiTeu  as  Ebal.    Itin  I.  p.  68.
town,    lleise  III.  p.  14G.  '  So  too  Yakut  in  Schult.  Ind.  in  ViL

'  Cotovicus  p.  338.     0.  von  Richter  Salad,  art.  7ourum.
Wallfahrtcu  p.  50.    This  story  goes  back

iii.  90.  97

Jv^E  14.]

THE  SAMARITANS.     MOUNT  GERIZIM.

277

Christian  we  were  willing  to  dismiss  till  we  came  back  ;  having
discovered  meantime,  that  his  plan  had  been  to  take  a  Samari-
tan guide  himself,  besides  demanding  one  of  our  mules  to  ride.
We  struck  up  the  ravine  above  mentioned,  which  comes  down
from  the  southwest  and  is  full  of  fruit  trees  and  verdure.  J ust
out  of  the  city  is  a  fine  fountain,  called  'Asal  and  stiU  further
up,  an  aqueduct  and  mill.

Above  the  ravine  the  ascent  of  the  mountain  is  steep  ;  yet  not
BO  but  that  one  might  ride  up  without  diificulty.  When  about
two  thirds  of  the  way  up,  we  heard  a  woman  calling  after  us,
who  proved  to  be  the  mother  of  our  Samaritan  guide.  He  was
her  only  son,  and  had  come  away,  it  seems,  without  her  know-
ledge ;  and  she  was  now  in  the  utmost  terror  at  finding  that  he  had
gone  off"  as  a  guide  to  Franks,  to  show  them  the  holy  mountain.
She  had  immediately  followed  us,  and  was  now  crying  after  us
with  aU  the  strength  of  her  lungs,  forbidding  him  to  proceed,
lest  some  evil  should  befall  him.  The  young  man  went  back  to
meet  her,  and  tried  to  pacify  her ;  but  in  vain  ;  she  insisted
upon  his  returning  home.  This  he  was  not  inclined  to  do  ;
although  he  said  he  could  not  disobey  his  mother,  and  so
transgress  the  law  of  Moses.  This  touching  trait  gave  us  a  fa-
vourable idea  of  the  morality  of  the  Samaritans.  After  reason-
ing with  her  a  long  time  without  efi"ect,  he  finally  persuaded  her
to  go  with  us.  So  she  followed  us  up  ;  at  first  full  of  wrath,
and  keeping  at  a  distance  from  us  ;  yet  at  last  she  became  quite
reconciled  and  communicative.

Twenty  minutes  of  ascent  from  the  city  in  the  direction
southwest  led  us  to  the  top  of  Gerizim ;  which  proved  to  be  a
tract  of  high  table  land  stretching  otf  far  towards  the  west  and
southwest.  Twenty  minutes  more  towards  the  southeast  along
a  regtilar  path  upon  the  table  land,  brought  us  to  the  Wely  we
had  seen  before,  standing  on  a  small  eminence  on  the  eastern
brow  of  the  mountain,  perhaps  the  highest  point ;  and  over-
looking the  plain  on  the  east,  and  indeed,  all  the  country  around,
including  Jebel  esh-Sheikh  or  Hermon  in  the  distance.  Here
is  the  holy  place  of  the  Samaritans,  wluther  they  stiU  come  up
three  times  a  year  to  worship.  The  spot  where  they  sacrifice  the
passover,  seven  lambs  among  them  all,  was  pointed  out  to  us,
just  below  the  highest  point  and  before  coming  to  the  last
slight  acclivity.  It  is  marked  by  two  parallel  rows  of  rough
stones  laid  upon  the  ground  ;  and  a  small  round  pit,  roughly
stoned  up,  in  which  the  flesh  is  roasted.

_  On  ascending  the  rise  of  ground  beyond  this  spot,  the  first
object  which  presents  itself,  are  the  ruins  of  an  immense  struc-
ture of  hewn  stones,  bearing  every  appearance  of  having  once
been  a  large  and  strong  fortress.  '  It  consisted  of  two  adjacent

Vol.  II.-24  iii.  97_99

278

NABTJLTTS.

[Sec.  XIV.

parts,  eacli  measuring  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  feet  from
east  to  west  and  two  hundred  feet  from  north  to  south,  giving  a
length  in  all  of  about  four  hundred  feet  in  the  latter  direction.
The  stones  are  the  common  limestone  of  the  region,  tolerably
large,  and  bevelled  at  the  edges,  though  rough  in  the  middle.
The  walls  in  some  places  are  nine  feet  thick.  At  the  four
corners  of  the  southern  division  were  square  towers,  and  one  in
the  middle  of  the  eastern  side.  In  the  northern  part  is  now  the
Muslim  Wely,  and  also  a  cemetery.  The  stranger  at  first  is
very  naturally  struck  with  the  idea,  that  these  mnst  be  the
remains  of  the  ancient  temple  of  the  Samaritans  upon  Mount
Gerizim  ;  but  the  Samaritans  of  the  present  day  attach  no
sanctity  whatever  to  these  ruins,  and  simply  call  them  el-Kul'ah,
*  the  Castle.'  We  shall  hereafter  see,  that  they  are  probably  the
remains  of  a  fortress  erected  by  Justinian.

Just  under  the  walls  of  the  castle,  on  the  west  side,  are  a
few  flat  stones,  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether  they  were
laid  there  by  nature,  or  by  man.  Under  these,  the  guide  said,
are  the  twelve  stones  brought  out  of  Jordan  by  the  Israelites
and  there  they  will  remain,  until  el-Muhdy  (the  Guide)  shall
appear.  This,  he  said,  and  not  the  Messiah,  is  the  name  they
give  to  the  expected  Saviour.  He  could  not  tell  when  he  would
appear ;  but  there  were  already  some  tokens  of  his  coming.

Soon  after  we  passed  the  castle,  towards  the  south,  the  guide
took  off"  his  shoes,  saying  it  was  unlawful  for  his  people  to  tread
with  shoes  upon  this  ground,  it  being  holy.  After  a  few  steps
we  came  to  a  large  naked  surface  of  rock,  even  with  the  ground
and  occupying  a  considerable  area,  inclining  somewhat  towards
a  cistern  in  the  western  part.  Tliis  he  said  was  their  holiest
spot,  the  place  where  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  with  the  ark
of  the  covenant  had  been  pitched.  He  seemed  to  have  no
tradition  of  any  temple  here  ;  and  although  we  inquired  repeat-
edly, we  could  not  perceive  that  he  had  ever  heard  of  any.
Around  this  rock  are  slight  traces  of  former  walls,  perhaps  of
the  ancient  temple.  We  measured  them,  so  far  as  they  could  be
distinguished,  fifty-eight  feet  from  north  to  south  and  forty-five
feet  from  east  to  west,  but  we  were  afterwards  not  sure  Avhether
this  latter  ought  not  to  be  doubled.  This  spot  is  the  Kibleh  of
the  Samaritans.  On  whatever  side  of  it  they  may  be,  according
to  our  guide,  they  always  turn  their  faces  towards  it  in  prayer  ;
but  when  upon  the  spot  itself,  it  is  lawful  for  them  to  pray  in
any  direction.

Near  by  the  same  place,  he  pointed  out  the  spot  where  they
believed  Abraham  was  connnanded  to  off'er  up  Isaac.    On  being

'  Benjamin  of  Tudela  relates,  that  the    was  built  of  these  twelve  stones.    Itin.  L
oltar  of  the  Samaritans  on  Mount  Gerizim    p.  67.
iii.  99.  100

JtWK  14.]

SUMMIT  OF  MOUNT  GERIZIM.

279

asked  if  there  were  Samaritans  in  any  other  part,  he  said
there  were  others  living  beyond  the  river  Sabt,  which  could  be
crossed  only  on  a  Saturday  ;  but  as  the  Samaritans  do  not
travel  on  that  day,  nothing  more  was  known  about  them.

Further  south,  and  indeed  all  around  upon  this  eminence,
are  extensive  foundations,  apparently  of  dwellings,  as  if  the
ruins  of  a  former  city.  There  are  also  many  cisterns  ;  but  aU
were  now  dry.

This  point  commanded  a  wide  view  of  the  country,  and
especially  of  the  great  plain  below,  through  which  we  had  trav-
elled on  approaching  f^abulus.  The  region  round  about,  bore
an  aspect  different  from  that  around  Jerusalem  ;  as  we  had
already  had  occasion  to  remark  upon  our  journey.  Indeed,  from
Sinjil  northwards,  we  had  noticed,  that  the  mountains  in  general
were  less  lofty  and  steep,  and  also  less  naked  ;  while  the  valleys
spread  themselves  out  into  fertile  plains  or  basins,  stretching
mostly  from  east  to  west,  but  also  sometimes  from  north  to
Bouth.  This  plain  of  Nabulus  is  the  largest  of  all  upon  the
high  tract  between  the  western  plain  and  the  Jordan  vaUey  ;
and  these  mountains  are  the  highest  in  this  region.  The  length
of  the  plain  from  S.  S.  W.  to  N.  N.  E.  is  not  far  from  four
hours  ;  its  breadth  is  somewhat  variable  in  consequence  of  the
irregxilarity  of  the  hills  along  the  eastern  border ;  but  may  be
taken  on  an  average  at  from  one  half  to  three  quarters  of  an
hour.  The  southern  part,  as  we  have  seen,  which  is  apparently
less  fertile,  is  drained  by  a  Wady  running  westwards  to  the
Mediterranean.  But  from  a  point  some  distance  south  of  the  val-
ley of  Nabulus,  the  land  begins  to  incline  towards  the  north,
and  the  waters  are  carried  off  at  the  northeast  extremity
towards  the  Jordan,  by  a  branch  of  the  great  Wady  el-Fari'a. —
Across  the  valley  of  Nabulus,  we  could  see  the  summit  of  Mount
Ebal  spreading  out  into  table  land,  not  unlike  that  of  Gerizim.

But  the  feature  in  the  prospect  which  struck  us  most,  was
the  smaller  plain  already  alluded  to,  which  runs  up  E.  S.  E.
from  the  eastern  side  of  the  Mukhna,  overagainst  the  valley  of
Nabulus.  It  is  properly  separated  from  the  Mukhna  by  a  low
ridge  of  rocky  hills,  through  which  runs  an  open  Wady  connect-
ing the  two  plains,  and  draining  off  the  waters  of  the  smaller
one  westwards,  where  they  then  flow  northwards  and  so  to  the
Jordan:  On  the  hills  along  the  north  side  of  this  Wady,  are
seen  the  three  villages  of  'Azmut,  Deir  el-Hatab,  and  Salim  ;
the  latter  lying  furthest  east.  This  may  not  improbably  be
the  Shalim,  a  city  of  Shechem,  to  which  Jacob  came  on  his
return  from  Padan-aram.'    The  plain  beyond  extends  eastwards

'1  Gen.  33,  18.  The  existence  of  this  bulus  or  Sliecliem,  shows  at  least  that  it
ancient  came  of  a  village  so  near  to  Na-    is  not  necessary  to  suppose  the  name  Sha-

iii  101, 102

280

yABULTJS.

[Sec  XIV.

for  an  hour  or  more,  bearing  the  same  characteristics  of  fertility
and  beauty  as  the  Mukhna  itself.  On  its  farther  side,  on  the
low  hills,  was  seen  a  village  called  Beit  Dejan  :'  and  beyond  the
southeast  part,  appeared  the  high  peak  of  a  mountain  looking
towards  the  Jordan,  along  the  foot  of  which  passes  a  road  lead-
ing from  Xabulus  through  this  plain  to  the  Jordan.  This  waa
Kum  Surtabeh,  which  we  had  so  often  seen  from  the  neighbour-
hood of  Jericho.*  On  the  nearest  part  of  the  southern  side  of
the  plain,  lay  another  village  called  Beit  Fiirik.  not  two  hours
from  Xabulus.  The  ruined  village  Kefr  Beita  lies  twenty  min-
utes further  west.^

In  the  same  region  (southeast)  our  lists  contained  the  name
of  'Akraljeh  as  a  \'illage  still  existing  ;  it  follows  immediately
five  of  the  villages  just  enumerated,  and  those  of  Beita,  Haudela,
'Awerta,  and  Raujib,  which  are  situated  along  the  eastern  side
of  the  large  plain.  It  would  seem  therefore  to  stand  somewhere
south  of  the  five  former,  and  east  of  the  four  latter.  We  how-
ever did  not  see  it,  nor  was  it  here  mentioned  nor  pointed  out  to
us  by  any  one.  Wherever  it  may  be  situated,  it  is  doubtless
the  ancient  Acrabi  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome.* — At  about  twelve
Eoman  miles  from  Xeapolis,  in  the  same  quarter,  the  Onomas-
ticon  j'laces  a  village  called  Edumia  :  and  in  our  Hsts  of  that
region  stands  the  name  Daumeh,  which  probably  marks  the
same  site.^

We  returned  down  the  mountain  by  the  same  route  :  occu-
pying twenty  minutes  to  the  brow  of  the  descent,  and  twenty
minutes  thence  to  the  city.  We  now  found  the  Samaritan
priest  and  several  of  his  people  waiting  for  us,  in  the  little  court
before  their  synagogue  and  school  room.  The  priest  seemed
about  sixty  years  old,  with  a  shrewd  intelligent  expression  of
coimtenance,  and  a  manner  which  would  command  influence
anywhere.'  His  son,  now  sub-priest,  perhaps  thirty-five  years
of  age,  seemed  in  all  respects  to  be  of  a  more  ordinary  charac-

lim  (Salem)  to  be  applied  in  this  passage  just  visible,  N.  by  W.  Mount  Hermon
to  Shechem  itself:  as  is  done  by  Eusebius  X.  30'  E.  'Aznuit  N.  55"  K  Deir  el-
and Jerome  and  others  after  them.  Ono-  Hatab  N.  70'  E.  Salim  N.  80°  E.  Beit
mast.  art.  Salem  and  Sichem.  Equally  nn-  Dejan  S.  80'  E.  Raujib  S.  50'  E,  'Awerta
oecessary  is  the  other  mode  of  interpreta-  S.  15  E.

tion,  which  regards  it  as  an  adjective,  in  '  Onomast  art.  Aorabi,  'AxpaPfitly.

the  meaning  ^o/f,  prosperous.    See  gene-  '  Onomast,  art.  Edomia. —  We  visited

rally,  Beland's  Dissenat  MiscelL  I.  3.  p.  both  'Akrabeh  and  Daumeh  in  1852  ;  see

143.  Vol  IIL  Sect  VIL  under  May  11th  and

•  This  implies  another  ancient  Beth  12th

Dagon,  of  which  we  have  no  account.  '  Our  notes  do  not  contain  the  name  of

Comp.  above,  p.  232,  n.  2.  the  priest :  but  he  is  probably  the  same

*  See  Vol.  I.  p.  536.  Si-Limcb.  who  wTOte  t-i  De  Sacy  and  others
'  Irby  and  Mangles  p.  329.  [100].—  in  lMi.*<,  1S20,  and  182G.    See  Ni-tices  et

From  Mount  Gerizim  we  took  the  fol-  Extr.  des  Mss.  etc.  Tom.  XXL  pp.  15,  17,

lowing  bearings :  Xabulua,  the  west  end  234.

iii.  102-104

June  14.1

VISIT  TO  THE  SAMARITANS,

281

ter.  The  priest  wore  an  external  robe  of  red  silk,  witli  a  white
turban  ;  the  others  had  mostly  red  turbans.  In  other  particu-
lars their  dress  was  similar  to  the  usual  costume  of  the  country.
Their  common  language  of  intercourse,  among  themselves  and
with  others,  is  the  Arabic.  They  were  very  ci\'il  and  polite  ;
answered  readily  all  our  inquiries  respecting  themselves,  their
customs,  and  their  faith  •  and  asked  many  questions,  especially
the  priest  respecting  America,  and  particularly  whether  there
were  any  Samaritans  in  that  country.  We  did  not  understand
them  as  believing,  that  other  colonies  of  Samaritans  actually
exist  there  or  elsewhere  ;  but  they  seemed  to  have  the  idea  that
such  a  thing  was  possible,  and  were  anxious  to  learn  the  true
stat3  of  the  case.

The  priest  said,  they  have  many  books  of  prayers,  commen-
taries, and  the  like^  in  their  ancient  language  and  character ;
which  character  they  call  el-'Ebry  (the  Hebrew),  in  distinction
from  that  used  by  the  Jews,  which  they  caU  el-Kashury.
They  have  a  copy  of  the  first  volume  of  Walton's  Polyglott ;
and  in  the  course  of  conversation,  the  priest  acknowledged  to  us
the  correctness  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  contained  in  it.
They  complained,  as  usual,  of  the  Jewish  corruptions  of  the
text  ;  and  dwelt  upon  the  superior  purity,  both  of  their  text
and  of  their  observance  of  the  law.

After  considerable  conversation,  the  priest  at  length  rose  and
opened  the  door  of  their  Keniseh,  (the  Arabic  word  for  both
church  and  sjTiagogue,)  and  we  all  entered,  taking  off  our  shoes.
It  is  a  small  plain  arched  room,  with  a  recess  on  the  left  hand
at  entering,  where  their  manuscripts  are  kept,  before  which  a
curtain  is  suspended.  We  noticed  no  figure  of  a  dove  or  of  other
objects.  We  inquired  after  the  noted  manuscript,  which  they
professed  was  now  3460  years  old  ;  referring  it  to  Abishua  the
son  of  Phinehas.'  The  priest  brought  out  a  manuscript  from
the  recess,  rolled  on  two  rods  in  the  usual  J ewish  form  ;  but  it
turned  out  to  be  written  in  a  modern  hand  and  on  new  parch-
ment. When  this  was  pointed  out,  the  old  man  laughed,  and
produced  another,  which  he  and  the  rest  aU  said  was  the  true
one.  It  was  certainly  very  much  worn,  and  somewhat  tattered
with  use  and  much  kissing,  and  here  and  there  patched  with
shreds  of  parchment  ;  but  the  handwriting  appeared  to  me  very
similar  to  the  former,  and  the  vellum  seemed  in  hke  manner  not
ancient.  Of  course  we  were  not  permitted  to  handle  or  touch  it ;
and  whatever  may  be  its  real  age,  it  is  very  probably  the  manu-
script which  has  usually  been  shown  to  former  travellers  and  ex-
cited their  wonder.    They  professed  to  have  about  a  hundred

'  1  C'hron.  6,  3.  4.  This  manuscript  is  often  mentioned  in  their  letters ;  e.  g.  De
Sacy  Corresp.  p.  1 25,  and  Note.

Vol.  II.— 24*  iii.  104, 105

282

KABULUS.

[Sec.  XIV.

manuscripts  ;  and  the  priest  said,  tliat  he  employs  himself  in
■writing  out  copies  of  the  law.  When  asked  if  they  would  seU  a
copy,  the  answer  was  :  Yes,  for  fifty  thousand  piastres.

The  Samaritans  are  now  reduced  to  a  very  small  community  ;
there  being  only  thirty  men  who  pay  taxes,  and  few,  if  any,  who
are  exempt  ;  so  that  their  whole  number  cannot  be  reckoned  at
over  one  hundred  and  fifty  souls.  One  of  them  is  in  affluent
circumstances  ;  and  having  been  for  a  long  time  chief  secretary
of  the  Mutesellim  of  Nabulus,  became  one  of  the  most  important
and  powerful  men  of  the  province.  He  had  recently  been  su-
perseded in  his  infiu^ce  with  the  governor  by  a  Copt  ;  and  now
held  only  the  second  place.  He  was  called  el-'Abd  es-Samary.
The  rest  of  the  Samaritans  are  not  remarkable  either  for  their
wealth  or  poverty.  The  physiognomy  of  those  we  saw  was  not
Jewish  ;  nor  indeed  did  we  remark  in  it  any  peculiar  character,
as  distinguished  from  that  of  other  natives  of  the  country.  They
keep  the  Saturday  as  their  Sabbath  with  great  strictness,  aUow-
ing  no  labour  nor  trading,  not  even  cooking  nor  hghting  a  fire,  but
resting  from  their  employments  the  whole  day.  On  Friday  even-
ing tliey  pray  in  their  houses  ;  and  on  Saturday  have  public
prayers  in  their  synagogue  at  morning,  noon,  and  evening.  They
meet  also  in  the  synagogue  on  the  great  festivals,  and  on  the
new  moons  ;  but  not  every  day.  The  law  is  read  in  pubKc,  not
every  Sabbath  day,  but  only  upon  the  same  festivals.

Three  times  a  year  they  go  up  to  Mount  Gerizim  (Jebel  et-
Tur)  in  solemn  procession  to  worship  ;  and  then  they  begin
reading  the  law  as  they  set  ofi",  and  finish  it  above.  These  seasons
are  :  The  feast  of  the  Passover,  when  they  pitch  their  tents  on
the  mountain  all  night,  and  sacrifice  seven  lambs  at  sunset  ;  the
day  of  Pentecost ;  and  the  feast  of  Tabernacles,  when  they  so-
journ there  in  booths  built  of  branches  of  the  arbutus.'  They
still  maintain  their  ancient  hatred  against  the  J ews  ;  accuse
them  of  departing  from  the  law  in  not  sacrificing  the  passover,
and  in  various  other  points,  as  well  as  of  corrupting  the  ancient
text  ;  and  scrupulously  avoid  all  connection  with  them.  If  of
old  "  the  Jews  had  no  dealings  with  the  Samaritans,"^  the  latter
at  the  present  day  reciprocate  the  feeling  ;  and  neither  eat  nor
drink,  nor  marry,  nor  associate  with  the  Jews ;  but  only  trade
with  them.

'  Ex.  23,  14—17.  For  many  years  at  oflfer  sacrifices  on  the  mountain,  and  per-
the  cl<  .se  of  the  last  century  and  the  begin-  fbrmed  their  rites  only  in  the  town.  Yet
ninp  of  tlie  present,  the  Samaiitans  were  from  their  letter  in  1820,  it  would  appear,
unable  to  pertbrm  their  devotions  on  Mount  that  they  had  already  been  able  to  resume
Gerizim,  on  account  of  the  exactions  and  their  pilgrimages  to  the  simimit  of  Gerizim-
oppres-^ions  of  the  government  and  Sheikhs.  De  Sacy  Corresp.  des  Samar.  pp.  12(J,  157,
Writing  to  France  in  1810,  they  say  that  158.
for  twenty-five  years  they  had  ceased  to       '  John  4,  9.

iii.  105-107

June  14.]

THE  SAMARITANS.     JACOB'S  WELL.

^83

We  inquired  of  the  Samaritans  respecting  Jacob's  well.
They  said  they  acknowledged  the  tradition,  and  regarded  it  as
having  belonged  to  the  patriarch.  It  lies  at  the  mouth  of  the
valley,  near  the  south  side  ;  and  is  the  same  which  the  Christians
sometimes  call  Bir  es-Samiriyoh, '  Well  of  the  Samaritan  woman.'
They  acknowledge  also  the  tomb  near  by  as  the  place  of  J oseph's
burial ;  though  the  present  building  is  only  a  Muhammedan
Wely.'

Late  as  it  was,  we  took  a  Christian  guide,  our  first  old  man
not  having  again  made  his  appearance,  and  set  off  for  Jacob's
well.  We  now  passed  down  on  the  north  the  fountain  in  the
valley  and  the  enclosed  gardens  below  ;  so  that  we  came  to  the
opening  of  the  valley  on  the  north  side.  Our  guide  had  professed
to  know  all  about  the  well ;  but  when  we  had  got  thus  far,  he
could  not  teU  where  it  was.  We  met,  however,  a  Muhammedan,
who  also  acknowledged  the  tradition  respecting  Jacob's  well  and
Joseph's  tomb.  He  led  us  by  the  latter,  wliich  stands  in  the
middle  of  the  mouth  of  the  valley  ;  and  then  to  the  well,  situa-
ted south  of  the  tomb  and  just  at  the  base  of  Gerizim,  below
the  road  by  wliich  we  had  passed  along  this  morning.  We  were
thirty-five  minutes  in  coming  to  it  from  the-city.  The  well  bears
evident  marks  of  antiquity,  but  was  now  dry  and  deserted  ;  it
was  said  usually  to  contain  living  water,  and  not  merely  to  be
filled  by  the  rains.  A  large,  stone  was  laid  loosely  over,  or  rather
in,  its  mouth  ;  and  as  the  hour  was  now  late  and  the  twilight
nearly  gone,  we  made  no  attempt  to  remove  the  stone  and  ex-
amine the  vaulted  entrance  below.  We  had  also  no  line  with  us
at  the  moment,  to  measure  the  well ;  but  by  dropping,  in  stones,
we  could  perceive  that  it  was  dzzp.^  Adjacent  to  the  well  are
the  ruins  of  an  ancient  church,  forming  mounds  of  mbbish ;
among  which  we  remarked  three  granite  columns.^

What  we  thus  could  not  do,  had  however  been  done  long
before  by  Maundrell.  He  describes  the  well  as  covered  by  an
old  stone  vault,"  into  which  he  descended  by  a  narrow  hole  in  the
roof,  and  there  found  the  proper  mouth  of  the  well  with  a  broad
flat  stone  upon  it.  He  removed  the  stone  and  measured  the  well.
"  It  is  dug  in  a  firm  rock,  and  contains  about  three  yards  in

'  We  heard  nothing  of  the  tombs  of  AVetstein  Kov.  Test,  in  Act.  1.  c.  Hieron.

Eleazar,  Ithamar,  Phinehas,  and  others,  Ep.  86,  Epitaph.  Paula,  p.  677,  "  atque

■which  the  Samaritans  have  formerly  pro-  inde  [Sichem]  divertens  vidit  duodecim

fessed  to  show  at  Nabulus.    See  De  Sacy  patriareharum  sepulchra  "  Yet  a  different

Corresp.  des  Samar.  pp.  181,  210,  etc. —  tradition  is  also  preserved  by  Josephus,

In  the  address  of  Stephen,  Acts  7,  16,  the  which  makes  them  to  have  been  buried  at

twelve  sons  of  Jacob  are  spoken  of  as  Hebron ;  Antiq.  2.  8.  2.

buried  at  Shechem  ;  and  historical  notices  '  John  4,  11.

of  a  Jen  isli  tradition  to  the  same  effect,  '  For  a  subsequent  visit  to  the  well,  see

are  found  iu  the  Rabbins  and  in  Jerome  ;  in  Vol.  in.  Sect.  Ill,  under  Apr.  23d,  1852.
see  Lightfoot  Hor.  Heb.  in  Act.  7,  16.

iii.  107,  108

284

NABULUS.

[Sec.  XIV.

diameter,  and  thirty-five  in  depth  ;  five  we  found  full  of  water."'
It  was  near  the  end  of  March  when  Maundrell  thus  found  fifteen
feet  of  water  in  the  well.  In  April,  1839,  the  Rev.  S.  Calhoun
found  the  well  to  be  only  seventy-five  feet  deep  below  the  vault,
with  ten  or  twelve  feet  of  water.  Tliis  measurement  was  verified
by  Dr  Wilson  in  April,  1843  ;  but  at  that  time  the  bottom  was
scarcely  covered  with  water.*  According  to  Bonifacius  about
1555,  there  was  then  an  altar  in  this  vault,  on  which  mass  was  cele-
brated once  a  year  ;  but  Quaresmius  in  the  next  century  remarks,
that  this  practice  had  been  already  discontinued  many  years  by
the  Latins  ;  although  the  altar  still  existed  in  the  vault,  where
the  Greeks  sometimes  yet  read  mass.^

This  tradition  respecting  both  Jacob's  weU  and  Joseph's  tomb,
in  which  by  a  singular  coincidence  Jews  and  Samaritans,  Chris-
tians and  Muhammedans,  all  agree,  goes  back  at  least  to  the
time  of  Eusebius  in  the  early  part  of  the  fourth  century.  That
writer  indeed  speaks  only  of  the  sepulchre  ;  but  the  Bourdeaux
pilgrim  in  A.  D.  333,  mentions  also  the  well ;  and  neither  of
these  writers  has  any  allusion  to  a  church.^  But  Jerome  in  his
letter  on  Paula,  which  is  referred  to  A.  D.  404,  makes  her  visit
the  church  erected  at  the  side  of  Mount  Gerizim  around  the  weU
of  Jacob,  where  our  Lord  met  the  Samaritan  woman.*  The
church  would  seem  therefore  to  have  been  built  during  the  fourth
century  ;  though  not  by  Helena,  as  is  reported  in  modem  times.
It  was  visited  and  is  mentioned,  as  around  the  well,  by  Antoninus
Martyr  near  the  close  of  the  sixth  century  ;  by  Arculfus  a  cen-
tury later,  who  describes  it  as  buUt  in  the  form  of  a  cross  ;  and
again  by  ^t.  Wilhbald  in  the  eighth  century.''  Yet  Saawulf  about
A.  D.  1103,  and  Phocas  in  1185,  who  speak  of  the  well,  make
no  mention  of  the  church  ;  whence  we  may  conclude  that  the
latter  had  been  destroyed  before  the  period  of  the  crusades.*
Brocardus  speaks  of  ruins  around  the  well,  blocks  of  marble  and
columns,  which  he  held  to  be  the  ruins  of  a  town,  the  ancient
Theboz  ;  they  were  probably  those  of  the  church,  to  which  he
makes  no  allusion.'    Other  travellers,  both  of  that  age  and  later,

'  Maundrell,  March  24.  extructam  circum  pnteum  Jacob  intravit

"  Lands  of  the   Bible   II.  p.  55  sq.  Ecclesiam,"  etc.
Comp.  Narrat.  of  the  Scotch  Deputation       '  Anton.  Mart.  Itin.  6.  Adamnanus  2.

in  1829,  June  20th.  21.    St.  WiUib.  Hodocpor.  22.  p.  378.  ed.

'  "  Tantuni  in  ore  putei  remanet  altare ;"  Mabill.     See  these  writers  cited  in  full,

Bonifacius,  quoted  by  Quaresmius,  11.  p.  Reland  Palaest.  p.  1007  sq.
801,  col.  a.  b.  "  Sajwulf  Peregrinat.  p.  269.  Phocas  do

*  Liglitfoot  Hor.  Heb.  in  Act.  7,  16.  Locis  Sanct.  13.  Reland  1.  c.

'  Onoinast.  art.  Sichcm.  Itiner.  Hieros.       "  Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  1 77.  Comp.  Marin,

ed.  Wess.  p.  587  sq.  Sanut.  p.  248,  who  also  mentions  the  tomb

"  Hieron.  Ep.  86,  Epit.  Paulae,  p.  676.  of  Joseph,
ed.  Mart.    "  Et  ex  latere  montis  Garizim
iii.  109,  110

June  14.]

Jacob's  well.

285

speak  of  the  cliurcla  only  as  destroyed,  and  tlie  well  as  already
deserted.'

Before  the  days  of  Eusebius,  there  seems  to  be  no  historical
testimony  to  show  the  identity  of  this  well,  with  that  which  onr
Saviour  visited  ;  and  the  proof  must  therefore  rest,  so  far  as  it
can  be  made  out  at  all,  on  circumstantial  evidence.  I  am  not
aware  of  anything  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  that  goes  to  con-
tradict the  common  tradition  ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  I  see
much  in  the  circumstances,  tending  to  confirm  the  supposition,
that  this  is  actually  the  spot  where  our  Lord  held  his  conversa-
tion with  the  Samaritan  woman.  Jesus  was  journeying  from
Jerusalem  to  GaUlee,  and  rested  at  the  well,  while  "  liis  disciples
were  gone  away  into  the  city  to  buy  meat."*  The  well  therefore
lay  apparently  before  the  city,  and  at  some  distance  from  it.
In  passing  along  the  eastern  plain,  Jesus  had  halted  at  the  well,
and  sent  his  disciples  to  the  city  situated  in  the  narrow  valley,
intending  on  their  return  to  proceed  along  the  plain  on  his  way
to  Galilee,  without  himself  visiting  the  city.  All  this  corres-
ponds exactly  to  the  present  character  of  the  ground.'  The
well  too  was  Jacob's  well,  of  high  antiquity,  a  known  and  ven-
erated spot ;  which,  after  having  aheady  Hved  for  so  many  ages
in  tradition,  would  not  be  likely  to  be  forgotten  in  the  two  and
a  half  centuries,  intervening  between  St.  John  and  Eusebius.

A  very  obvious  question  presented  itself  to  us  upon  the  spot,
viz.  How  it  can  be  supposed,  that  the  woman  should  have
come  from  the  city,  now  half  an  hour  distant,  with  her  water-
pot,  to  draw  water  from  Jacob's  well,  when  there  are  so  many
fountains  just  around  the  city,  and  she  must  have  also  passed
directly  by  a  large  one  at  mid-disiance  ?  But,  in  the  first  place,
the  ancient  city  probably  lay  in  part  nearer  to  this  well  than
the  modern  one  ;  and  then  too  it  is  not  said,  that  the  woman
came  thither/rom  the  city  at  all.  She  may  have  dwelt,  or  have
been  labouring,  near  by  the  well ;  and  have  gone  into  the  city
only  to  make  her  wonderful  report  respecting  the  stranger  pro-
phet.'' Or,  even  granting  that  her  home  was  in  the  city,  there
would  be  nothing  improbable  or  unusual  in  the  supposition,  that
the  inhabitants  may  have  set  a  pecuHar  value  on  the  water  of
this  ancient  well  of  J acob,  and  have  occasionally  put  themselves
to  the  trouble  of  going  thither  to  draw.  That  it  was  not  the
ordinary  public  well  of  the  city,  is  probable  from  the  circum-

-  So  Will,  de  Baldensel  in  Basnage  northwards,  ascends  and  crosses  the  ridge

Thesaiir.  IV.  p.  S.'iS.    Sir  J.  Maurideville  of  Mount  Ebal  at  a  point  west  of  the  town,

p.  105.  Lond.  1839.     Lud.  de  Suchem.  But  there  is,  and  doubtless  was,  also  a

Itin.  p.  93.  Reissb.  p.  8.50.  Cotoidc.  p.  road  along  the  plain.

337.    Quarosraius  II.  p.  801.  etc.  etc.  '  John  4,  7.  28.  29.    "Woman  of  Sa-

'  'lolin  4,  3-8.  maria"  is  here  only  equivalent  to  "  a  Sa-

'  The  present  usual  road  from  Nilbulus  maritan  woman,"  one  of  the  Samaritans.

iii.  ]10.  Ill

286

NABULUS,

[Sec.  XIV.

stance,  that  there  was  here  no  public  accommodation  for  drawing
water. '

More  difficult  is  it  to  account  for  the  fact,  that  a  well  should
ever  have  been  dug  here  at  all,  on  a  spot  in  the  immediate
vicinity  of  so  .many  natural  fountains ;  and  irrigated,  even  at
the  present  day,  by  rills  of  running  water,  brought  down  from
the  source  higher  up  the  valley,  and  of  sufficient  volume  to
drive  a  mill.  I  can  solve  this  difficulty  only  by  admitting,  that
this  is  probably  the  actual  well  of  the  patriarch  ;  and  that  it
was  dug  by  him  in  some  connection  with  the  possession  of  the
"  parcel  of  ground,"  bought  of  Hamor  the  father  of  Shechem  ;
which  he  gave  to  his  son  J oseph,  and  in  which  Joseph  and  possi-
bly his  brethren  were  buried.'^  The  practice  of  the  patriarchs
to  dig  wells  wherever  they  sojourned,  is  weU  known  and  if
Jacob's  field,  as  it  would  seem,  was  here  before  the  mouth  of  the
valley  of  Shechem,  he  might  prefer  not  to  be  dependent  for
water  on  fountains,  which  lay  up  that  vaUey  and  were  not  his
own.  Or,  very  possibly,  the  fountain  itself  may  be  of  later
date  ;  the  effect  of  earthquakes,  to  which  the  land  is  subject.

I  think  we  may  thus  rest  with  confidence  in  the  opinion,  that
this  is  Jacob's  well,  and  here  the  parcel  of  ground  which  Jacob
gave  to  his  son  Joseph.  Here  the  Saviour,  wearied  with  his
journey,  sat  upon  the  well,  and  taught  the  poor  Samantan
woman  those  great  truths,  which  have  broken  down  the  separa-
ting wall  between  Jews  and  Gentiles:  "God  is  a  spirit ;  and
they  that  worship  him,  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."
Here,  too,  as  the  people  flocked  from  the  city  to  hear  him,  he
pointed  his  disciples  to  the  waving  fields  which  decked  the  noble
plain  around,  exclaiming  :  "  Say  not  ye,  There  are  yet  four
months,  and  then  cometh  harvest  ?  Behold,  I  say  unto  you,
Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  on  the  fields ;  for  they  are  white
already  to  harvest !  "  *

It  was  half  past  8  o'clock  when  we  returned  to  our  tent ;
wearied  indeed  in  body,  but  refreshed  in  spirit,  as  we  read  anew,
and  in  the  midst  of  the  very  scenes,  the  account  of  our  Saviour's
visit  and  sublime  teaching.'

1^1  our  interview  with  the  Samaritans,  we  had  forgotten  to
inquire  respecting  the  general  statistics  of  Nabulus  ;  and  we
had  no  other  acquaintance  on  whose  information  we  could  de-
pend. The  only  Christians  here  are  Greeks,  numbering  120
taxable  men,  or  about  500  souls.    There  is  a  Greek  bishop  of

»  John  4,  11.

»  Gen.  33,  19.  Josh.  24,  32.  John  5,
5.  Acts  7,  1.5.  16.  Corap.  Lightfoot
Hor.  Heb.  in  Act.  7,  16.  See  also  above,
p.  283.  n.  1.

iii.  112.  113

'  Gen.  21,  25.  30.    26,  15.  18-32.
*  John  4,  20-24.  30.  35.
'  We  visited  Nabulus  again  in  1852;
see  Vol.  III.  Sect.  Ill,  under  Apr.  23.

Jtoe  14.]

8HECHEM,  HISTORY.

287

Nabulus  ;  but  he  resides  in  the  convent  at  Jerusalem.'  The
Samaritans  count  some  150  souls,  as  we  have  seen  ;  and  there
were  aaid  to  be  about  as  many  Jews.  From  various  data,  we
were  led  to  estimate  the  whole  population  at  about  8000  souls  ;
all  Muhammedans,  with  the  exceptions  above  specified.  The
present  governor  of  the  province  of  Nabulus  was  a  son  of  Hu-
sein,  the  former  Mudir  of  'Akka.*

It  would  be  useless  to  spend  time  here,  in  showing  that  the
Nabulus  of  the  present  day  is  the  Neapohs  of  the  Koman  age  ;
or  that  the  latter  appellation  took  the  place  of  the  more  ancient
name  Shechem.  It  is  one  of  the  very  few  foreign  names  im-
posed by  the  Romans  in  Palestine,  which  have  survived  to  the
present  day.  The  historical  testimonies  to  the  general  identity
of  Neapolis  and  Sichem  are  hardly  less  definite  and  numerous,
than  in  the  case  of  ^lia  and  Jerusalem  f  while  the  situation
of  Nabulus  in  the  mountains  of  Ephraim  and  beneath  Mount
Gerizim,  of  which  tradition  has  never  lost  sight,  corresponds
entirely  to  the  ancient  accounts  of  the  position  of  Shechem.

Shechem  was  a  very  ancient  place,  though  we  do  not  find  it
mentioned  as  a  city,  until  the  time  of  Jacob.  Abraham  indeed
first  came,  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  unto  the  place  of  Shechem,
unto  the  oaks  of  Moreh  and  Jacob  on  his  return  from  Padan-
Aram,  came  to  Shalira,  a  city  of  Shechem,  "  and  pitched  his
tents  before "  (east  of)  the  latter  city.  This  corresponds  to  the
present  village  of  Siilim,  which  lies  east  of  Nabulus  across  the
great  plain.  In  this  plain  the  patriarch  encamped,  and  pur-
chased the  "  parcel  of  ground,"  still  marked  by  his  well  and  the
traditional  tomb  of  Joseph.'  It  was  here  that  Dinah  was
defiled  by  Shechem  the  son  of  Hamor,  prince  of  the  country ;
and  the  city  Shechem  with  its  gates  is  spoken  of,  named
probably  after  that  prince.  It  would  seem  not  then  to  have
been  large  ;  inasmuch  as  the  two  sons  of  Jacob  were  able  to
overcome  and  to  slay  all  the  males.^  Jacob's  field,  as  we  have
seen,  was  a  permanent  possession ;  and  the  patriarch,  even  when
residing  at  Hebron,  sent  his  fiocks  to  pasture  in  this  neighbour-
hood. It  was  on  a  visit  to  them  in  this  region,  that  Joseph  was
Bold  by  his  brethren.'

'  .See  Vol.  I.  p.  42.5.  lOGS.    Hieron.  Ep.  86,  Epitaph.  Pauloc,  p.

'  There  are  said  to  be  leprous  persons  676,  "Transivit  Sichem, — quiB  nunc  Nea-

at  N.ibulus,  as  well  as  at  .lerusalem  ;  but  polls  appellatur,"  etc.    See  also  other  au-

■we  did  not  here  meet  with  them.    Pax-  thorities,  Reland  Pal.  p.  1004  sq.

ton's  Letters,  xv.  p.  173.  Load.  ^  Gen.  12,  6.

'■'  Jo.sephus  has  usually  Sichem;   but  *  Gen.  3.3,  18.  19.    See  above,  p.  279.

also  once  N'eapolis,  B.  J.  4.  8.  I.    Epiplia-  n.  1 ;  al,*o  p.  286.

nius  adv.  Haer.  lib.  iii.  p.  105.'"), 'Ev  SiiciVois,  "  Gen.  34,  1.  2.  20.  24.  25.

roin'  tariv,  iv  ry  vuvl  NtoWAei.     ib.  p.  '  Gen.  37,  12—14.

iii.  113.  114

288

NABULUS.

[Sec.  XrV.

On  the  return  of  the  Israelites  from  Egypt,  after  they  had
passed  over  Jordan,  they  were  directed  to  set  up  great  stones
and  build  an  altar  on  Mount  Ebal ;  and  to  station  six  of  the
tribes  upon  Mount  Gerizim  to  bless  the  people,  and  six  upon
Mount  Ebal  to  curse.'  Between  these  two  mountains,  accord-
ing to  Josephus,  lay  >Shechem,  having  Ebal  on  the  north  and
Gerizim  on  the  south.^  In  the  division  of  the  land,  Shechem
fell  to  the  lot  of  Ephraim,  but  was  assigned  to  the  Levites  and
made  a  city  of  refuge.^  Here  Joshua  met  the  assembled  people
for  the  last  time.^  In  the  days  of  the  Judges,  Abimelech
treacherously  got  possession  of  the  city,  which  gave  occasion  for
the  beautiful  parable  of  Jotham,  delivered  from  Mount  Gerizim  ;
in  the  end  the  people  proved  treacherous  to  the  usurper,  and
the  city  was  destroyed  by  him.^  At  Shechem  all .  Israel  came
together  to  make  Rehoboam  king  ;  here  the  ten  tribes  rebelled  ;
and  the  city  became  for  a  time  the  royal  residence  of  Jeroboam.'
We  hear  nothing  more  of  it  before  the  exile  ;  during  which  it
seems  still  to  have  been  inhabited.^

After  the  exile,  Shechem  is  mainly  known  as  the  chief  seat
of  the  people,  who  thenceforth  bore  the  name  of  Samaritans.
Of  the  origin  of  this  people  we  have  no  ancient  account,  except
in  the  Scrij^tures  and  in  Josephus.  It  appears  that  after  the
carrying  away  captive  of  the  Israelites  from  Mount  Ephraim
and  the ,  region  of  Samaria  by  the  Assyrian  Shalmaneser,  the
same  monarch  brought  men  from  Babylon,  and  from  other
eastern  countries,  "  and  jjlaced  them  in  the  cities  of  Samaria
instead  of  the  children  of  Israel ;  and  they  possessed  Samaria
and  dwelt  in  the  cities  thereof"^  Visited  and  disturbed  by  lions,
this  people  appUed  to  the  king  of  Assyria  for  one  of  the  Israel-
itish  priests,  to  teach  them  the  manner  of  the  God  of  the
land  ; "  and  one  was  sent  accordingly,  and  took  up  his  abode  at
Bethel,  the  former  scene  of  Jeroboam's  idolatry.  So,  "  they
feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  own  gods,"  each  his  own
national  idols  ;  "  and  made  unto  themselves  of  the  lowest  of
them  priests  of  the  high  places."  This  continued  to  be  the
case  down  to  the  time  when  the  scriptural  account  was  written  ;
and  it  was  this  people,  according  to  Josephus,  who  were  called
in  Hebrew  Cutheans,  and  in  the  Greek  language  Samaritans.'

'  Dent.  27,  1-13.    The  altar  in  verse  '  Judg.  9,  1-49.

4,  according  to  the  present  Hebrew  text,  ^  1  Kings  12,  1.  12—16.  25.

was  to  be  on  Ebal.    The  Samaritan  text  '  Jer.  41,  5.

reads  here  Gerizim  ;  and  this  is  the  main  '  2  Kings  17,  3.  6.  24.    Joseph.  Antiq.

point,  in  which  they  charge  the  Jews  with  9.  14.  1,  3.  ib.  10.  9.  7. — The  Samaritni.s

corrupting  the  text.  themselves  aftcnvards  refer  their  tnuispor-

'  Joseph.  Ant.  4.  8.  44.  Comp.  Judg.  tation  into  the  land  to  Esar-haddoii,  L/ru

9,  7.  4,  2.    This  may  have  been  a  later  euiigra-

'  Josh.  20,  7.    21,  20.  21.  tion.

*  Josh.  24,  1.  25.  "  2  Kings  18,  25-34. 41.  Joseph.  Ant.  L  c.
iii.  114-116

ORIGDT  OF  THE  SAMABTTAyS.

289

According  to  these  accounts,  it  appears  that  the  Samaritans
were  originallT  foreigners,  having  nothing  in  common  with  the
Jews;  and  not  a  mixed  race,  as  is  commonlr  assumed,  except  so
fer  as  a  comparatively  few  straggling  Israelites  of  the  lower
classes  may  not  improbably  have  remained  in  their  homes.'
The  introduction  of  the  Pentateuch  among  them  is  sufficiently
accounted  for,  by  the  return  of  the  Israelitish  priest  to  Bethel,
and  the  partial  renewal  of  the  Israelitish  worship.  When  the
Jews  returned  imder  Zerubbabel  from  their  exile,  and  began  to
rebuild  Jerusalem  and  their  temple,  the  Samaritans  also  desired
to  aid  them  ia  the  work  :  Let  us  bmld  with  you  ;  for  we  seek
your  God  as  ye  do  ;  and  we  do  sacrifice  imto  him  since  the  days
of  Esar-haddon."*  It  was  the  refusal  of  the  Jews  to  admit
them  to  this  privilege,  that  gave  rise  to  the  subsequent  hatred
between  the  two  races  ;  and  from  that  moment  the  Samaritans
did  all  they  could,  to  hinder  the  rebuilding  both  of  the  temple
and  the  city.^

It  was  the  same  refusal,  probably,  and  subsequent  acts  of
mutual  hatred,  that  stimulated  the  Samaritans  to  erect  a  temple
of  their  own  upon  Mount  Gerizim.  The  immediate  occasion
appears  to  have  been  the  circumstance  related  by  Xehemiah,
that  a  son  of  Joiada  the  high  priest  had  become  son-in-law  to
Sanballat,  and  had  on  this  account  been  expelled  from  Jerusa-
lem.* According  to  Josephus,  this  person  was  Manasseh,  a
brother  of  the  high  priest  Jaddus,  and  was  expelled  as  having
married  the  daughter  of  Sanballat,  the  Persian  governor  of
Samaria  imder  Darius  Codomanus  and  Alexander  the  Great,
about  330  B.  C.  some  eighty  years  later  than  the  time  of  Xehe-
Tniah  '  The  same  writer  relates,  that  Manasseh  withdrew  to
the  Samaritans.;  and  that  Sanballat,  his  father-in-law,  having
joined  Alexander  the  Great  before  Tyre,  obtained  from  that
monarch  permission  to  erect  a  temple  on  Mount  Gerizim,  in
which  he  constituted  Manasseh  high  priest.'  Sichem,  at  the
foot  of  Gerizim,  now  became  the  metropolis  of  the  Samar-
itans, and  was  inhabited  by  apostate  Jews ;  and  according  to
J(^phus,  if  a  Jew  at  Jerusalem  was  called  to  an  account  for
eating  unclean  food,  or  for  broking  the  Sabbath,  or  for  any

'  The  ccmmaa  view  b  perfaapa  moet  seem  most  probabh-  to  be  a  dmmcJogksl

■tnag^  OaXed  bj-  De  Sacj,  Coire^  its  emr  on  the  part  of  Joeepfans;  ance  h  ia

Samariuio^  p.  ^  ia  Xodces  et  £xtr.  des  bardty  sappoeable,  diat  the  Teiv  same  fact,

MsB.       la  BiUkdi.  da  Km,  Tom  \1L  with  tb?  like  circumstances,  ^boold  occur

For  d»e  oppoate  fiew,  see  Hengstenberg  at  two  di^rent  times  to  difierent  persons

Andteotte  d«s  Pentat.  L  p.  1  £q.  bearing  the  same  names.    Hence  too  the

*  Ezra  4.  2.  building  of  the  temple  oo  Gerizim.  is  pr«>-

*  Ezra  c.  -t.  Xebem.  cc  -L  6.  Joeeph.  bablj  to  be  ]Jaced  ^rUer  than  the  time  of
Ant.  11.  i.  9.  Alexander.

*  yeh.  13,  2«.  •  Josei*.  Ant  IL  8.  2,  t

*  Joseph.  Ant.  11.  X.  2.    This  voold

Vol.  n.— 25  iiL  116, 117

290

NABULUS.

[Sec.  XIV.

similar  crime,  he  fled  to  the  Sichemites,  declaring  himself  to  be
unjustly  accused.'

The  mutual  hatred  continued  to  increase,  each  party
contending  for  the  sanctity  of  their  own  temple  ;^  though  the
Jewish  historian,  with  apparent  justice,  accuses  the  Samaritans
of  professing  to  he  Jews  and  descended  from  Joseph,  when  this
might  tend  to  their  advantage  ;  or  of  disclaiming  all  kindred
and  connection  with  them,  when  this  would  better  serve  their
turn.^  Broils  sometimes  ensued  and  at  length  the  temple  on
Gerizim  was  destroyed  by  John  Hyrcanus,  about  129  B.  C.
having  stood,  according  to  Josephus,  about  two  hundred  years.*
The  broils  continued,  and  the  hatred  increased.  Under  the
procurator  Coponius,  who  followed  Archelaus,  a  Samaritan  en-
tered Jerusalem  secretly,  and  polluted  the  whole  temple,  by
scattering  in  it  human  bones.*  The  name  Samaritan  had  now
become  among  the  Jews  a  by-word  and  term  of  reproach  ;  and
all  intercourse  with  them  was  avoided.  Of  this  we  find  various
traces  in  the  New  Testament.  Jesus  himself  was  called  a
Samaritan  in  scorn  ;  and  the  seventy  disciples,  when  first  sent
out,  were  not  to  go  to  the  cities  of  the  Samaritans,  since  they
did  not  belong  to  the  house  of  Israel.^  They  stUl  clung  to  their
worship  on  Mount  Gerizim  ;  and  lived  in  expectation  of  a
Messiah.'  In  consequence  of  this  hatred,  and  in  allusion  to  this
idolatry,  the  town  of  Sichem  probably  received  among  the
Jewish  common  people  the  by-name  Sychar,  which  we  find  in
the  Gospel  of  St.  John  ;  while  Stephen,  in  addressing  the  more
courtly  Sanhedrim,  employs  the  ancient  name.'  Yet  many  of
the  Samaritans  believed  on  Christ  in  Sichem  itself ;  and  after-
wards, churches  were  gathered  in  their  towns  and  villages  by
the  apostles."

\iv  rSre  ri^v  Si'/fiua  ex""'''^^'  Kiifi^irqv  Trphs    Testam.  XII  Patriarch,  p.  564.

8.  7.— Comp.  Jahn  Bibl.  Ai-chteoL  Th.  II.    Sychar  {2vxap)  might  come  from  Heb.

^  Jolin  4,  20.  2.5.

'  John  4,  5.  Acts  7,  16. — This  name

Bd.  11.  p.  303.

'  Jos.  Ant.  12.  1.  1.    ib.  13.  3.  4.

'  Jos.  Ant.  9.  14.  3.     Thus  towards

^  18  ;  or  also  from  t3  -  drunkard,  in  ullu-
.sion  to  Is.  28,  1.  7.  Comp.  Sirae.  .50,  26.
Test.  XII  I'atr.  p.  5G4,  iarai  yap  kith  (n'j/xe-
pov  SiKiifj,  Kfyo/xfinri  ir6Kis  aavvfrav.  The
Jew.s  were  fond  of  such  slight  like-sounding
perversions  of  proper  names ;  so  the  change

"ij5"Zj  falsehood,  spoken  of  idols,  Hab.  2,

Alexander  they  professed  to  be  Hebrews,

ib.  11.  8.  6.  With  Antiochus  they  claimed

to  be  Medes  and  Persians,  and  asked  per-

mission to  dedicate  their  temple  to  Jupiter

Hellenius;  ib.  12.  5.  5.  Comp.  2  Mace.
6,2.

*  Jos.  Ant.  12.  4.  1.  ib.  13.  3.  4.  ib.  13.
10.  2.  ib.  14.  6.  2.

'  Ibid.  13.  9.  1.    B.  J.  1.  2.  6.

•  Jos.  Ant  18.  2.  2.  Comp.  20.  6.  1.

'  John  8,  48.  4,  9.  27.  Matt.  10,  .5.
Luke  17,  16.  18.    See  also  Sirac.  50,  25.

between  1^21  brs  Beelzebub,  2  K.  1,  2.  3,
and  he(\(iPov\  Beelzebnl,  applied  in  the
X.  T.  to  Satan,  Matt.  10,  25.  etc.  So  too
Betftaven  for  Bethel,  Hos.  4,  15.  5,  8 ;
comp.  Amos  5,  5.  See  Relaud  Dissert
Miscell.  I.  p.  140  sq.  Hengstenb.  Anth.  dea
Pentat.  I.  p.  25  sq.

John  4,  39-42.  Acts  8,  5-25.  9,  31.

iii.  117-119

mSTORT.  XEAPOLIS.

291

Xot  long  after  the  times  of  the  Xew  Testament,  the  city  of
Sichem  received  the  new  name  of  N eapolis.  which  remains  to
the  present  dav  in  the  Arabic  form  Nabulus.  This  took  place
apparently  tmder  Vespasian :  for  the  coins  of  the  city,  of  which
there  are  many  firom  Titus  to  Tolusianns,  bear  the  inscription
"  Flavia  Neapolis  ; "  the  former  epithet  being  adopted  in  honour
of  Flavins  Vespasian,  probably  in  consequence  of  some  benefit
conferred  by  him.'  The  name  Neapolis  is  already  mentioned  by
Josephus.  and  also  by  Pliny,  who  died  A.  D.  79  :  and  both
these  writers  affirm,  that  the  place  was  before  called  Mabortha
or  Mamortha  by  its  inhabitants  :  a  circumstance  of  which  there
seems  to  be  no  further  historical  trace,  and  no  very  satisfactory
Bolution.*

There  is  also  a  question,  whether  Xeap^lis  occupied,  or  now
occupies,  precisely  the  same  spot  as  Sichem  ;  though  the  tact  of
their  general  identity  does  not  appear  to  be  doubtful'  The
diffictilty  has  apparently  arisen,  from  what  seems  to  have  been  a
mere  hypothesis  cnrrent  in  the  days  of  Eusebius,  when  the  rage
for  pilgrimages  and  the  finding  out  of  scriptural  places  was  just
beginning.  At  that  time  Sychar  and  Sichem  were  regarded  as
two  distinct  places,  and  both  of  them  different  from  Xeapjlis.
Etisebius  says  expressly,  that  Sychar  lay  before  (east  of)  Xeapo-
lis  by  the  field  of  Joseph  with  Jacob's  well ;  while  Sichem  was
pointed  out  as  a  deserted  place  in  the  snbtirbs  of  Neapolis,
where  was  also  Joseph's  tomb.*  The  Bourdeaux  pilgrim  in  the
■ame  age  (A.  D.  333)  is  more  specific.  According  to  him,  by
Keapohs  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Gerizim  lay  the  place  called
Sichem,  where  was  the  montmient  of  Joseph :  and  at  one
Boman  mile  further  was  Sychar,  whence  the  Samaritan  woman
eame  to  draw  water  at  Jacob's  well'

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark  upon  the  confusion  and
inconsistency  of  all  this,  and  how  strongly  it  savours  of  the

make  out  at  it  Fl^rut  Xe^pdu,  Tfaidh
ns  not  a  metzopoGs.  See  Haidnin  XmB-
mor.  antiq.  papQlonmi  et  aritiuiu  Sfantr.
p.  %M.  CdUnas  Cer  of
eleven  thousand  six  hundred  persons.'  Whether  the  city  itself
was  destroyed  or  rebuilt  by  Vespasian,  we  are  not  informed.

The  Samaritan  worship  would  appear  to  have  long  continued
predominant  at  Xeapolis  ;  for  upon  the  coins  of  the  subsequent
centuries,  we  find  Mount  Gerizim  with  its  temple  depicted  as
the  symbol  of  the  city.  There  is  indeed  no  historical  testimony,
that  the  former  temple  was  ever  rebuilt ;  yet  there  was  doubt-
less an  altar,  or  some  kind  of  structure,  where  their  worship
was  held.  The  Samaritans  are  not  mentioned  in  connection
with  the  Jewish  war  and  catastrophe  tmder  Adrian  :  but  under
Septimius  Severus,  about  A.  D.  200.  they  apj-ear  to  have  made
common  cause  with  the  Jews  against  that  emperor  :  and  Xe-
apoUs  was  deprived  by  him  of  its  rights  as  a  city.*  In  that
and  the  following  centuries,  the  Samaritans  were  spread  exten-
sively not  only  in  Egypt  and  the  east,  but  als>D  in  the  west  as
far  as  to  Rome  itself :  where  they  had  a  synagogue  va  the  time
of  Theodoric,  after  A.  D.  493.^  Their  occupation  appears  to
have  been  chiefly  that  of  merchants  and  money  changers,  much
like  the  Jews.*

There  had  already  been  converts  to  the  CTiristian  faith  in
Neap«:'lis  under  our  Saviour  :  and  in  all  probability  a  church  had
been  gathered  here,  during  the  ministry  of  the  apostles.'  The
celebrated  Justin  Martvr.  who  suffered  at  Eome  about  A.  D.
163,  was  a  native  of  this  city.*  It  also  became  early  the  seat
of  a  Christian  bishop.  The  name  of  Grermanus.  bishop  of
Neapolis,  appears  among  the  subscriptions  to  the  councils  of
Ancyra  and  Xeoctesarea  A.  D.  314.  and  to  that  of  Xicea  A.  D.
325  ;  while  the  names  of  foiu-  others  are  also  preserved,  the  last
of  whom.  John,  was  a  signer  at  the  synod  of  Jerusalem  A.  D.
536."    The  general  condition  of  the  city  in  the  tourth  and  fifth

'  Joee^  B.  J.  3.  7.  S2.  *  See  the  edict  of  Jn^udan,

*  Eoaeb  ChroQ.  "  Jadstcom  et  Samari-  upyi^wpmTiMmw  rmmJJm  f/idimr,  vhae  it

ticam  belhim  motmn  est'    ^putian.  in  is  said :  Ei  fpf^^«iii  pcfm  avrav  raS

Sept.  Ser.  c  16,  ** NeapoGtaais  Pafaesd-  ^fnT^f^l  imS  ji  iim)fmf'm\

neBsboB  jos  civitatis  tnfi^  qnod  poro  Xigre  mirm,  atr  "yniniyrlmi  »a)>>Cn.  Cdbiiui^

[Seven  jemalo]  £n  in aniiisfbenBt.*  "nus  L  c  pp.  23,

ri>ht  was  probaUr  restoRd ;  for  the  same       ^  J<^  i,  39-43.    Acts  8,  3S.   9,  3L

writer  remarks,  c  15.  "  Pabpstinii  pcesam  13,  3.

renuat,q[aamobeaiisaamXigriiiiaiiaazit''      *  ApoL2.pL41,'U— ttw  ari^Aa— fat

See  CeDara  CoOectan.  Hist.  Samar.  L  7.  Kau  riXe^   iapUs  rfs  UmJiatarir^s.

p.  22.  Enseb.  Hist.  Eet  4.  If .

'  This  appean  from  die  laws  of  the       '  LabW  ConciL  g :  V.  p.  286.  See  gaxenSbr,  Le  Qnien  Oneaa

XVm  de  Xoricnlains;  CXXIX,  CXLIV,  Chr.  m.  coL  647  sq.    Reland  Pakest  p.

de  Sunarids.    CeUanns  L  c  pp.  16.  22,  1009.  See  abo^  XoL  L  p.  3S3w  ^tafoEs

23,  25. — For  the  sTnagogoe,  see  Caaaodor.  stands  also  in  d>e  Greek  ecdiesasical

Tariar.  Epist.  lib.'lIL  4ol    CeOariK,  L  c.  XotiiHe;  see  Belaid  PaL  pp.  215.  220.
pt  23.

ToL  n.— 25*  fii,  122. 123

594

NABULUS.

[Sec.  XIV.

centuries,  as  reported  by  Eusebius,  the  Bourdeaux  pilgrim,  and
Jerome,  we  have  already  seen.'  Nearly  a  century  later,  the
hatred  of  the  Samaritans  broke  out  against  the  Christians,  and
gave  rise  anew  to  scenes  of  tumult  and  slaughter.

The  historian  Procopius  relates,  that  under  the  reign  of
Zeno  (after  A.  D.  474)  a  tumult  arose  at  Neapohs,  in  which  the
Samaritans  rushed  in  great  numbers  into  the  church,  where  the
Christians  were  celebrating  the  festival  of  Pentecost,  killed
many,  maimed  the  bishop  Terebinthus  by  cutting  off  his  fin-
gers, and  committed  other  horrible  atrocities.  The  bishop  him-
self repaired  to  Constantinople,  and  made  complaint  to  the
emperor  ;  who  immediately  took  measures  to  punish  the  guilty.
The  Samaritans  were  driven  from  Mount  Gerizim,  which  was
made  over  to  the  Christians  ;  and  Zeno  erected  there  a  church
in  honour  of  the  virgin,  which  he  surrounded  by  what  in  ap-
pearance was  a  wall,  though  in  reality  only  a  fence  f  stationing
a  strong  garrison  below  in  the  city,  but  only  a  small  guard  at
the  church  above.

The  Samaritans  smothered  their  indignation  for  a  time
but  it  broke  out  again  under  Anastasius  and  Justinian.  Dur-
ing the  reign  of  the  former,  a  band  of  this  people,  under  the
guidance  of  a  woman,  ascended  Mount  Gerizim  from  a  diiSferent
side,  seized  upon  the  church,  and  slew  the  guard  ;  but  the
troops  in  the  city  were  able  to  prevent  their  being  supported  by
the  inhabitants,  and  the  ringleaders  were  seized  and  pimished.
In  respect  to  the  troubles  under  Justinian,  Procopius  only
remarks,  that  this  emperor  erected  outside  of  the  former  wall  or
fence  around  the  church  on  Mount  Gerizim,  a  second  wall,
which,  while  it  left  the  appearance  of  the  work  unchanged,
rendered  it  wholly  impregnable.  This  was  probably  the  fortress,
the  ruins  of  which  are  still  seen  upon  the  mountain,  bearing
every  mark  of  a  Roman  origin.''  The  emperor  also  caused  the
five  Christian  churches,  destroyed  by  the  Samaritans  in  the  city
itself,  to  be  rebuilt.

The  Samaritan  insurrection  under  Justinian,  is  more  fully
described  by  CyrU  of  Scythopolis  in  his  hfe  of  St.  Sabas.
According  to  him,  the  whole  race  of  the  Samaritans  in  Palestine
rose  upon  the  Christians,  in  May,  A.  D.  529,  the  third  year  of
Justinian's  reign.  They  perpetrated  many  atrocities,  plunder-
ing and  burning  churches,  torturing  Christians  to  death,  and
setting  on  fire  whole  villages,  especially  in  the  vicinity  of  Ne-

'  Pages  291,  292.  drive  out  the  Christians  from  Ciesarea.

'  Teix  Bohiiedd.  Vit  Salad,  p.  59.  AbulC
Annal.  A.  H.  580.

♦  Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  IIL  iL  p.  252.

iiL  126-128

'  R.id.  Coggesh.  in  Martene  et  Dnrand
Tom.  V.  p.  560  sq.  Mejr  ed-Diu  in  l  undgc
des  Or  III  p.  81.    Wilken  ibid,  p  2^4.

"  Makrizi  in  Wilken  Comment  de  BelL
Cruc.  p.  204.

'  Benj.  of  Tnd.  I.  p  66-68.  Benjamin
asserts,  that  in  his  day  there  were  also  two
hondrcd  Samaritans  in  Csesarea ;  ib.  p.  65.

JUSE  14.]

HISTORY.     THE  SAMARITANS.

297

bian  writers  of  the  same  period  speak  also  of  the  Samaritans,
whom  they  confound  with  the  Jews.'

The  first  Christian  travellers  who  appear  to  have  noticed  this
people,  are  William  of  Baldensel  in  A.  D.  1336,  and  Sir  John
Maundeville  about  the  same  time  ;  the  former  describes  the
Samaritans  as  a  singular  sect,  differing  alike  from  Christians,
Jews,  Saracens,  and  Pagans  ;  and  distinguished  from  all  by
their  red  turbans,  as  at  the  present  day.''  The  pilgrims  of  the
following  centuries  appear  seldom  to  have  taken  this  route  ;  and
I  find  no  further  mention  of  the  Samaritans  until  Coto\dcus  in
A.  D.  1598,  who  speaks  of  them  as  a  sect  of  the  Jews,  but
without  afibrding  any  particulars  concerning  them.'  Delia
Valle,  in  the  early  part  of  the  next  (seventeenth)  centurv-,  was
the  first  to  give  some  account  of  them  ;  Maundrell  in  A.  D.
1697  visited  and  describes  them  ;  and  Morison  also  slightly
mentions  them  in  the  following  year.*  During  the  eighteenth
century,  they  appear  to  have  been  noticed  by  very  few  if  any
travellers ;  indeed  almost  no  Frank  passed  on  this  route.
Within  the  present  century  they  have  again  been  brought  more
into  notice  ;  although  few  travellers  have  taken  the  pains  to
visit  them.^

A  greater  interest  however  has  been  excited  in  behalf  of
the  Samaritans,  and  more  information  acquired  respecting  them,
in  consequence  of  their  correspondence  with  several  learned  Eu-
ropeans, and  the  publication  of  their  copies  of  the  Pentateuch.
The  existence  of  the  Pentateuch  among  them  appears  to  have
been  early  known  to  scholars  ;  and  Julius  ScaHger,  in  the  six-
teenth century,  was  the  first,  according  to  De  Sacy,  to  point
out  the  importance  of  obtaining  copies  of  it  in  Europe.*  This
wish  was  first  fulfilled  by  the  traveller  Delia  Valle  in  A.  D.
1616.  When  at  Constantinople  on  his  way  to  the  east,  he  was
commissioned  by  De  Sancy,  then  French  ambassador  in  that
city,  to  purchase  Samaritan  manuscripts  ;  and  after  attempting

'  So  the  Arabian  geographer  Yakut
about  A.  D.  1200;  see  Schultens  Ini
geogr.  in  Vit.  Salad,  art  Neapolix.  Abul-
feda  Tub.  Syr.  p.  8.5.  Mejr  ed-Din  in
Fundgr.  de3  Or.  II.  p.  139.

'  GuiL  de  Baldensel  Ho-Joepor.  p  35.3,
in  Canisii  Thesanr.  ed.  Basnage,  Tom.  IV.
Sir  J.  Maundeville  gives  much  the  same
account;  p.  108.  Lond.  1839. — See  above,
p.  281.

'  Cotovic.  Itin.  p.  342.

♦  Delia  VuUe  Voyages  Tom.  II.  p.  103
sq.  Paris  174.5.  Manndrell  March  2-t
Morison  Relation,  eto.  pp  234,  240. — It  is
perhaps  worth  oserving,  that  Quaresmius,
who  lived  severnl  years  in  Palestine,  and

devoted  two  folio  volumes  to  an  "  historical,
theological,  and  moral  elucidation  "  of  the
Holy  Land,  in  which  he  describes  Nabulus
and  recounts  the  ancient  history  of  the
Samaritans,  makes  nevertheless  not  the
slightest  allusion  to  their  present  existence.

'  Dr  Clarke  speaks  of  the  Samaritans,
but  only  from  Benjamin  of  Tudela  and
Maundrell;  p  511  sq.  4to.  Buckingham
does  the  same,  also  without  having  seen
them  ;  p.  528  sq.  Within  the  last  twenty
years  they  have  been  visited  by  Messrs
Jowett  and  Fisk,  Connor,  EUiott,  and
others.

'  De  Sacy  Corresp.  des  Samar.  p.  7,  in
Notices  et  Extr.  Tom.  XII.

iii.  128, 129

298

NABULUS.

[Sec.  XIV.

it  in  vain  at  Cairo,  Gaza,  and  Nabulus,  lie  was  able  to  procure
at  Damascus  two  copies  of  the  Pentateuch.  One,  on  parch-
ment, exhibiting  the  Hebrew  text  in  Samaritan  characters,  he
transmitted  to  the  ambassador  ;  the  other,  on  paper,  containing
the  Samaritan  version,  he  retained  for  himself.'  The  former  was
sent  by  De  Sancy  to  the  library  of  the  Oratoire  in  Paris,  and
was  published  by  J.  Morin  in  the  Paris  Polyglott ;  the  latter
was  loaned  by  Delia  Valle  to  the  same  editor,  and  appeared  also
in  the  same  work.''  Both  were  afterAvards  reprinted  with  slight
corrections  in  the  London  Polyglott.  The  munificence  of  arch-
bishop Usher  was  able  to  procure,  not  long  after,  no  fewer  than
six  additional  manuscripts  of  the  Hebrew-Samaritan  Pentateuch  ;
another  was  sent  to  England  by  Robert  Huntington  about  A.  D.
1672  ;  and  the  number  continued  to  increase,  so  that  Ken-
nicott  was  able  to  collate,  for  his  great  work,  not  less  than  sixteen
manuscripts  more  or  less  complete.  Of  these,  six  are  in  the
Bodleian  Library,  and  one  in  the  British  Museum.^ — The  Sa-
maritan-Arabic version  of  Abu  Sa'id  has  never  yet  been  fully
printed  ;  bat  lies  in  seven  manuscripts  in  the  hbraries  of  Rome,
Oxford,  Paris,  and  Leyden.*  The  general  merits  of  all  these
copies  of  the  Pentateuch,  have  been  investigated  by  able
scholars.'

Long  before  the  wish  of  the  elder  Scahger  had  thus  been
fulfilled,  in  the  acquisition  and  publication  of  the  Samaritan
Pentateuch,  his  son  Joseph  Scahger  had  attempted  to  open  a
direct  correspondence  with  that  people  themselves  ;  and  had
written  to  their  communities  in  Nabulus  and  Cairo.  Answers
were  sent  from  both  these  places  ;  but  although  dated  in  the
year  998  of  the  Hejra,  A.  D.  1589,  they  never  reached  Scaliger,
who  died  A.  D.  1609.  After  passing  through  several  hands,
they  came  into  the  possession  of  J.  Morin,  who  made  a  Latin
translation  of  them,  which  was  published  after  his  death.^  The

■  Delia  Valle  Voyages  Tom.  H.  p.  105  horn's  Einleit.  ins  A.  T.  Vol  I.  p.  595.

sq.  128  sq  Paris  1745.  '  See  Gesenius  Comment,  de  Pentat.

'  De  Sacy  Corresp  des  Samar.  1.  c.  p.  Samaritani  Origine,  Indole,  etc.  Halffi
8.  Cellarins  Collect.  Hist.  Samar.  p.  46.  1815.  4.  On  the  Samaritan  version,  see
See  the  correspondence  between  Morin  and  ibid.  pp.  18,  19.  Bertholdt  Einleit.  II.  pp.
P.  dilla  Viille  in  the  little  work  published  608-012.  The  Siimaritan-Ai-abic  version
anonyrnously  by  R.  Simon  :  "  Antiquitates  is  fully  treated  of  by  De  Sacy,  Comment  de
EcclesL-E  Orientalis,"  Lond.  1682.  8.  pp.  Versione  Sam.  Arabica  libror.  Mosis,  in
156-205.  Also  the  Life  of  J.  Morin,  in  Eichhom's  AUgem.  Biblioth.  der  bibl.  Li-
the same  volume,  p.  18  sq.  terat.    Th.  X.  pp.  1-176.    Enlarged  and

"  See  Kcnnicott  Diss  General,  ed.  Brans  reprinted  in  Memoires  de  TAciid  des  luscr.

p.  259  sq.    De  Rossi  Var.  Lect  in  V.  T.  ct  des  Belles  Lettres  Tom.  XLIX.  pp.  1-

Tom   I.  p.  civil.    Bertholdt's  Eiul.  II.  p.  1!)!). — On  the  value  of  the  Samaritan  Pe«-

476  sq  tateuch  in  general,  see  also  Hengstouberg

*  Van  \loten  Specimen  philol.  cont.  Autlient.  des  Pentat.  I.  p.  1  sq.

Descr.  Codicis  Ms.  Vers.  Sam.  Arabicse  "  In  the  work  above  mentioned,  pub-

Pentat   Lugd.  Bat  1803.  4.    The  per-  lished  by  R.  Simon  :  Antiquitates  Eccleai»

tions  published  are  enumerated  in  Eich-  Orientalis,  Lond.  1682.  8.
iii.  129.  130

Juys  14.]

THE  SAMARITAN  PENTATEUCH.

299

originals  are  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Paris  ;  and  the  text,  with
a  more  accurate  version,  has  been  published  by  De  Sacy.'

In  A.  D.  1671,  Robert  Huntington,  who  was  then  chaplain
of  the  Enghsh  Factory  at  Aleppo,  and  died  in  1701  as  bishop
of  Raphoe  in  Ireland,  visited  the  Samaritans  at  Nabulus  on  his
way  to  Jerusalem.  They  appear  to  have  received  from  him,
through  some  misapprehension,  the  impression,  that  there  were
Samaritans  in  England  ;  and  he  proposed  to  them  to  write  to
their  brethren  in  that  country,  giving  a  summary  of  their  doc-
trines and  rites,  and  to  transmit  at  the  same  time  a  copy  of
their  law.  A  manuscript  of  the  Pentateuch  was  accordingly
put  into  his  hands,  and  a  letter  sent  after  him  to  Jerusalem  ;
both  of  which  he  forwarded  to  England.  The  letter  was  an-
swered by  Thomas  Marshall,  Rector  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford  ;
and  the  correspondence  thus  commenced,  continued  until  A.  D.
1688,  chiefly  through  Huntington  at  Aleppo.  This  correspond-
ence, extending  to  six  letters  from  the  Samaritans,  so  far  as  it
has  been  preserved  in  passing  piecemeal  through  various  hands,
has  been  first  fully  publi.shed  by  De  Sacy.^

In  the  mean  time,  another  correspondence  had  been  com-
menced with  the  Samaritans  of  Nabulus,  by  the  celebrated
Ludolf  Taking  advantage  of  the  return  of  a  JeAvish  agent  to
Palestine  in  A.  D.  1684,  he  sent  by  him  a  letter,  written  in
Hebrew  with  Samaritan  characters ;  and  received  from  the
Samaritans  two  letters  in  reply,  in  the  same  language  and  char-
acter, dated  in  1685.  These  were  soon  published  by  Cellarius.'
Ludolf  wrote  again,  and  received  another  letter  in  1691,  which
was  not  published  until  long  afterwards.''

For  more  than  a  century,  these  various  letters  continued  to
be  the  only  source  accessible  to  the  scholars  of  Europe,  from
which  a  knowledge  of  the  tenets  and  ceremonies  of  the  Sa-
maritans could  be  derived.  In  A.  D.  1807,  the  French  bishop
and  senator  G-regoire  again  took  up  the  subject ;  and,  by  his
influence,  instructions  were  sent  to  the  French  consuls  in  the
Levant,  to  make  inquiries  respecting  the  Samaritans.  The
consul  at  Aleppo  opened  a  communication  with  those  at  Xa-
bulus,  and  received  from  them  a  letter  in  1808,  which  was  for-
warded to  Europe,  written  in  Arabic  by  the  priest  Selameh,  son
of  Tobias,  probably  the  same  person  whom  we  saw.    This  letter

'  In  Eichhorn's  Repertorium  f  iir  bibL  in  the  new  edition  of  his  Collectan.  Hist

and  morgenl.  Litersit.  Bd.  XIII.    See  also  Samar.  Halae  1699.    Brans  first  published

De  Sacy  Corresp.  des  Samarit.  p  9,  in  it  in  full :  Epistola  Samar.  Sichem.  tertia

Notices  et  Extr.  des  Mss  Tom.  XIL  ad  J.  Ludoltum,  ed.  P  J.  Bruns,  Helmst

'Correspond,  des  Samar.   pp.    9-11,  1781.  4.— The  full  correspondence  is  given

162-22.5.  in  Eichhorn's  Repertorium  Bd.  XI ll,  ia

'  Epistol£E  Samaritanje   Sichemitarum  connection  with  the  letters  to  Scaliger.

ad  J.  Ludolt'um,  Ciz«  1G88  4.  See  De  Sacy  Corresp.  des  Samar.  L  c.  pp

*  Cellarius  gave  some  extracts  from  it  11,  12.

iii.  131,132

900

NABULUS.

[Sec.  XIV.

came  into  the  hands  of  De  Sacy,  who  answered  it  for  Gregoire  ;
and  received  in  1811  a  reply  in  Hebrew,  written  with  Samaritan
characters.  Another  letter  arrived  for  De  Sacy  in  1820,  and  also
one  addressed  to  a  supposed  Samaritan  community  in  Paris  ;  for
which  likewise  a  second  letter  came  in  1826.  These  five  letters
have  been  published  by  this  learned  orientalist,  in  the  collection
so  often  referred  to.'

The  pubhshed  literature  of  the  Samaritans,  therefore,  con-
sists of  the  various  copies  of  the  Pentateuch  in  whole  or  in  part ;
and  of  this  series  of  their  letters  at  four  different  periods,
stretching  through  an  interval  of  nearly  two  and  a  half  cen-
turies.^ In  addition  to  this,  Gesenius  discovered,  in  a  Samaritan
manuscript  in  England,  a  curious  collection  of  hymns,  chiefly
of  a  doctrinal  nature,  which  he  has  pubhshed  with  a  commen-
tary.^ They  possess  also  manuscripts  of  a  work  professing  to
be  the  book  of  Joshua,  often  mentioned  in  their  letters.  It  has
never  yet  been  printed ;  but  a  manuscript  of  an  Arabic  version,
written  in  the  Samaritan  character,  was  procured  by  Joseph
Scaliger  for  the  library  of  the  university  of  Leyden.  The  work
is  a  sort  of  chronicle  extending  from  Moses  to  the  time  of  Alex-
ander Severus  ;  and,  in  the  period  parallel  to  the  book  of  Joshua,
has  a  strong  affinity  with  that  book.^  Accounts  of  their  tenets
and  rites  have  been  often  drawn  up  from  these  various  sources,
to  which  I  can  here  only  refer.'

From  the  earliest  letters  of  the  Samaritans  and  from  the
accounts  of  Delia  Valle,  it  appears,  that,  two  centuries  ago,
they  had  small  communities  in  Cairo,  Gaza,  Nabulus,  and  Da-
mascus. The  three  former  are  mentioned  repeatedly  in  their
letters  ;  the  latter  we  know  only  from  Delia  VaUe,  who  pur-
chased at  Damascus  his  copies  of  the  Pentateuch.  They  seem
to  have  been  only  a  few  families,  in  the  gardens  outside  of  the
city  ;  perhaps  a  temporary  establishment ;  and  we  hear  no  more
of  them.'  Those  of  Nabulus  and  Gaza  appear  to  have  stood  in
close  connection  ;  and  one  of  the  letters  to  England  was  written
from  the  latter  place.^    In  their  first  answer  to  the  inquiries  of

'  Corresp.  des  Samar.  pp.  13-18,  .50-  196.    Bertholdt's  Einleitung  Th.  HI.  p.

161,  22.5-235.  869  sq.

'  The  letters  to  Scali3 ;  and  also  in  Cotovicus  (p.  346),
Delia  Valle.  and  other  travellers.  Quares-
miiis  rejects  the  story  of  imprisonment  and
death  at  Samaria,  but  not  the  burial ;  II.
p.  8 1 1  sq.

JtoteIS.]     SEBUSTIEH. — THBESHI^'G  SLEDGE,  COLUMNS,  ETC.  307

sled  or  sledge,  as  used  for  threshing.  It  consists  simply  of  two
planks,  fastened  together  side  bv  side,  and  bent  upwards  in
front  ;  precisely  like  the  common  stone  sledge  of  ^ew  England,
though  less  heavy.  Many  holes  are  bored  in  the  bottom  under-
neath, and  into  these  are  fixed  sharp  fragments  of  hard  stone.
The  machine  is  dragged  bv  the  oxen  as  thev  are  driven  round
upon  the  grain  ;  sometimes  a  man  or  boy  sits  upon  it  ;  but  we
did  not  see  it  otherwise  loaded.  The  effect  of  it  is,  to  cut  up
the  straw  quite  fine.  We  afterwards  saw  this  instrument  fre-
quently in  the  north  of  Palestine.

The  whole  hill  of  Sebfistieh  consists  of  fertile  soil  ;  it  is  now
cultivated  to  the  top,  and  has  upon  it  many  olive  and  fig  trees.
The  ground  has  been  ploughed  for  centuries  ; '  and  hence  it  is
now  in  vain  to  look  here  for  the  foundations  and  stones  of  the
ancient  city.  They  have  been  either  employed  in  the  construc-
tions of  the  later  village  ;  or  removed  from  the  soil  in  order  to
admit  the  plough  ;  or  have  been  covered  over  by  the  long  course
of  tillage.'  Yet  on  approaching  the  summit,  we  came  suddenly
■upon  an  area  once  surrounded  by  limestone  columns,  of  which
fifteen  are  still  standing  and  two  prostrate.  They  measured
seven  feet  nine  inches  in  circumference.  How  many  more  have
been  broken  up  and  carried  away,  no  one  can  teU.  We  could
not  distinguish  the  order  of  their  architecture  ;  nor  is  there  any
trace  of  foundations  round  about,  which  might  afford  a  clue  to
the  nature  of  the  edifice.  Phocas  and  Brocardus  describe  the
top  of  the  hill,  as  occupied  in  their  day  by  a  Greek  church  and
monastery  f  and  these  columns  may  possibly  have  been  connected
with  the  former.  Yet  they  certainly  have  much  more  the  ap-
pearance of  having  once  belonged  to  a  heathen  temple.

The  view  from  the  summit  of  the  hill  presents  a  splendid
panorama  of  the  fertile  basin  and  the  mountains  around,  teeming
with  large  villages  ;  and  includes  also  a  long  extent  of  the
Mediterranean,  not  less  than  twenty-five  degrees,  between  W.
by  N.  and  X.  "W.  Xabulus  is  not  here  visible  ;  but  so  near  as
•we  conld  judge  of  its  direction,  it  must  bear  about  S,  36°  E.^
Many  other  places  were  pointed  out  to  us  by  an  inhabitant  of  the
village.*

'  Cotovicus  in  the  sixteenth,  and  von
Troilo  in  the  next  centnry,  speak  of  the
ground  as  strowed  with  masses  of  ruins,
which  is  not  now  the  case.  Cotov.  p.  345.
Von  Troilo  p.  409.  Dresd.  1676.

'  Phocas  §  12.    Brocardns  c.  7.  p.  177.

'  Schubert,  aa  we  have  seen,  p.  276
above,  makes  tbe  elevation  of  X.-ibnlus  1 751
French  tt.et ;  that  of  Sebfistieh  he  gives
at  92G  fee:  above  the  sea ;  Beise  IIL  p.
160.    I  think  this  latter  number  must  be

wrong  ;  for  Nibulus  lies  in  the  valley,  and.
Scbustieh  lies  much  higher  than  the  same
valley  .^ome  two  hours  farther  northwest.
So  that  even  admitting  that  the  valley
falls  in  this  distance  800  feet  (which  is
hardly  possible),  yet  still  Sebustieh  would
not  be  more  than  three  or  four  hundred
feet  lower  than  Xabulus.  The  actual  dif-
ference is  probably  not  so  great.

■*  These  bore  as  follows :  Beit  Iba  on
the  southern  hiU  west  of  Xibulus  S.  15'
ill.  143. 144

308

FROM  NABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

Descending  the  hill  on  the  W.  S.  W.  we  came  to  the  very
remarkable  colonnade,  which  once  ran  from  this  point  along  the
belt  of  level  ground  on  the  south  side  of  the  hill,  apparently  quite
around  to  the  site  of  the  present  village.  It  begins  at  a  mass
of  ruins  on  this  quarter  of  the  hill,  which  may  have  been  a
temple,  or  more  probably  an  arch  of  triumph  or  something  of
the  like  kind,  looking  out  W.  N.  W.  over  the  green  valley  and
towards  the  sea  ;  forming  apparently  the  entrance  of  the  city  on
this  side.  From  here,  the  colonnade  runs  E.  S.  E.  for  about  a
thousand  feet,  and  then  curves  to  the  left,  following  the  base  of
the  hill.  In  the  western  part,  about  sixty  limestone  columns  are
still  erect,  most  of  them  on  ground  recently  ploughed  ;  and
farther  east  are  some  twenty  more  standing  irregiilarly,  at  various
intervals.  Many  more  than  these  lie  prostrate  ;  and  we  could
trace  whole  columns  or  fragments  nearly  or  quite  to  the  village.
The  columns  which  we  measured,  were  sixteen  feet  high,  two
feet  in  diameter  at  the  base,  and  one  foot  eight  inches  at  the
top.  The  capitals  are  gone  ;  we  could  nowhere  find  a  trace  of
them  remaining.  The  width  of  the  colonnade  was  fifty  feet.
We  measured  from  the  western  end  for  more  than  1900  feet,
and  were  afterwards  satisfied  that  it  extended  for  a  thousand  feet
or  more  further  ;  making  its  whole  length  not  much  less  than
three  thousand  feet.

This  colonnade  is  probably  to  be  referred  to  the  time  of
Herod  the  Great  ;  who,  as  we  shall  see,  rebuilt  and  adorned
Samaria  with  splendid  structiires.  But  the  purpose  of  the
work,  and  the  edifice  it  was  intended  to  decorate,  are  ahke  un-
known ;  and  these  columns  now  stand  solitary  and  mournful  in
the  midst  of  ploughed  fields,  the  skeletons  as  it  were  of  depart-
ed glory.

I  find  no  mention  of  this  colonnade  by  travellers  before  the
present  century,  except  in  very  general  terms.'  There  were
said  to  be  likewise  columns  on  the  north  side  of  the  hill ;  which,
however,  time  did  not  permit  us  to  seek  out.

Sebustieh  is  the  Arabic  form  of  Sebaste,  another  foreign

E.    Surra  S.1°E.    Deir  Sheraf  S.  7°  W.  Mart.  Apol.  lib.  H.  Euseb.  Hist.  Ecc.  2. 13.

Kuryet  Jit  S.  51°  W.    Beit  Lid  S.  05°  W.  See  more  in  Reland  Fairest,  p.  813sq.— In

Kefr  Lebad  N.  72°  W.    Ramin  N.  70°  W.  the  fonner  edition,  TiM  Keram  was  spoken

Biz.'iria  N.  30°  W.     Burka  N.  6°  E.    Beit  of  as  in  sigiit,  wliich  is  not  tlie  case.

Imrin  X.  60'  E.    Xuss  Ijbeil  N.  80°  E.  There  was  also  an  interchange  of  Ri'iniin

^jni.'-nia  S    78°  E.    esh-Sheikh  Sha'leh,  and  Kefr  Lebad.

Wely,  S.  G0°  E.   en-Nakurah  S.  40  E. —       '  Maundrell  mentions  only  the  columns

The  village  Kuryet  Jit  lies  on  the  hills  be-  on  the  hill,  or,  as  he  says,  on  the  north;

yoiid  the  W'ady  of  Nubulus,  and  is  probably  March   24th.     Morison  speaks  of  over

the  Gitta  (T'lTra)  mentioned  by  Justin  200  columns  on  the  west  and  south;  by

Martyr,  Kusebius,aiid  other  ancient  writcM-s,  which  he  probably  means  the  colonnade  ;

as  a  village  in  the  region  of  Samaria,  the  p.  231.    It  seems  to  be  first  described  by

reputed  birth  place  of  Simon  Magus.  Just.  Buckingham  ;  p.  514.  4to.

iii.  144.  145

Joss  15.]  SEBUSTIEH,  SECASTE,  SAMARIA.  309

Greek  appellation,  wliich  since  the  days  of  Herod  has  continued
to  usurp  the  place  of  the  earlier  name  Samaria.  This  ancient
city,  the  later  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,  was  built
by  Omri  king  of  Israel,  about  925  B.  C.  after  he  had  purchased
the  hill  from  Shemer  its  owner,  from  whom  the  city  took  its
name. '  The  site  of  this  capital  was  therefore  a  chosen  one  ;  and
it  would  be  difficult  to  find,  in  all  Palestine,  a  situation  of  equal
strength,  fertility,  and  beauty  combined.  In  all  these  particu-
lars, it  has  very  orreatlv  the  advantasre  over  Jerusalem.  It  con-
tinned  to  be  the  capital  of  Israel  for  two  centuries,  and  until
the  carrying  away  of  the  ten  tubes  by  Shalmaneser,  under  king
Hoshea,  about  720  B.  C*  During  all  this  time  it  was  the  seat
of  idolatry  ;  and  is  often  denounced  by  the  prophets,  sometimes
in  connection  with  Jerusalem.'  Here  too  was  the  scene  of  many
of  the  acts  of  the  pro^ihets  Elijah  and  Elisha,  connected  with
the  various  famines  in  the  land,  the  unexpected  plenty  in  Sama-
ria, and  the  various  deliverances  of  the  city  from  the  Syrians.*

Afrer  the  carrying  away  of  the  ten  tribes,  Samaria  appears
to  have  continued,  for  a  time  at  least,  as  the  chief  city  of  the
foreigners  brought  into  their  place  ;  though  Sichem  (Nabulus),
as  we  have  seen,  soon  became  the  capital  of  the  Samaritans  as
a  religious  sect.  It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  distinguish,  whether
under  the  name  Samaria,  the  city  or  the  region  is  meant.'  John
Hyrcanus  took  the  city  after  a  year's  siege,  and  razed  it  to  the
ground.'  Yet  it  must  soon  have  revived  ;  for  we  find  Samaria
not  long  after  mentioned  still  as  in  the  possession  of  the  Jews ;
Pompey  restored  it  to  its  own  inhabitants  ;  and  it  was  afterwards
built  up  again  by  Gabinius.' — Augustus,  after  the  death  of
Antony  and  Cleopatra,  bestowed  Samaria  on  Herod  the  Great ;
who  ultimately  rebuilt  the  city  with  great  magnificence  and
strength,  and  gave  it  the  name  Sebaste  in  honour  of  Augustus.'
Here  he  placed  a  colony  of  six  thousand  persons,  composed
partly  of  veteran  soldiers,  and  partly  of  people  from  the  coun-
try round  about  ;  enlarged  the  circumference  of  the  city  ;  and
erected  around  it  a  strong  wall,  twenty  stadia  in  circuit.  In  the
midst  of  the  city,  he  left  a  sacred  place  of  a  fiirlong  and  a  half,
splendidly  decorated  ;  and  here  he  erected  a  temple  in  honour
of  Augustus,  which  was  celebrated  for  its  magnitude  and  beauty.

'  1  K.  lt;,-23.  24.  Jos.  Antdq.  8.  12.  3.  »  Jer.  41,  5.  Ezra  4,  10.  17.  Xeh.  4,

*  2  K.  17,  3.  5  sq.  2.   1  Mace.  5,  66.  2  Mace.  13,  1.

'  Ahab  built  here  a  temple  of  Baal,  1  •  Joseph.  Ant.  13.  10.  3.    B.  J.  1.  2.  ".

K.  16,  32.  33.    Jehu  destroyed  this  tem-  '  Jos.  Ant  13.  13.  4.    ib.  14.  4.  4.  ib.

pie,  2  K.  10,  18-23.    Prophetic  denuncia-  14.  5.  3.

tions  see  in  Is.  9,  8  sq.    Jer.  23,  13.  14.  "  Jos.  Ant.  15.  7.  3.  B.  J.  1.  20.  3.

Ez.  IC,  4G-.-).'-..    Am.  6,  1.    SEc.  1,  1  sq.  Comp.  Ant.  15.  7.  7.  ib.  15.  8.  5.— The

See  also  Hos.  8,  .")-14.    Am.  4,  1.  etc.  name  Sebaste  is  the  Greek  translation  of

■*  1  K.  17,  1.   18,  1.  2  sq.  c.  20.    2  K.  the  Latin  epithet  or  name  Augusta.
6,  24.  c.  7.

iii.  146. 147

310

FROM  NABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XrV.

The  wliole  city  was  greatly  ornamented  ;  and  became  a  strong
fortress.'  Such  was  apparently  the  Samaria  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, where  Philip  preached  the  Gospel,  and  a  church  was
gathered  by  the  apostles.'' — That  the  colonnade  now  seen  along
the  southern  side  of  the  hill,  was  connected  with  the  temple
just  mentioned,  although  not  in  itself  improbable,  is  yet  more
perhaps  than  we  are  warranted  certainly  to  affirm.

In  the  next  following  centuries  we  know  nothing  of  Sebaste,
except  from  its  coins  ;  of  which  there  are  several,  extending  from
Nero  to  Geta  the  brother  of  Caracalla.^  Septimius  Severus
appears  also  to  have  established  there  a  Roman  colony,  in  the
beginning  of  the  third  century.^  Eusebius  scarcely  mentions
the  city  as  extant ;  but  Jerome  speaks  frequently  of  it,  as  do
other  writers  of  the  same  and  a  later  age.^  Samaria  early  be-
came an  episcopal  see.  The  bishop  Marius  or  Marinus  was
present  at  the  council  of  Nicea  in  A.  D.  325  ;  and  the  names
of  six  others  are  preserved,  the  last  of  whom,  Pelagius,  at-
tended the  synod  at  Jerusalem  in  A.  D.  536.*  The  name
of  this  see  occurs  in  the  earlier  Greek  Notitice,  and  also  in
the  later  Latin  ones.^  The  city  fell,  with  Nabulus,  into  the
power  of  the  Muhammedans  during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  ;
but  we  hear  nothing  more  of  it,  until  the  time  of  the  crusades,
except  the  slight  mention  by  St.  Willibald,  in  the  ninth  century.'
At  what  time  the  splendid  city  of  Herod  was  laid  in  ruins,  we
are  nowhere  informed  ;  but  all  the  notices  of  the  fourth  century
and  later,  would  rather  lead  us  to  infer,  that  the  destruction  had .
already  taken  place  before  that  early  period.

The  crusaders  afford  us  little  information  as  to  the  Sebaste
of  their  day.  They  established  here  a  Latin  bishopric,  of  which
RajTicr  is  first  mentioned  as  the  occupant,  about  A.  D.  1155  ;
and  the  title  was  continued  in  the  Romish  church  until  the
fourteenth  century.'  Saladin  marched  through  it  in  A.  D.  1184,
on  his  retreat  from  Kerak.'"  Benjamin  of  Tudela  describes  it
as  a  strong  place,  situated  on  a  hiU,  watered  with  rivulets,  and
abounding  in  gardens,  orchards,  vineyards,  and  olive  trees.''
Phocas  and  Brocardus  speak  only  of  the  church  and  tomb  of

'  Jos.  Ant  15.  8.  5.   B.  J.  1.  21.  2.  citations  in  Relnnd  Falsest,  pp.  979-981.

Strabo  16.  2.  .34.  "  Lablw  Concil.  U.  c.  .51.  V.  c.  286.

^  Acts  8,  5.  9  sq.  Rel.ind  Pal.  p.  983.    Le  Quien  Or.  Chr.

'  Eckhel  Doctr.  Numm.  III.  p.  440.  III.  p.  650  sq.

Mionnct  M'd.  antiq.  V.  p.  513.  '  Roland  Pal.  pp.  215,  220,  222,  228.

*  Ulpi.in.  Leg.  I.  do  Censibus  :  "  Divus  *  See  above,  p.  29.5.   St.  Willibald.  Ho-

quoque  Severus  in  Scb.asteiiam  civitatem  deep.  p.  378,  ed.  Mabillon.

coloniain  deduxit."  Coins  of  Julia  Domna  "  Will.  Tyr.  18.  6.  Jac.  do  Vitr.  56.  p.

the  wife  of  Severus,  bear  also  the  inscrip-  1077.    See  genr.  Le  Quien  Oriens  Chr.

tion  COL.  SEBASTE.     CeUarius  Notit.  III.  p.  12!)0  sq.

Orb.  IL  p.  432.  Abulfeda  Annal.  A.  H.  580.  See

'  Epist.  86,  Epitaph.  Pante  p.  677.   See  above,  p.  296.

above,  p.  301.    See  also  the  numerous  "  Benj.  of  Tud.  I.  p.  65.

ui.  147-149

Jl^tE  15.]

SEBUSTIEH,  SAMARIA,  ETC.

311

John  the  Baptist,  and  of  the  Greek  church  and  monastery  near
the  summit  of  the  hill. '  Similar  slisrht  notices  are  found  in  the
travellers  of  the  fourteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  centuries  ;*
in  the  eighteenth  it  appears  not  to  have  heen  noticed  at  all ;
■whUe  in  the  present  century  it  has  agaiu  been  often  visited  and
described.'  There  are  in  Sebustieh  a  few  Greek  Christians;  and
a  titular  Greek  bishop  of  Sebaste  resides  in  the  convent  at  Jeru-
salem.^

From  Sebustieh  two  roads  lead  into  the  direct  route  from
Nabulus  to  Jenin.  The  easiest  meets  it  at  Beit  Imrin,  a  village
on  that  route,  distant  from  Sebustieh  an  hour  and  a  quarter,  N.
60^  E.  By  this  we  despatched  our  sen'ants  and  baggage,  while
we  were  occupied  in  looking  at  the  ruins.  The  other  road  leads
over  the  high  ridge,  which  shuts  in  the  basin  on  the  north.
This  we  took.  Leaving  Sebustieh  at  10.40,  we  descended  into
the  northern  valley  ;  and  then  ascending  the  range  of  hills
bevond,  we  came  at  11.20  to  Burka,  a  larore  villacre  situated
upon  a  sort  of  terrace  on  the  side  of  the  northern  ridge,  over-
looking the  whole  basin  of  Sebustieh.'  Like  all  the  villages  of
these  parts,  it  is  surrounded  by  extensive  olive  groves.  At  llf
o'clock  we  reached  the  top  of  the  ridge  beyond,  by  a  steeper
ascent,  and  had  a  noble  prospect  of  the  fine  basin  behind  us  ;
of  the  Mediterranean  upon  our  left ;  and  also  a  view  before  us
of  another  of  those  beautiful  plains,  which  characterize  this
region  in  distinction  from  that  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  a  fine
broad  valley  running  from  east  to  west,  divided  into  two  parts  at
some  distance  on  our  right,  by  irregular  rocky  hills,  projecting
into  it  from  the  north.  The  eastern  portion  appeared  here
green  and  beautiful,  extending  far  eastward  like  an  oval  plain  ;
on  its  northwest  side  lies  Sanur,  which  was  not  here  visible.
The  western  part  was  narrower,  less  regular,  and  less  rich,
running  ofi"  westwards  towards  the  Mediterranean,  but  not
uniting  with  the  valley  of  Nabulus  and  Sebustieh.  Many
villages  lay  before  us  in  various  dii-ections,  scattered  upon  the
lower  hills  beyond  the  valley  ;  but  in  consequence  of  the  igno-

'  Phocas  §  12.    Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  177.  npon  Mmself  or  others,  or  even  to  suggest

'  William  of  Baldensel  A.  D.  133(5,  p.  the  idea,  that  the  fortress  of  SAniir  (his

353.    Sir  J.  Mannde-iille,  p.  107.  Lond.  Santorri)  might  hare  heen  the  site  of  the

1839.     Zuallart  p.  245.     Cotovicns  p.  ancient  Samaria  and  Sebaste,  merelv  be-

34.5.    Delia  Valle  IL  p.  ICS.  Paris  1745.  cause  he  did  not  happen  to  see  Sebustieh.

Quaresmins  Hp.  811  sq.      Matmdrell  See  above,  VoL  I.  p.  434,  n.  2.

March  24.  Morison  p.  231.  'See  Vol.  L  p.  425.

'  It  is  absolutelv  unpardonable  in  Dr  '  From  Burka  the  bearing  of  Sebustieh

Clarke,  that  he  should  attempt  to  impose  is  S.  6'  AV.

iii.  149, 150

312

FROM  NABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

ranee  of  our  guide,  we  failed  to  obtain  the  names  of  many  of
them.  He  indeed  was  always  ready  with  a  name  ;  but  we
discovered  by  cross  examination,  that  he  did  not  always  give  the
same ;  and  therefore  recorded  only  such  as  were  confinned  by
other  testimony.'

We  now  descended  obliquely  along  the  northern  side  of  the
ridge  on  a  general  course  E.  N.  E.  We  reached  at  12.20  a
small  village  called  Fendekumieh,'^  Ijing  up  some  distance  on
the  hill  side,  with»several  fountains  near  it.  We  continued  on
the  same  course,  stiQ  along  the  slope,  with  the  fine  valley  below
us  on  the  left ;  and  at  12|  o'clock  came  to  Jeba',  a  large  village,
or  rather  town,  on  the  slope  of  the  range  of  hills,  which  at  this
point  are  much  lower  than  where  we  had  crossed  further  west.
In  the  village  is  a  tower ;  and  there  is  quite  an  appearance
of  antiquity.  The  name,  too,  marks  it  decidedly  as  another
ancient  Geba  or  Gibeah  ;  but  I  am  not  aware  of  any  notice  of
a  pilace  of  that  name  in  this  quarter,  unless  it  be  the  Gahe
mentioned  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  sixteen  Eoman  miles  from
Cassarea.^  Here  we  fell  into  the  direct  Nabulus  road  ;  and
descending  to  a  fine  fountain  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  found  our
servants  and  baggage  waiting  our  arrival.  We  halted  under  the
shade  of  the  ohve  trees  to  dine.

Setting  off  again  at  half  past  2  o'clock,  we  continued  on  the
same  course  for  twenty  minutes  ;  when  we  passed  the  narrowest
part  of  the  valley,  a  stony  dell,  and  emerging  iipon  the  open
plain  beyond,  turned  northeast.  Here  Sanur  came  in  sight  ;  a
ruin  on  an  almost  isolated  rocky  hill  before  us.  Fifteen  minutes
further  brought  us  to  the  apparent  water-summit  in  the  plain  ;
beyond  which  the  waters  no  longer  flow  westwards.  The  valley
opens  out  gradually  into  an  extensive  plain  on  the  east  of
Saniir.  At  3.10,  a  spot  was  pointed  out  on  our  left,  where  a
weekly  fair  is  held,  which  is  frequented  by  the  neighbouring
peasants.  At  the  same  time  the  villages  of  Meithelun  and
Misilya  were  in  sight  upon  our  right ;  the  former  bearing  E.^S.

'  The  places  which  we  ascertained,  bore  hour  to  Sebustieh  ;  March  24th.  Morison
as  follows :  Sebustieh  S.  15^  W.  Surra  describes  tlie  well  as  on  a  hill,  and  the
S.  3°  W.  'A_\jeh  N.  n"  E.  Fahmeh  N.  village  lower  down  upon  the  slope ;  p.  229.
6°  W.  er-Rnmeh  N.  6'  W. — Among  the  This  Sileh  is  marked  in  on  our  lists  in  con-
Tillages  which  wo  thus  lost,  was  probably  nection  with  'A_iieh,  'Arrabeh,  and  Kalimeh ;
Sileh,  or  Silet  ed-Dahr,  "  Sileh  of  the  and  from  the  description  of  these  travellers,
summit,"  as  it  is  called  in  distinction  from  would  seem  to  be  perhaps  on  the  same
the  Sileh  west  of  Jenin,  near  the  plain  of  slope  as  Fendekumieh,  but  further  west.
Esdraelon.  Maundrell  in  passing  by  a  di-  ^  This  name  is  doubtless  an  ancient
rect  route  from  el-Le_ijun  to  Sebfistieh,  had  Pontacomia,  'nevraKOjxia.  But  I  find  no
the  two  villages  'Arrabeh  and  Itameh  at  ancient  place  of  tiiis  name  mentioned,  ex-
his  left  on  the  hills;  and  came  thence  iu  cept  in  Patestina  Tcrtia,  east  of  the  Dead
an  hour  to  a  well  called  Sileh,  after  the  Sea.  Rel.  Pal.  pp.  215,  218,  223,  227,  925.
nearest  village  ;  from  this  point  he  was  an       '  Onomast.  art.  Gabathon.

iii.  150, 151

JOHE  15.]

JEBA*.  SANUR.

313

distant  about  half  an  hour,  and  the  latter  E.  by  N.  perhaps  an
hour  distant.  We  passed  along  the  base  of  the  hill  on  which
Sanilr  stands  at  3.20,  having  the  village  and  ruin  over  us  upon
the  left.

This  is  a  village  and  former  fortress,  situated  on  a  round
rocky  hill  of  considerable  elevation,  almost  insulated  in  the
plain,  being  connected  with  the  lower  mountains  in  the  north-
west only  by  a  low  rocky  ridge.  The  village  was  once  consider-
able. The  fortress  was  formerly  very  strong  ;  and  so  far  as  the
situation  is  concerned,  might  easily  have  been  made  impregna-
ble. It  belonged  to  one  of  the  independent  Sheikhs  of  the
country  ;  who,  although  nominally  subject  to  the  Turkish  Pa-
sha, was  not  always  ready  to  yield  him  obedience.  The  notori-
ous Jezzar  with  five  thousand  men  once  besieged  the  Sheikh  for
two  months  in  his  strong  hold,  without  success.'  More  than
thirty  years  later,  the  chieftain  having  placed  himself  in  open
rebellion  against  the  late  Abdallah  Pasha  of  'Akka,  that  officer
laid  siege  to  the  fortress  in  1830,  the  year  before  'Akka  itself
was  invested  by  the  Egyptian  army.  With  the  aid  of  troops
from  the  Emir  Beshir  of  Mount  Lebanon,  he  finally  succeeded
in  taking  the  place,  after  a  siege  of  three  or  four  months  ;  razed
the  fortress  ;  and  cut  down  all  the  olive  trees.  It  is  now  a
shapeless  mass  of  ruins  ;  among  which  a  few  families  still  find  a
home,  living  chieflv  in  caves.  The  castle  is  described  as  havinsr
borne  the  character  of  the  middle  ages  ;  but  I  find  no  allusion
to  it  in  any  writer,  Frank  or  Arabian,  imtil  near  the  present
century  ;  and  it  is  therefore  probably  not  of  very  ancient  date.^

The  plain  on  the  east  of  Sanur  is  a  beautiful  tract,  oval  or
nearly  round  in  form,  three  or  four  miles  in  diameter,  and
surrounded  by  picturesque  hills  not  very  elevated.  It  is  per-
fectly level,  with  a  soil  of  rich  dark  loam  exceedingly  fertile.
Its  waters  would  seem  naturally  to  flow  ofi"  somewhere  on  the
southeast  quarter  ;  but  not  being  able  to  distinguish  any  outlet
among  the  hills,  we  inquired,  and  were  told  that  none  exists.
The  plain,  it  was  said,  drinks  up  its  own  waters  ;  and  in  winter
they  collect  upon  it  and  form  a  lake,  wliich  renders  our  present
road  impassable.  Hence  it  is  planted  chiefly  with  miUet,  a
summer  crop  ;  although  in  the  northwest  part,  where  the  sur-
face is  higher,  we  found  the  peasants  engaged  in  harvesting
wheat.  From  its  mud  in  winter,  the  plain  is  called  Merj
el-Ghuruk,  '  Meadow  of  sinking  or  drowning,'  equivalent  to

'  Browne's  Travels  p.  505.  Clarke's
Travels  in  the  Holy  Land.  4to.  p.  SO-l. —
This  was  before  A.  D.  1799.

'  First  apparently  by  Browne,  who  how-
ever does  not  give  the  name  ;  p.  565.  It

Vol.  II.— 27

was  visited  by  Dr  Clarke  in  ISOl,  and
later  by  Turner,  Buckingham,  and  others.
It  is  the  Santorri  of  Dr  Clarke,  which  he
tries  to  pass  off  as  Samaria ;  p.  503.  4to.

ill.  151-153

I

314

FROM  NABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

*  Drowued  meadow.''  Around  its  southern  and  eastern  borders
are  several  \'illages.*

We  issued  from  the  large  plain  at  4  o'clock,  opposite  to  Jerba
on  our  left,  by  a  narrow  plain  or  "Wady  coming  from  the  northeast.
After  fifteen  minutes  this  valley  turns  east,  where  it  runs  up  for
some  distance.  On  its  southern  side  was  the  small  vUlacce  Kufeir,
about  twenty  minutes  distant.  We  kept  on  up  the  slight  rocky
ascent  on  the  north  ;  and  reaching  its  top  at  4.25,  were  sud-
denly gratified  with  a  wide  and  glorious  view,  extending  across
the  lower  hills  to  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon  and  the  mountains
of  Nazareth  beyond.  The  impression  at  first  almost  overpow-
ered me.  Just  below  us,  on  the  left,  was  a  charming  little  basin
or  plain,  a  recess  shut  in  among  the  mountains,  and  separated  on
the  north  from  the  great  plain  only  by  a  slight  ridge.  I  looked
eagerly  for  the  round  summit  of  Tabor,  but  it  was  not  visible  ;
the  mountain  of  Dtihy,  the  Little  Hermon,  rose  in  desert
nakedness  between,  and  shut  out  Tabor  wholly  from  the  view.
Further  west,  the  mountains  rose  boldly  along  the  north  side  of
the  great  plain  ;  and  the  precipice  S.  by  E.  of  Nazareth,  to
which  an  ecclesiastical  tradition  gives  the  name  of  the  "Mountain
of  the  Precipitation,"^  was  conspicuous,  bearing  N.  7°  E.

We  now  had  a  considerable  descent  on  the  same  coiu-se,
about  northeast,  and  came  at  4|  o'clock  to  Kubatiyeh,  a  large
village  in  the  midst  of  very  extensive  and  beautiful  olive  groves.
It  lies  on  the  east  of  the  little  plain  above  described,  and  some-
what higher  ;  from  the  plain  a  valley  extends  up  by  the  village
on  the  north  side,  and  opens  into  a  stiU  smaller  plain  in  that
direction,  which  it  serves  to  drain.  Our  course  now  led  us
across  this  latter  plain  along  its  left  side  ;  it  is  skirted  by  low
hills,  and  was  covered  with  fields  of  wheat  ;  but  seemed  not
very  fertile.  Crossing  a  low  rise  of  ground  at  5\  o'clock,  we
left  the  plain,  and  descended  into  a  narrow  stony  naked  dell,  not
very  deep,  but  yet  sufficiently  so  to  cut  oft'  all  further  obser-
vation. It  was  now  dry ;  but  water  apparently  often  runs
through  it."  We  followed  down  this  dell  about  N.  N.  E.  till  it
brought  us  at  6^  o'clock  to  Jenin.

'  Jfonro,  in  passing  this  way  on  the
2d  of  May,  saw  here  a  lake,  which  he
says  "  had  been  formed  within  a  short  time
from  some  unknown  cause  !"  His  muleteere
had  ]>r<)bably  never  before  seen  it.  1.  p.
2  70. — Schubert  travelled  from  Sebi'istieh
to  Jen.n  by  a  more  western  route,  leading
bv  the  village  of  'Arr.ibeh  ;  lieise  III.  p.
101.

'■'  Those  at  3.fl5  bore  as  follows ;  the
little  village  of  Jerba  lying  at  the  same  time
north  about  ten  minutes  distant  at  the  foot

iii.  153. 15 1

of  the  hills ;  viz.  SAnur  S.  25°  W.  Meithe-
I6n  S.  20'  E.  .Judeideh  S.  23°  E.  Siris
S.  35  E.    Mi^ilya  S.  72^  E.

'  Saltus  vel  PKccipitium  Domini  ;  Bro-
cardus  c.  G.  p.  175.  Quaresmius  11.  p.
842.  Cotovic.  p.  349.  The  tradition  from
which  this  name  springs,  is  late  and  le-
gendary ;  as  we  shall  sec  further  on.

*  Monro  describes  a  spring  as  gushing
out  in  this  valley  and  fonning  a  consider-
able brook.  This  was  early  in  May.
Summer  Ramble  I.  p.  277.

Jcxs  15.]

315

This  place  is  situated  in  the  month  of  the  same  Wadr,  as  it
enters  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon,  having  gentle  hills  on  either
side.  The  town  lies  in  the  midst  of  gardens  of  fruit  trees,
which  are  surrounded  hy  hedges  of  the  prickly  pear  ;  here  too
are  seen  a  few  scattered  pabn  trees.  The  houses  are  of  stone,
tolerably  well  built ;  the  place  may  contain  perhaps  two  thou-
sand inhabitants  ;  among  whom  are  only  three  or  four  famOies
of  Greek  Chri-stians.'  The  most  remarkable  thing  here  is  the
fine  flowing  public  fountain,  rising  in  the  hills  back  of  the  town,
and  brought  down  so  as  to  issue  in  a  noble  stream  in  the  midst  of
the  place.  The  fountain  is  built  np  with  plain  but  good  mason
"wotk.  It  has  a  reservoir  of  stone,  in  which  the  people  may  dip
their  jars  ;  and  also  a  long  stone  trough  for  the  herds  and  flocks.
The  water  flows  off  northwestwards  towards  the  Mediterranean.*

This  fountain  had  not  long  been  buUt  ;  and  is  a  good  speci-
men of  the  public  spirit  of  Husein  'Abd  el-Hady,  late  Mudir  of
'Akka,  whose  authority  extended  over  all  the  southern  provinces
of  Syria.  Husein  was  the  head  of  a  powerful  family  :  was  very
rich  ;  and  employed  some  two  or  three  hundred  yoke  of  oxen  in
cultivating  the  plain  of  Esdraelon.  He  was  now  dead,  and  one
of  his  brothers  had  succeeded  to  the  same  office.  One  of  his
sons  was  at  this  time  governor  of  Nabulus.  Another  was  aLso
governor  of  Jenin,  which  is  the  chief  place  of  the  district
embracing  the  great  plain,  and  is  subordinate  to  Nabulus,  in
the  same  manner  as  Hebron  is  to  Jerusalem.  He  too  cultivates
large  tracts  of  land  upon  the  plain  in  the  vicinity  of  Jenin.

Jenin  is  probably  the  En-Gannim  of  the  Old  Testament,  a
Levirical  city,  in  Issachar,  in  or  near  the  great  plain.  ^  It  has
also  ever  been  held,  and  with  good  reason,  to  be  the  Ginsea  of
Josephus,  which  lay  on  the  borders  of  the  great  plain  towards
Samaria  ;  indeed  the  province  of  Samaria  extended  from  it  south-
wards as  far  as  to  Acrabatene.*  No  further  notice  of  the  place
appears,  imtil  the  time  of  the  crusades,  when  it  is  several  times
mentioned  by  Arabian  writers  in  connection  with  the  march  of
Saladin.'  Brocardus  speaks  of  it  as  Ginum  ;*  and  as  it  lies  upon
the  great  road  between  Jerusalem  and  'Akka  or  Nazareth,  it  has
since  been  visited  and  described  by  many  travellers.

The  plain  of  Esdraelon  is  skirted  on  its  southern  side  by  low
hiUs,  running  from  Jenin  in  a  northwest  direction,  until  they

'  Scholz  ?ay3  from  1500  to  2000  inhab-  teenth  century ;   see  in  Aster's  Benj.  of

itants ;  p.  26G.    I  suppose  the  place  to  be  Tad.  II.  p.  4.33.

at  least  one  quarter  as  large  aa  Nabulus,  *  Ttvaia  Joa.  Ant  20.  6.  1.  B.  J.  3.  3  4.

and  probably  more.  Comp.  B.  J.  2.  12.  3,  where  it  is  FTjuiy.

'  The  elevation  of  Jenin,  and  of  course  Reland  Pal.  p.  812.

rf  the  plain  jast  adjacent,  is  given  by  Schu-  '  Bohaedd.  Vit.  Salad,  p.  59.  Abulfedae

bert  at  515  Paris  feet.    Reise  III.  p.  162.  Annal.  A  H.  578,  580,  pp.  30,  36,  in

'  Josh.  19,  21.   21,  29.    This  identity  Schultens  Excerpt.  Abulf.  post  Vit.  Salad,

is  also  asanmed  by  B.  Paicbi  in  the  four-  *  Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  177.

iii.  154-156

316

FROM  NABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

unite  with  what  may  he  called  an  extension  of  the  ridge  of
Carmel.  Farther  south,  these  hills  hecome  higher  and  form  the
mountains  of  Samaria.  It  is  this  extension  of  Carmel  towards
the  southeast,  consisting  of  a  low  ridge  or  range  of  hills,  which
separates  the  great  southern  plain  along  the  coast,  from  that  of
Esdraelon.  From  the  knoll  on  the  west  of  Jenin,  we  could  look
out  upon  this  part  of  the  plain  and  the  adjacent  southern  hills,
which  are  very  much  lower  and  less  hold  than  those  on  the
northern  side  around  Nazareth.  Looking  towards  Carmel,  on  the
southeast  side  of  a  low  Tell  or  mound,  a  little  hack  from  the
plain,  we  could  distinguish  the  place  called  Ta'annuk,  ahout
two  and  a  half  hours  distant ;  it  was  said  to  have  ruins,  which
led  the  people  to  suppose  it  was  once  a  large  city,  though  it
now  contains  but  a  few  famihes.  Further  to  the  right,  the
direction  of  el-Lejjun,  the  ancient  Legio,  was  shown  ;  but  we
could  not  make  it  out  distinctly.  Ta'annuk  is  undoubtedly  the
ancient  Taanach  ;  first  a  city  of  the  Canaanites  ;  then  allotted
to  Manasseh  and  assigned  to  the  Le\'ites  ;  and  afterwards  cele-
brated in  the  triumphal  song  of  Deborah  and  Barak.'  Eusehius
and  Jerome  describe  it  as  three  or  tour  Roman  miles  from  Legio ;
which  accords  with  the  present  site."  The  name  is  found  upon
Jacotin's  map  ;  but  I  am  not  aware  that  the  place  has  been
noticed  by  any  traveller  before  Schubert.'

Eastward  of  Jenin,  an  arm  or  offset  of  the  great  plain  runs
up  southeast  between  the  hills  of  Samaria  on  the  south,  here
higher  than  those  further  west,  and  a  range  of  naked  rocky
heights  on  the  north,  which  extend  for  some  distance  from
southeast  to  northwest  into  the  plain.  This  branch  of  the  plain
is  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  broad,  and  rises  with  a  per-
ceptible ascent  towards  the  southeast  for  an  hour  and  a  half  or
two  hours  beyond  Jenin.  On  its  sides  round  about,  are  the
villages  Deir  Abu  Dha'if,  Beit  Kad,  Fuku'a,  Deir  Ghuzal,  and
'Araneh.  On  one  of  the  highest  points  of  the  rocky  heights
north  of  this  arm,  lies  the  village  of  Wezar,*  apparently  a  ruin,
and  seen  in  all  directions.  From  Jenin  a  direct  road  to  Beisan
leads  obliquely  up  this  plain,  and  across  this  northern  range  of
mountains  ;  on  this  road,  and  upon  these  mountains,  half  an
hour  southwest  of  the  highest  point,  lies  an  inhabited  village
called  Jelbon,  in  which  we  may  recognise  the  ancient  Gilboa.*

'  Josh.  12,  21.  17,  11.   21,  25.  Judg.  1,       '  Here  again  the  final  'Ain  of  the  He-

27.  5,  19.  It  is  further  mentioned  in  Scrip-  brew  has  fallen  away  as  in  el- Jib;  a  very

tare  only  I  K.  4,  12.  unusual  circumstance.    See  Vol.  I.  p.  255.

'  Onomast.  arts.  Thaanach  and  Tha-  n   2,  and  p.  456.     Our  information  re-

naac/i,  oue  four,  the  other  three  miles  from  specting  this  village  was  obtained  nfter-

Legio.  wards  at  Nazaretli,  from  an  intelligent

'  Rcise  in.  p.  164.  Christian,  who  had  himself  travelled  the

*  Schultz  writes  this  name  Mezar ;  but  road  in  question.     See  also  Liebetrut  3^

incorrectly.    Ritter  Erdk.  XX.  p.  422.  Reise,  I.  p.  254,  Hamb.  1854.
iii.  156.  157

Junk  15.]

ENVIRONS  OF  JENIN.

317

This  circumstance  serves  to  identify  these  as  the  mountains  of
Gilboa,  where  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  slain  ;  and  on  which,
according  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  a  large  village  of  the  same
name  existed  in  their  day.'  The  inhabitants  of  Jenin  now  call
this  range  Jebel  Fuk^'a,  from  the  adjacent  village  ;  but  it  is
hardly  probable  that  others  give  it  this  appellation.  It  consti-
tutes a  mountainous  tract  with  several  ridges,  in  aU  about  an
hour  in  breadth.'^

Besides  the  villages  we  had  to  day  seen  on  the  right  of  our
road  after  leaving  J eba',  there  is  also  marked  in  our  lists  a  place
called  Tilbas,  which  probably  corresponds  to  the  Thebez  of
Scripture,  where  Abimelech  met  his  death. ^  That  place  Euse-
bius and  Jerome  describe  as  thirteen  Koman  miles  distant  from
Neapolis  towards  Scythopolis,  now  Beisan.^  Berggren  in  pass-
ing from  Nazareth  to  Nabulus  took  a  route  lying  eastward  of
Jenin,  and  spent  the  night  at  Tubas  ;  he  gives  its  position  at
nine  hours  from  Nazareth  and  four  from  Nabulus.'

In  the  district  west  of  our  road  also,  our  lists  give  the  name
of  the  village  Kefr  Kud  ;  probably  the  Caparcotia  of  Ptolemy
and  the  Peutinger  Tables,  on  a  road  between  Csesarea  and
Scythopolis,  marked  at  twenty-eight  Koman  miles  from  the
former  and  twenty  from  the  latter.  Of  this  ancient  place
nothing  more  is  known.* — Buckingham,  in  travelling  from  Na-
bulus to  Nazareth,  describes  himself  as  leaving  the  road  to
Jenin  at  Kubatiyeh,  and  taking  a  more  westerly  direction,
which  brought  him  in  about  two  hours  to  a  village  which  he
calls  "  Birreheen,"  that  is,  Burkin.  This  village,  he  says,  "  is
seated  on  the  brow  of  the  hill,  and  contains  from  forty  to  fifty
dwellings  ;  and  just  opposite  to  it  on  the  west,  distant  about  a
mile,  is  another  village  of  the  same  size,"  which  according  to
him  is  Kefr  Kud.  Afterwards,  he  turned  northeast  through  a
narrow  pass,  and  came  out  upon  the  plain  of  Esdraelon  about
two  miles  west  of  Jenin.''    The  position  of  Kefr  KM  is  there-

'  Onomast.  "  Gelhue,  montes  alienige-  I.  pp.  568,  569. — We  made  many  inquiries

narum  in  sexto  lapide  a  Scythopoli,  in  after  Tirzah  the  most  ancient  capital  of  tlie

quibus  etiam  vicus  est  grandis,  qui  vocatur  kingdom  of  Israel;  1  Kings  14,  17.  15,

Grelbus."  33,  etc.    We  could  find,  however,  no  name

'  From  Jenin  we  took  tbe  following  resembling  it ;  unless  perhaps  it  be  Tullu-

bearings  :  Northern  declivity  of  Carmel,  za,  a  place  which  we  visited  in  1852;  see

as  here  seen,  N.  30'  W.    Ta'annuk  N.  42°  in  Vol.  III.  Sect.  VIL
W.    'ArAneh  in  the  plain  N.  39"  E.    We-       «  Ptolem.  4.  16.    Reland  Pal.  pp.  421,

zar  N.  46°  E.  'Arubboneh  N.  60°  E.  Fu-  461.    The  Pent  Tables  read  Caporcota-

kii'a  N.  78°  E.  ni ;  which  doubtless  is  the  same  place.
=  Judg.  9,  50.  '  Travels  in  Palest,  pp.  551,  552.  4to.—

*  Onomast.  art.  Thebes.  Notwithstanding  the  apparent  display  of

'  Berggren  Resor,  etc.  Del.  m.  Blhang  accuracy  in  B.'s  account,  I  am  still  unable

p.  18.    This  appendix  in  the  original,  con-  to  fix  definitely  the  exact  position  of  Kefr

taining  Itineraries,  is  not  given  in  the  Ger-  Kud.     He  leaves  Sanur   at  8  o'clock ;

man  translation.    See  however  the  latter,  reaches  Kubatiyeh  (his  Cabaat)  in  about

Reisen  Th.  II.  p.  266  sq.  Comp.  above,  Vol.  two  hours ;  and  '  Birreheen '  in  about  two
Vol.  II.— 27*  iii.  157-159

318

FEOM  XABULUS  TO  XAZABETH,

[Sec  XrV.

fore,  probablr,  not  &r  from  an  hour  west  or  southwest  from  Jenin,
among  the  hills,  three  quarters  of  an  hour  or  more  distant  from
the  plain.  In  cros-sing  the  latter,  this  village  was  nowhere
visible  to  us.  Mr  Wolcott  also,  in  1842.  when  at  Burkin,  saw
Kefr  Knd  about  half  an  hour  distant,  in  a  vallev  among  the  op-
posite hills. '

Saturday.  June  16fA.  The  guide  whom  we  had  yesterday
taken  at  Nabulus,  proved  so  incomj-etent  and  untrustworthy,
that  we  dismissed  him,  and  engaged  a  Muslim  of  Jenin  to
accompany  us  to  Nazareth  :  not  indeed  to  show  us  the  r^ad,  for
that  was  plain  enough,  and  our  luuleteers  had  often  travelled  it ;
but  in  order  to  elicit  from  him  information  as  to  the  country
along  the  way.  "SVe  were  for  some  time  undecided  what  route
to  take.  I  had  a  strong  desire  to  visit  Ta'annuk  and  el-Lejjun,
to  say  nothing  of  the  "  excellency  of  Carmel ; "  but  we  had
already  been  compelled  reluctantly  to  exclude  this  mountain
from  our  plan,  in  order  to  reach  Beirut  at  the  proper  time  :  and
the  way  by  the  two  villages  in  question,  presented  nothing  else
of  special  interest.  Along  the  direct  route  to  Nazareth,  also,
there  is  very  little  to  be  seen  upon  the  plain.  But  by  taking  a
direction  somewhat  further  ea.?t,  we  should  pass  by  Zerin  and
several  other  places,  which  seemed  connected  with  antiquity.
We  decided  for  the  latter  route,  and  were  afterwards  glad  that
we  did  so  :  as  it  afforded  us  better  views  of  the  plain  itself  and
of  its  general  character,  than  we  could  have  obtained  upon  the
other  roads.

Our  grand  object  to  day  was  the  position  of  the  ancient
Jezreel ;  could  this  be  satisfactorily  determined,  it  would  afford
a  clue  for  fixing  the  sites  of  various  other  places  and  historical
events,  connected  with  this  region.  Setting  off  fi^om  Jenin  at
4|  o'dc-ck,  we  struck  out  upon  the  noble  plain  on  a  course  about
N.  by  E.  ^E.  towards  the  western  extremity  of  the  mountains  of
Gilboa,  wliich  I  have  above  described  as  running  towards  the
northwest.  We  thus  crossed  the  arm  or  offset  of  the  plain,
which  here  extends  up  southeast,  and  found  all  the  water-
courses, though  now  dry,  running  off  westwards,  as  do  those  also
from  the  southern  hills  ;  all  going  to  swell  in  the  rainy  season
"  that  ancient  river,  the  river  Kishon,"*  as  it  flows  towards  the
Mediterranean.  In  the  plain  are  occasionally  low  ridges  and
swells.    Perched  high  on  the  summit  of  one  of  the  naked  peaks

liocinmore.  Of  coone  itvasnow  mboot  12  distaoce  from  dtextec  to  Ke&  Eol,  is  pftil»-

oTclock.  Tben  be  tnnis  X.  E.  throng  m  v»i-  Mj  to  be  cootncted  in  like  proportica.

rovpaa,  and  afterpamung  his  war  for  some  '  Biblioth.  Sacra,  1843,  p.  7fi.  See

thne,  corner  cot  upon  the  plain  of  £«iraek4i  more  inVoLHI.  Sect.  III,BDder  A^fSSlt^

mt  neon.    From  Santir  to  Kubitireh  we  1852.

'WCTC  short  ot  an  boor  and  a  half;  and  B.'«  *  'Jwig-  5,  21.
iiL  159, 160

Jm  16.]

zer'in,  jezreel.

319

of  Gilhoa,  the  village  Wezar  was  a  conspicuous  object,  and
apparently  had  been  once  a  fortress.

At  51  o'clock,  we  left  the  village  'Araneh  on  our  right,  and
soon  reached  the  broad  western  end  of  GUlwa.  The  path  now
led  over  occasional  slight  spurs,  or  roots  of  the  mountain,
stretching  down  still  further  westwards ;  and  from  such  points
we  had  wide  views  of  all  the  extent  of  the  great  plain,
spread  out  upon  our  left,  and  of  the  long  blue  ridge  of  Carmel
beyond.  The  prospect  was  charming  for  its  rich  fertility  and
beauty.  Yellow  fields  of  grain,  with  green  patches  of  cotton
and  millet  interspersed,  checkered  the  landscape  like  a  carpet.
The  plain  itself  was  almost  without  villages  ;  but  on  the  slope
of  Carmel,  as  it  extends  southeast,  or  on  hills  further  to  the  left,
several  places  were  pointed  out,  as  el-Lejjun,  Um  el-Fahm,
Ta'annuk,  8ileh,  el-Yamon,  el-Barid,  Kefr  Adan,  and  otheis.
A  small  village  called  Jelameh,  apparently  deserted,  was  just  on
our  left  at  ten  minutes  before  6  o'clock  ;  and  here  too  we  could
see  Mukeibeleh,  a  village  in  the  plain,  on  the  direct  route  from
Jenin  to  Nazareth.'

The  water-courses  from  the  mountains  on  our  right,  all
passed  off  westwards  into  the  plain  ;  at  6.10  we  came  upon  the
junction  of  two  of  these  of  some  size,  but  with  no  trace  of
water.  Five  minutes  beyond,  we  had  a  small  site  of  ruined
foundations  on  our  right,  called  Sundela.  At  6.^  o'clock,  we
crossed  the  principal  of  the  low  spurs,  and  Zer'in  lay  before  us.
We  now  began  to  get  sight  of  the  country  north  of  the  range
of  Gilboa  ;  and  were  surprised  to  find  it  lying  much  lower  than
the  plain  we  were  crossing.  At  3.40  the  head  of  a  Wady  was
on  our  right,  running  down  "northeast.  We  had  thus  been
about  an  hour  in  passing  along  the  whole  breadth  of  these
mountains  at  their  western  end.  At  7  o'clock  we  reached
Zer'in.

Thus  far  we  had  been  travelling  over  the  plain  ;  which  here
perhaps  might  be  called  undulating,  in  consequence  of  the  slight
spurs  and  swells  above  described.  Further  west  it  seemed  per-
fectly level,  with  a  general  declivity  towards  the  Mediterranean,
to  which  its  waters  flow  off.  As  we  approached  Zer'in,  there  was
only  a  very  gentle  rise  of  the  surface,  like  another  low  swell ;
and  it  was  therefore  quite  unexpected  to  us,  on  reaching  that
village,  to  find  it  standing  upon  the  brow  of  a  very  steep  rocky
descent  of  one  hundred  feet  or  more  towards  the  northeast.
Here  the  land  sinks  off  at  once  into  a  great  fertile  valley  run-
ning down  E.  S.  E.  along  the  northern  wall  of  the  mountains  of
Gilboa.    This  valley  is  itself  a  broad  deep  plain ;  its  water-

'  From  Jelameh  my  companion  took  the  A'lan  S.  70' W.  Sileh  W.  Ta'annuk  N.
followinghearings;  Wezar  N.  60  E.  Kefr    70  W.    el-Mukeibileh,  N.  60  ' W.

iii.  160-162

320

FROM  XABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

bed  runs  along  under  the  rocky  declivity  on  the  right,  and  then
under  Gillx)a  ;  •while  on  the  other,  or  northeastern  side,  the
ground  slopes  gradually  upwards  to  the  base  of  the  mountain
of  Dfihy,  the  little  Hermon.  The  western  extremity  of  this
mountain  bears  from  Zer'in  about  north  by  east,  and  from  that
point  it  stretches  off  east-southeastwards  for  some  distance,
parallel  to  Gilboa.  It  thus  shuts  out  still  all  .view  of  Mount
Tabor ;  of  which  as  yet  we  had  had  no  glimpse.  Hermon  is
not  long  ;  its  eastern  part  being  only  a  very  low  ridge  along  the
north  side  of  the  valley.

This  deep  plain,  thus  enclosed  between  the  ranges  of  Gilboa
and  little  Hermon.  is  about  an  hour  in  breadth  ;  and  below
Zer'in  continues  down  E.  S.  E.  quite  to  the  plain  of  the  Jordan
at  BeLsan.  "VVe  could  here  see  the  acropolis  of  Beisan  lying
much  lower  than  Zer'in  ;  and  from  every  account,  that  place
appears  to  be  situated  not  far  above  the  level  of  the  Jordan
valley.  On  our  left,  the  Wady  or  plain  below  us  ran  up  to-
wards the  northwest,  where  it  seemed  soon  to  reach  the  level  of
the  great  plain  above.  The  exact  place  of  the  division  of  the
waters,  we  were  not  able  to  determine  ;  but  so  far  as  we  could
judge  of  it,  as  seen  from  the  higher  ground  which  we  after-
wards crossed,  it  seemed  to  be  near  the  ruined  villages  Fvdeh
and  'Aftdeh  in  the  plain.  There  is  apparently  no  distinct
water-shed  ;  but  the  portions  of  the  great  plain  on  the  north
and  south  of  these  hamlets,  ob"viously  send  their  waters  west-
wards to  the  Mediterranean  ;  while  near  those  ruins,  the  waters
as  obviously  begin  to  run  eastwards  to  the  J ordan,  with  a  much
more  rapid  descent  through  this  broad  deeper  valley,  than
exists  towards  the  west.  Here  then  we  have  a  second  arm,  or
branch  of  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon,  running  down  eastwards
between  the  two  parallel  ridges  of  mountains  quite  to  the
Jordan  ;  thus  regularly  connecting  the  valley  of  the  latter  with,
the  great  plain  above  and  further  west,  without  any  steep  as-
cent or  pass.

In  the  valley  directly  under  Zer'in  is  a  considerable  fountain  ;
and  twenty  minutes  fiirther  east,  another  larger  one  under  the
northern  side  of  Gilboa,  called  'Ain  Jaliid.  Zer'in  itself  thus
lies  comparatively  high,  and  commands  a  wide  and  noble  view  ;
extending  down  the  broad  low  valley  on  the  east  to  Beisan,  and
to  the  moimtains  beyond  the  Jordan  ;  while  towards  the  west  it
includes  the  whole  great  plain  quite  to  the  long  ridge  of  CarmeL
It  is  a  most  magnificent  site  for  a  city  ;  which,  being  itself  thus
a  conspicuous  object  in  every  i)art,  would  naturally  give  its
name  to  the  whole  region.  There  could  therefore  be  little  ques-
tion, that  in  and  around  Zer'in,  we  had  before  us  the  city,

iiL  162, 103

J0X3  16]

zeb'ix,  JEZREEL.

321

the  plain,  the  valley,  and  the  fountain,  of  the  ancient  Jez-
reel. '

The  identity  of  this  place  with  Jezreel  was  recognised  hy
the  crusaders,  who  gave  it  the  name  of  Parvura  Gerinnm  ;  but
they  remark  also  that  it  was  called  Zaracin  ;  and  describe  it  as
situated  near  the  western  end  of  Mount  Gilboa,  and  command-
ing a  wide  prospect  on  the  east  to  the  mountains  of  Gilead,  and
on  the  west  to  Carmel.^  But  this  identity  was  ag;iin  lost  sight
of ;  and  although  writers  in  the  seventeenth  century  speak  of
this  deep  valley  under  the  name  of  Jezreel,  and  describe  it
correctly  as  lying  between  Gilboa  and  httle  Hermon  and  extend-
ing to  the  Jordai},  yet  the  village  itself  seems  not  further  to  be
mentioned,  from  the  fourteenth  century  down  to  the  year  1814.^
Since  then  it  has  been  again  bnjught  into  notice  by  several
travellers,  but  without  any  description  of  its  site  ;  and  also  with-
out any  suggestion  of  its  identity  with  Jezreel/  It  is  only
within  the  last  three  years,  that  this  idea  has  been  revived,
apparently  on  mere  conjecture.'  Quite  as  recently,  likewise,
other  travellers  have  still  found  the  site  of  Jezreel  at  Jenin.'

Here,  as  in  so  many  other  cases,  the  name  itself  is  quite
decisive  ;  although  at  first  view  the  resemblance  between  Jez-
reel and  Zer'in  is  less  striking.  But  the  first  feeble  letter  of
the  Hebrew  being  dropped,  and  the  last  syllable  el  becoming  in,
as  is  not  unusual  in  Arabic,^  the  two  forms  are  seen  to  be  obvi-
ously identical.  From  Eusebius  and  Jerome  we  know,  that
Jezreel  lay  in  the  great  plain  between  Legio  (el-Lejjun)  and
ScythopoHs  now  Beisan  ;  and  the  pilgrim  of  Bourdeaux  sets  it
at  twelve  Roman  miles  from  the  latter  place,  and  ten  fi-om

'  FaW<»y  of  Jezreel,  Josh.  17,  16.  Jadg.  '  Adrichomius  copies  the  account  of

6,  33.  Hos.  1,  .5.    Fountain  at  Jezreel,  1  Brocardus,  p.  73.    Fiirer  of  Haimendorf

Sam.  29,  1.    Plain  of  Esdraelon,  Jndith  (1566)  speaks  of  the  fountain  and  valley

1,  8.  under  Mount  Gilboa,  and  mentions  appa-

■•'  WilL  Tyr.  22.  26,  "  Jezraheel,  nunc  rently  the  tillage,  of  which  he  misunder-

autem  vulgari  appellatione  dicitor  pamim  stood  the  name;   p.  269.  Xumb.  1616.

Gcrinum."    Benjamin  of  Tndela  mentions  Doubdan  describes  the  valley  as  extending

here  also  Jezreel,  which  he  calls  Serain ;  to  the  Jordan,  p.  580.    So  too  Morison,  p.

I.  \.  80.    Brocardus  c.  7.  pp.  176,  177,  216.    Quaresmius  makes  no  allusion  to

"  Jezraiil — hodie  vix  habet  viginti  domos,  Jezreel  or  its  vaUey.

vocaturque  Zaracin  (Zaraein  ?)  in  pede  *  First  by  Turner  in  1814,  Tour  in  the
mentis  Gelboe  ad  Occidontem  sita. — Ha-  Levant  II.  p.  151.  Afterwards  by  Buck-
bet  Jezrael  pulchrmn  prospectum  per  totam  ingham,  p.  495,  4tD.  Berggren  Reisen  II,
Galilaeam,  usque  ad  Carmelum  et  montes  p.  266.

PhoBnicis,  montemque  Thabor  et  Galaad."  ^  Ranmer's  Palast   Ed.    2.   p.  155.

This  mention  of  Tabor  is  wrong.     Bro-  Schubert  Reise  HI.  p.  164.    Elliott's  Tra-

cardus  describes  also  the  broad  valley  of  vels  11.  p.  379.

Jezreel  as  running  down  between  Gilboa  '  Monro's  Summer  Ramble  I.  p.  277.

and  little  Hermon  to  the   Jordaa — Sir  Hard/s  Notices  of  the  Holy  Land,  Lond.

John  Maundevilie  likewise  gives  correctly  1 835.  p.  225.     Paxton's  Letters,  Lond.

the  site  of  Jezreel,  "that  sometyme  was  1839.  p.  176.

clept  Zan,Tn;"  p.  111.  Lond.  1839.    So  '  As  in  Beitin  for  Bethel;  Isma'in  for

too  Parchi ;  Asher's  Benj.  of  Tud.  IL  p.  Ishmael,  Isma'il ;    and   other  examples.

429.  See  above,  Vol  L  p.  449.

iii.  163-165

822

FROM  NABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

Masimianopolis,  which  lay  somewhere  near  Legio.'  The  Arabs
at  Zer'in,  whose  estimates  of  distances  by  time  are  never  very
exact,  gave  the  distance  to  both  el-Lejjiin  and  Beisan  at  about
three  and  a  half  hours.  Both  places  were  in  sight,  and  seemed
nearly  equidistant.

Jezreel  is  first  mentioned  as  belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Issa-
char  ;  and  it  constituted  afterwards  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of
Ishbosheth.''  It  became  more  notorious  under  Ahab  and  Jeze-
bel, who,  though  residing  at  Samaria,  had  a  palace  here  ;  and  it
was  to  enlarge  the  grounds  of  this  palace,  that  the  king  desired
the  vineyard  of  Naboth,  and  gave  occasion  for  the  tragic  story  of
the  latter.'  In  the  retributions  of  divine  Provjdence,  the  same
place  became  the  scene  of  the  massacre  of  Jezebel  herself,  her
son  Joram,  and  all  the  house  of  Ahab,  by  the  hand  of  Jehu.*
Still  later,  Jezreel  is  alluded  to  by  the  prophet  Hosea  ;  and  we
find  the  name  in  the  book  of  Judith  under  the  Greek  form  Es-
drelom.''  In  the  days  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome  it  was  still  a
large  \allage,  called  Esdraela  ;  and  the  Bourdeaux  pilgrim  in  the
same  age  mentions  it  as  Stradela.'  We  hear  nothing  more  of
it  untU  the  time  of  the  crusades  ;  when  it  was  called,  as  we
have  seen,  by  the  Franks  Parvum  Gerinum,  and  by  the  Arabs
Zer'in."  In  A.  D.  1183,  Saladin  encamped  by  the  fountain,
then  known  to  the  Franks  as  Tubania  ;  but  deserted  it  on  the
approach  of  the  Christians,  after  a  skimiish  with  a  band  of
knights  coming  from  Kerak  and  Shobek,  and  after  destroying
the  village.'  In  A.  D.  1217,  a  Christian  host  advanced  tlirough
this  valley  to  Beisan.'  Zer'in  then  contained  hardly  twenty
houses  ;  and  since  that  time  we  hear  no  more  of  it,  untU  the
present  century,  as  above  described.'"

At  the  present  day,  Zer'in  has  perhaps  more  than  twenty
houses  ;  but  they  are  mostly  in  ruins,  and  the  place  contains
few  inhabitants.  The  principal  mark  of  antiquity  we  saw,  was
a  sarcophagus  with  sculptured,  ornaments,  lying  on  the  left  of
our  path  just  as  we  entered  the  village.  Other  travellers  speak
of  more."  There  is  a  square  tower  of  some  height,  partly  in
ruins  ;  from  the  several  windows  of  wliich  we  enjoyed  a  splendid
view  of  the  adjacent  country  in  all  directions.    Several  of  the

'  Onomast.  art.  Jczracl.  Itin.  Hieros.  ed.
Wessel  p.  .'586. — On  the  probable  position
of  !\laxiinianopolis,  see  in  Vol.  III.  Sect.
Ill,  Apr.  21st,  18.')2,  under  Lrjjun.

'  JosL.  19,  18.  2  Sam.  2,  8.  9.

'  1  \L  18,  45.  4C.  c.  21.

«  2  K.  9,  U-37.  10,  1-11.

'  Hos.  1,  4;  coinp.  1,  11.  2,  22.—
Judith  1,8.   4,  5.    7,  3.

"  Oiioinust.  art.  Jczracl.  Itin.  Hieros.  p.
586.

iii.  1C5, 166

'  Miinter  enumerates  Par\'um  Gerinnra
among  the  possessions  of. the  Templars;
Statutenbuch,  etc.  I.  p.  419.

*  Will.  Tyr.  22.  2G.  Bohaed.  Yit.  Salad,
pp.  r)3,  54.  WUken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  IL  ii.
pp.  2.31,  232.

"  Wilken  ib.  VI.  p.  144.

Brocardus  c.  7.  pp.  176,  177,  quoted
on  p.  321,  note  2,  above.

"  Buckingham  p.  495,  4to.  Elliott,
Vol.  II.  p.  379.

JOSB  16.]

zer'in.    'ain  JALUD.

323

inliabitants  gathered  round  us  ;  and  we  liad  here  no  difficiilty  in
finding  out  the  names  of  all  the  places  visible.  Most  of  them
■we  knew  already.  Wezar  was  still  in  view  on  its  high  peak  ;
and  below  it,  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  mountain,  was  another
village,  Ni\ris.  Tell  Beisan,  the  acropohs  of  that  place,  was
quite  distinct  down  the  great  valley  far  below  us.'  North  of  that
valley,  on  the  low  ridge  running  out  eastwards  from  little  Her-
mon,  was  seen  the  village  Kiimieh  ;  on  the  summit  of  the  same
mountain  was  the  Wely  of  Duhy  ;  and  at  the  western  end,  over-
against  Zer'in,  lay  the  village  Solam,  to  which  we  afterwards
came.  In  the  west,  we  could  now  distinguish  more  clearly  the
place  of  el-Lejjxm,  on  the  slope  of  the  plain,  as  it  rises  gradually
to  the  line  of  hills,  which  form  the  extension  of  Carmel  in  that
quarter.

Leaving  Zer'in  at  7^  o'clock,  we  descended  in  a  direction
nearly  east,  to  the  fountain  below  the  village,  reaching  it  in
twelve  minutes,  by  a  steep  and  rocky  path.  The  water  is  copi-
ous and  good;  not  gushing  out  in  one  large  fountain,  but  flowing
up  through  the  gravel  in  various  places  and  running  off  in  many
little  rills  to  form  a  small  brook  below.  We  were  told  that  this
fountain  in  former  times  became  dry  every  summer,  and  at  length
dried  up  whoUy  ;  but  the  same  public  spirited  Husein  'Abd  el-
Hady  already  mentioned,^  had  caused  it  to  be  again  opened
about  four  years  previously,  by  digging  down  till  the  water
flowed,  and  then  filling  in  loose  gravel ;  so  that  now  the  water
never  fails.  From  this  circumstance  it  bears  the  name  of  'Ain
el-Meiyiteh,  "  the  Dead  Fountain."

From  here  we  proceeded  down  the  valley  southeast  twenty
minutes  to  'Ain  Jalud,  a  very  large  fountain,  flowing  out  from
under  a  sort  of  cavern  in  the  wall  of  conglomerate  rock,  which
here  forms  the  base  of  Gilboa.  The  water  is  excellent  ;  and
issuing  from  crevices  in  the  rocks,  it  spreads  out  at  once  into  a
fine  hmpid  pool,  forty  or  fifty  feet  in  diameter,  in  which  great
numbers  of  small  fish  were  sporting.  From  the  reservoir,  a
stream  sufficient  to  turn  a  mill  flows  off  eastwards  down  the
valley.    There  is  every  reason  to  regard  this  as  the  ancient  foun-

•  So  Beth-shean  (Beisiin)  is  said  to  be  W.C?)  SUehS.  75°W.  el-Yamon  S  .55°  VV.

"beneath  Jezreel,"  1  K.  4,  12.  el-B.lrid  S  50"  W.    Kefr  Adan  S.  45'  W.

'  From  Zer'in  we  took  the  following  Mukeibileh  S.  40°  W.    Jelameh  S.  15°  W.

bearings,  beginning  at  the  south,  arid  pro-  Jenin  S.  15'  W. — I  am  since  satisfied,  that

ceeding  towards  the  left:  Wezar  S.  38°  we  mistook  some  other  village  for  el-Lejjun,

E.    Nurif  S.  47°  E     Tell  Beisan  S.  65°  perliaps  Salim,  which  lies  S.  S.  E.  of

E.    Ki'.mieh  E.WeW  ed-Duhy,  summit  of  Lcjjun,  an  hour  distant.    Leijun  has  no

little  Hermon,  X.  26°  E.    S6lam  N.  12'  minaret  or  other  mark  by  which  it  could

E    FnlehX.  11°  W.    'Afuleh  N.  22°  W.  be  seen  at  aU.    See  Wolcott  in  Biblioth.

Khuiieilis  for  Ukhm-ifis)  X.  32  W.    Xorth  Sac.  1843.  p.  77.

end  of  Cannel,  as  here  seen,  N.  34°  W.  '  See  above,  p.  315.
el-Lejuun  X.  80'  W.  (?)    Ta'annuk  S.  80°

iii.  lGG-168.

324

FROM  KABULTJS  TO  XAZARETH.

[Sec.  XTV.

tain  of  Jezreel,  -where  Saul  and  Jonathan  pitched  before  their
last  fatal  battle  ;  and  where,  too,  in  the  days  of  the  crusades,
Saladin  and  the  Christians  successively  encamped.  At  that
time  the  Christians  called  it  Tubania  ;  but  among  the  Arabs  it
already  bore  its  present  name.*  The  presence  of  fish  in  the
fountain,  probably  gave  rise  to  the  story  of  its  furnishing  a  mi-
raculous supply  for  the  whole  Christian  army  during  several
days,*

Having  breakfasted  at  the  fountain,  we  set  off  again  at  8.55,
bending  our  steps  towards  Solam,  on  our  way  to  Nazareth.  The
place  was  not  visible  here  in  the  deep  valley,  nor  was  there  any
direct  path  leading  to  it.  We  struck  off  through  the  open  fields
in  a  direction  about  north  ;  and  crossed  soon  the  little  streamlet,
coming  from  the  other  fountain  and  probably  also  from  higher  up
the  valley.  The  soil  of  this  plain,  and  also  of  the  gradual  north-
ern slope,  is  exceedingly  fertile  ;  and  the  fields  in  many  parts
were  still  covered  with  a  rich  crop  of  wheat,  long  ready  and  wait-
ing for  the  sickle.  The  harvest  in  other  quarters  of  the  plain
seemed  to  be  already  ended.  This  valley  is  included  under  the
name  Merj  Ibn  'Amir,  by  which  the  whole  great  plain  of  Esdra-
elon  is  known  to  the  Arabs.  Our  guide  from  Jenin  took  us
directly  through  several  fields  of  grain,  where  his  donkey  and
our  mules  cropped  their  fill  in  passing  ;  but  at  length,  after  as-
cending gradually  for  some  time,  we  fell  into  the  path  from
Zer'in  to  Solam,  and  reached  the  latter  at  10.25,  in  an  hour  and
a  half  from  'Ain  Jalud,  Our  progress  however  had  been  rather
slower  than  usual.

Solam  lies,  as  we  have  seen,  on  the  declivity  at  the  western
end  of  the  mountain  of  Duhy,  overagainst  Zer'in,  but  higher  ;
having  the  deep  broad  valley  of  Jezreel  between,  and  overlooking
the  whole  western  plain  to  Carmel.  Mount  Tabor  was  not  yet
visible.  The  village  is  small  and  dirty,  Mng  upon  a  steep
slope,  with  a  small  fountain  hardly  sufficient  for  the  wants  of
the  inhabitants.  The  people  were  civil  and  friendly.  One  old
man  accosted  us,  professing  to  be  the  keeper  of  the  "Wely  of

'  1  Sam.  29,  1.  Will.  Tyr.  22.  26.  Bo-       '  WUl.  Tyr.  22.  27,  "  Cum  hactenus  tam

haed.  Vit.  Salad,  p.  53.     See  above,  p.  322.  fons  supra  nominatus  quam  qui  ex  eo  rivua

Bohaeddin  writes  el-.J;ilut ;  which  form  Ja-  profluit,  pisces  aut  nullos  aut  rarissimos

lut  is  tlie  Arabic  for  Goliath.    It  is  difficult,  habere  crederetur,  illis  diebustantam  dici-

at  first,  to  see  how  this  name  should  come  tur  copiam  ministrasse,  quae  universo  ex-

to  be  found  in  this  region  ;  but  there  would  ercitui  sufBcere  posset." — The  same  writer

seem  to  have  been  an  early  legend,  that  correctly  describes  the  stream  as  flowing

here  was  the  scene  of  David's  combat  with  towards  Beis.in  ;  ibid.  26  :  "  Subito  Sala-

Goliath.     In  connection   with    Stradela  hadinus  castra  solvens,  ex  insperato  fon-

( Jezreel)  the  Itin.  Hieros.  has  the  follow-  tem  deserit,  inferiusque  versus  Bethsan,

ing:  "Ibi  est  campus,  ubi  David  Goliat  fontis  ejusdem  fluenta  sequens,  .  .  .  cas-

occidit ;"  p.  .'586,  cd.  WesscHng.    Parchi  trametatus  e:^t."    So  too  Mariuus  Sanutna,

mentions  the  same  legend;  see  in  Asher's  p.  251.  Comp.  lieland  Pal.  p.  803.
Benj.  of  Tud.  II.  p.  429,  430.

iii.  168,16'>

Jvxs  16.]

SOLAM,  SHUNEM.

325

DiSliy  ;  and  offered  his  services  as  a  guide  to  the  mountain,
which  he  said  was  often  visited  by  the  monks.'

Although  we  could  find  no  remains  of  antiquity  about  the
village,  yet  there  is  little  room  for  doubt,  that  it  is  the  ancient
Shunem  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  where  the  Philistines  encamped
before  Saul's  last  battle.'*  From  the  same  place  apparently,
Abishag  the  Shunamite  was  brought  to  the  aged  David ;  and
here  it  was,  probably,  that  Ehsha  often  lodged  in  the  house  of
the  Shunamitish  woman,  and  afterwards  raised  her  son  from  the
dead.'  Eusebius  and  Jerome  describe  it  in  their  day,  as  a  vil-
lage lying  five  Roman  miles  from  Mount  Tabor,  towards  the
southern  quarter,  and  they  write  the  name  already  Sulem.^  The
crusaders  also  speak  of  Suna  on  the  southwest  side  of  the  little
Hermon  ;^  but  from  that  time  onwards,  the  name  I  believe  no-
where occurs,  until  we  find  it  upon  the  map  of  Jacotin  in  the
present  century.  In  A.  D.  1822,  the  village  was  seen  by  Berg-
gren  but  although  since  then  various  travellers  have  taken  it
in  their  route,  yet  it  has  been  recognised  as  Shunem  only  within
the  last  three  or  four  years/

As  we  here  at  Solam  took  leave  of  the  valley  of  J ezreel,  and
of  the  objects  immediately  connected  with  it ;  this  may  be  a
proper  place  to  pause  for  a  moment,  and  bring  together  what
remains  to  be  said  upon  that  valley,  and  on  some  other  points
which  have  been  already  brought  into  view.

Gilhoa.  I  have  already  adduced  the  evidence,  which  goes
to  show  that  the  heights  south  of  the  said  valley,  separating  it
from  the  more  southern  arm  of  the  great  plain,  are  no  other  than
the  ancient  mountains  of  Gilboa  ;  they  were  so  regarded  in  the
days  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  and  also  in  the  age  of  the  cru-
sades and  since.^    Yet  the  name  Gilboa  (Jelbon)  is  not  now

'  AVe  took  at  SoLim  the  following  bear-
ings :  Wely  ed-Duhy,  top  of  the  mountain,
N.  E.  by  E.  Wezar  S  9°  E.  Zer'in  S.
12°  W.  Jenin  S.  20'  AV.  Ta'annuk  S.
56°  AV.  Urn  el-Fahm  S.  65'  W.  Salim
S.  84 '  W.  (?)  Nazareth,  as  we  found  after-
wards, bears  from  Solam  N.  9'  AN'.

'  Josh.  19,  18.  1  Sam  28,  4.

'  1  K.  ],  3.  2  K.  4,  8-37.  8,  1-0
Eusebius  and  Jerome  suppose  the  hostess
of  Eliiha  to  have  dwelt  at  Sonam,  a  vil-
lage in  Akrabatcne.  But  the  mother,  on
the  death  of  her  child,  goes  to  Elisha  on
Mount  Carmel,  apparently  not  very  dis-
tant ;  2  K.  4,  22-25.  This  accords  far
better  with  the  relative  position  of  Solam.
Onomast.  art.  Sunam,

*  Onomast.  art.  Suleni.    In  the  present
Vol.  II.  -28

text  of  Eusebius,  the  name  stands  as  2ou-
&^fi,  but  Jerome's  copy  evidently  had  Sou-
Aljyu.  This  change  from  n  to  /  was  frequent
in  Hebrew,  as  it  is  in  other  languages.
See  Gesenius  Lex.  lett.  b.

'  Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  176.  Marin.  Sannt.
p.  249.

'  Reisen  etc.  11.  p.  265.  Perhaps  Scholz
means  the  same  by  his  "  Selwam,"  p.  264.

'  Monro  mentions  here  a  tower  (not
town)  as  having  been  destroyed  by  'Abdal-
lah  Pasha  of  'Akka  about  1831 ;  A'ol.  I.
pp.  278,  280.  Elliott's  Travels  XL  p.  378.
Schubert  Reise  III.  p.  165.  P^aumer  Pa-
List.  Ed.  3.  p.  124.

'  See  above,  p.  31 7.  n.  1 ;  where  the  words
of  Eusebius  aud  Jerome  are  cited.  WilL
Tyr.  22.  26.  Brocardus  c.  7.  pp.  176,  177.

iii.  169-171

326

FROM  NABULTJS  TO  NAZARETH,

[Sec.  XIV.

known  among  the  inhabitants,  as  applied  to  these  mountains,
but  only  to  the  village  upon  them.*  This  latter  circumstance,
together  with  their  relative  position  to  Scythopolis  (Beisan),
Jezreel,  and  Shunem,  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  respecting  their
identity.  The  highest  part  is  towards  the  east,  two  hours  or
more  from  Zer'in.  Further  down  toward  the  Jordan  valley,  they
become  somewhat  lower.

Little  Hermon.  The  high  ridge  on  the  north  of  Jezreel,
known  to  the  Arabs  as  Jebel  ed-Duhy,  I  have  above  called  the
Little  Hermon,  in  distinction  from  Jebel  esh-Sheikh  north  of
Banias,  the  true  and  only  Hermon  of  the  Scriptures.*  There  is
no  ground  to  suppose  that  this  mountain  of  Duhy  is  mentioned
in  Scripture  as  Hermon  ;  yet  this  name  was  certainly  applied
to  it  in  the  days  of  Jerome,  and  may  therefore  be  used  without
impropriety,  for  the  sake  of  convenience.'  It  probably  had  its
origin  in  the  fourth  century,  after  the  conversion  of  Constantine
had  made  Palestine  accessible  to  foreign  ecclesiastics  and  monks,
who  now  busied  themselves  in  tracing  out  all  the  names  and
places  of  Scripture,  without  much  regard  to  criticism  or  to  ear-
lier tradition.^  Eusebius  appears  to  have  listened  doubtfully  to
an  older  tradition  of  Hermon  as  situated  near  Paneas  ;  but
makes  no  allusion  to  one  near  Tabor.'  J erome  heard  the  same
tradition  of  the  true  Hermon  from  his  Jewish  instructor,  and
speaks  of  it  much  more  decidedly."  The  name  Hermon,  there-
fore, was  probably  first  appHed  to  this  mountain  near  Tabor,  in
the  interval  between  these  two  writers,  on  a  mere  conjecture
drawn  from  the  words  of  the  Psalmist  :  "  Tabor  and  Hermon
shall  rejoice  in  thy  name  ; and  it  was  natural  for  Jerome

Parchi  in  Asher's  Benj.  of  Tud.  II.  p.  430.  montem  Thabor  .  .  .  Aspiciebat  procul

Marinus  Sanutus  p.  251.     Cotovicus  p.  montes  Hermon  et  Hennonim,  et  campos

347.    Doubdan  p.  580,  etc.  Quaresmius  latos  Galilseaj,"  etc.  This  form  Hennonim

does  not  mention  Gilboa.  is  the  Hebrew  plural,  boiTowed  from  Ps.

'  I  speak  here  advisedly ;  for  I  had  42,  7.
been  misled  by  Richardson,  to  look  for  the       '  See  the  remarks  at  the  beginning  of
mountains  of  Gilboa  as  bordering  upon  the  Sect.  VII.  Vol.  I.  p.  251  sq.
Jordan  valley  north  of  Beisan.    He  says  Onomast.  art.  jErmon.
expressly  of  the  moimtain  tliere  :  "  The       "  "  Hebrajus  vero,  quo  pralegente  Scrip-
natives  still  call  it  Gibl  Gilbo,  or  mount  turos   didici,  ailirmat  montem  .3irmon
Gilbo ;"  Travels  II.  p.  424.    This  led  us  Paneadi  inmiinere,    .  .  .    de  quo  nunc
to  make  minute  and  extensive  inquiry,  asstlvte  nives  Tyrum  ad  delicias  feruntur."
wliich  resulted  in  showing  tlie  language  of  Jerome  adds  all  this  to  the  article  of  Euse-
Kichardson  to  be  utterly  witliout  founda-  bius.

tion.  '  Ps.  80,  12.  [13.]    It  was  taken  for

-  See  more  on  Jebel  esh-Sheikh  as  Her-  granted,  that  as  Tabor  and  Hermon  are

mon,  near  the  end  of  the  next  section.  here  mentioned  together,  they  must  also

"  Jerome  twice  mentions  a   Hermon  lie  close  together.    But  both  this  and  all

near  Mount  Tabor.  Kp.  44,  ad  Mai-cellam,  the  other  passages  of  Scripture,  in  wliich

0pp.  ed.  Mart.  T.  IV.  ii.  p.  552,  "  Appa-  Hermon  occurs,  apply  with  far  greater

rebit  oppidum  Naim  .  .  .   Videbitur  et  strength  and  beauty  to  Jebel  esh-Sheikh.

Hermonim  et  torrens  Eiidor  in  quo  super-  So  especially  the  difficult  passage  Ps.  133,

atur  Sisera."     Ep.  8(!,  ad  Eustoch.  Epi-  3 ;  which,  however  it  may  be  explained,

taph.  Paulas   ibid.  p.  G77,   "  Scandebat  can  have  no  allusion  to  the  vicinity  of

iii.  171,  .172

June  16.]

VALLEY  OF  JEZREEL.

327

afterwards  to  speak  of  it  in  the  plural  form,  Hermonim,  in  dis-
tinction from  ■what  he  knew  to  be  the  proper  Hermon  in  the
north.  This  name  continued,  in  ecclesiastical  tradition,  through
the  middle  ajjes  and  the  followincc  centuries  ;  and  maintains
itself  still  in  the  monasteries. '  The  Arab  Christians  appear  also
to  be  acquainted  with  it  as  naramon,  but  do  not  use  this
name  ;  and  among  the  Muslims,  it  seems  to  be  entirely  lost.
The  old  man  whom  we  met  at  Solam,  had  learned  it  from  pil-
grims to  the  mountain.

This  mountain  of  ed-Duhy,  therefore,  has  httle  of  historical
interest ;  nor  has  it  either  beauty  or  fertility  to  excite  the  atten-
tion of  the  traveller.  It  is  in  fact  a  desert  shapeless  mass  ;  and
when,  as  we  approached  Jenin  from  the  south,  it  was  erroneously
pointed  out  to  me  as  Tabor,  I  felt  great  disappointment.  The
highest  part,  crowned  by  the  Wely,  is  towards  the  western  end  ;
further  east  it  sinks  down  gradually  to  a  low  ridge  of  table  land,
parallel  to  the  eastern  part  of  the  valley  of  JezreeL

VaUey  of  JezreeL  This  great  valley  is  celebrated  in  Scrip-
tare  history,  for  the  remarkable  victory  of  Gideon,  and  the  last
fatal  overthrow  of  Saul.  The  Midianites,  the  Amalekites,  and
the  children  of  the  east  had  come  over  Jordan  and  pitched  in
the  valley  of  Jezreel ;  and  Gideon  had  gathered  the  Israelites
of  the  northern  tribes  together,  and  encamped  at  the  well  of
Harod,  probably  on  Mount  GUboa  ;  since  "  the  host  of  Midian
was  beneath  him  in  the  valley."^  Here  Gideon  went  down  to
the  host,  and  heard  the  dream  ;  and  then,  with  his  three  hun-
dred men,  attacked  and  miraculously  routed  the  whole  host  of
Midian.' — Against  Saul,  the  Philistines  came  up  and  pitched  in
Shunem  (Solam).  and  Saul  and  aU  Israel  pitched  in  Gilboa  ;
afterwards  the  Philistines  are  said  to  be  at  Aphek,  and  the
Israelites  at  a  fountain  in  Jezreel,  probably  the  present  'Ain
Jalud.*  Forsaken  of  God  and  in  the  depth  of  his  despair,  Saul
now  crossed  over  the  ridge  of  the  little  Hermon  to  Endor,  to
consult  the  sorceress.  The  battle  took  place  next  day  ;  "  the
men  of  Israel  fled  from  before  the  Philistines,  and  fell  down
slain  in  mount  Gilboa  ; "  and  Saul  and  his  three  sons  were  found
among  the  dead.  The  Philistines  cut  off  his  head,  stripped  the
dead  body,  and  then  fastened  it  to  the  wall  of  Beth-shean.'
Thus  in  the  language  of  David's  pathetic  elegy  :  "  The  beauty
of  Israel  was  slain  upon  thy  high  places  !  "  and  hence  the  curse
upon  the  scene  of  slaughter :  "Ye  mountains  of  Gilboa,  let

Tabor,  notwithstanding  Reland's  sngges-       *  1  Sam.  27,  4.  29,  1.     Ensebius  and

tidn  ;  Palx=t  pp.  325,  326.  Jerome  place  Aphek  near  Endor ;  the  lat-

'  Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  177.  Marin.  Sanut.  ter  is  on  the  north  side  of  the  little  Her-

p.251.  Cotovic.  p.  347.Manndrell,  Apr.  19.  mon.     Onomast.     Aphee,  juxta  Endor

'  Judg.  6,  33.  35.  7,  1.  8.  Jezraelis,  nbi  dimicavit  SauL"
»  Judg.  7,  9-25.  »  1  Sam.  28,  5-25.  c.  31.

iiL  172-174

328

FROM  KABTTLUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

there  be  no  dew,  neither  rain  upon  vou,  nor  fields  of  ofi^er-

Beisan.  In  the  former  edition  of  this  work,  historical
notices  of  Beisan  were  here  subjoined.  But  as  we  ourselves
visited  that  place  in  1852,  the  reader  is  referred  for  them  to  the
third  volume.''

Fideh.  On  the  great  plain  west  of  Solam,  lie  the  ruined
villages  Fuleh  and  'Afideh  ;  the  former  hardly  three  quarters
of  an  hour  distant,  and  the  latter  about  a  mile  beyond ;  both
lying  near  the  low  water-shed  at  the  head  of  the  valley  of  Jez-
reeL  Fuleh  has  become  celebrated  in  modem  times  as  the  cen-
tral point  of  the  battle  in  A.  D.  1799,  between  the  French  and
the  Turkish  army  advancing  from  Damascus  for  the  relief  of
'Akka,  commonly  known  as  the  battle  of  Mount  Tabor.*  But
the  place  has  a  still  older  renown,  as  the  site  of  a  fortress  in  the
time  of  the  crusades,  known  among  the  Arabs  as  Fuleh  and
among  the  Franks  as  the  castle  Faba,  and  occupied  by  the
knights  Hospitalers  and  Templars  in  common.*  It  is  mentioned
in  A.  D.  1183  in  connection  with  the  march  of  the  Christians
to  the  fountain  Tubania  ;  and  was  captured  by  Saladin  in  1187
after  the  battle  of  Hattin.'

Lfijjvn.  On  the  western  border  of  the  great  plain  of  Es-
draelon,  where  it  already  begins  to  rise  gently  towards  the  low

'  2  Sam.  1.  19.  21.  Napoleon;  see  likewise  Thiers  R^rolntion

'  See  Tel.  III.  .Sect.  VII.  at  the  end  Francaise,  Tom.  X.  p.  405-407.  Paris,

'  "  When  the  French  invaded  Syria,  1834.

Nazareth  was  occupied  by  sis  or  eight  *  Faha  is  simply  the  translation  of  Fu-

htmdred  men,  whose  advanced  posts  were  leh,  '  a  bean  ; '  Fr.  la  Feve.    Hugo  Pla-

at  Tubariyeh  and  Safed.    Two  hours  from  gon  in  Martene  et  Dnrand,  Tom.  V.  pp.

Kazaretli,  General  Kleber  sustained,  with  598,  599.    W'ilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  IIL  iL

a  corps  not  exceeding  fifteen  hundred  men,  pp.  231,  267.    Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  176. —

the  attack  of  the  whole  Syrian  army,  In  Le  Clerc's  edition  of  Brocardus,  this

amounting  to  at  least  twenty-five  thousand,  name  is  wrongly  printed  Sah-i  ;  the  edition

He  was  posted  in  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  of  Reineccius  (Magdeb.  1587)  has  correctly

near  the  village  of  Fiileh,  where  he  formed  Faba.

his  battalion  into  a  square,  which  contin-  '  Bohaed.  Vit  Salad,  p.  54.    Wilken  L

ned  fighting  from  sunrise  to  mid-day,  until  c.  pp.  231,  232. — Abulfeite  Annal.  A.  H.

they  had  expended  almost  all  their  ammu-  583.  Mejr  ed-Din  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  IIL

nition.    Bonaparte,  informed  of  Kleber's  p.  81.    Wilken  Comment  de  Bell.  Croc,

perilous  situation,  advanced  to  his  support  p.  142. — The  Frank  fortress  Belvoir,  men-

with  sis  hundred  men.    No  sooner  had  he  tioned  in  connection  with  the  same  CTents,

come  in  sight  of  the  enemy  and  fixed  a  appears  to  be  the  Kaukab  of  the  Arabs,  the

shot  over  the  plain,  than  the  Turks  suppo-  present  Kaukab  el-Hawa  described  further

ring  that  a  large  force  was  advancing,  took  on,  situated  on  the  heights  west  of  the

precipitately  to  flight ;  during  which  seve-  Jordan  valley,  between  Beis^in  and  the

ral  thousand  were  killed  and  many  drown-  lake.    A  place  'Afurbala  (Lat  Forbelat)

ed  in  the  river  of  Deburieh,  which  then  is  also  mentioned,  which  lay  apparently

inundated  a  part  of  the  plain.    Bonaparte  between  Beisan  and  Belvoir  on  a  plain;

dined  at  Nazareth,  .  .  .  and  returned  the  but  whether  below  in  the  Jordan  vaUey,

same  dav  to  'Akka,"  Burckhardt's  Travels  or  on  the  table  land  above,  is  not  said,

in  Syria,  etc,  p,  339.    This  was  on  the  'Will.  T^t.  22.  16,  26.  Bohaed.  Wt.  Salad.

16th  of  April,  1799.    The  same  general  pp.  54,  76,  et  Ind.  art.  Apherbala.  Wilken

account  is  given  in  the  various  Lives  of  Gesch.  der.  Kr.  III.  ii.  pp.  210,  211,  232.
iu.  174.  176-178

JlTNE  16.]

LEJJUN,  LEGIO.

329

range  of  hills,  whicli  connect  Carmel  and  the  mountains  of  Sa-
maria, there  was  felted  out  to  us  from  Solam,  as  also  from
Zer'in,  the  position  w  el-Lejjim.  Near  by  it  there  was  said  to
be  a  large  fountain,  sending  forth  a  mill  stream  ;  which,  like
that  at  Jenin  and  all  the  brooks  along  the  southwestern  hills,
so  far  as  these  flow  at  all,  runs  into  the  plain,  and  goes  to  aid
in  forming  the  ancient  Kishon.  The  place  was  visited  by  Maun-
drell,  who  speaks  of  it  in  his  day  as  an  old  village  near  a  brook,
with  a  Khan  then  in  good  repair ;  he  could  here  overlook  the
plain  of  Esdraelon.'  The  Khan  was  for  the  accommodation  of
caravans,  passing  on  the  great  road  between  Egypt  and  Damas-
cus, which  here  comes  over  the  hills  from  the  western  plain
along  the  coast,  and  enters  that  of  Esdraelon.'

Lejjun  is  without  doubt  the  ancient  Legio  of  Eusebius  and
Jerome.  In  their  day  it  must  have  been  an  important  and  well
known  place  ;  since  they  assume  it  as  a  central  point,  from
which  to  mark  the  position  of  several  other  places  in  this  quar-
ter.' Yet  I  find  no  further  certain  allusion  to  it,  neither  during
the  age  of  the  crusades,  nor  in  the  preceding  nor  subsequent
centuries,  until  the  time  of  Abulfeda.*  The  visit  of  Maundrell
took  place  in  A.  D.  1697.  In  the  present  century  it  reappears
upon  the  map  of  Jacotin.

It  does  not  seem  probable,  that  the  ancient  Legio  was  a  city
founded  by  the  Romans  ;  but  rather,  that  this  was  a  new  name
imposed  upon  a  still  older  place  ;  which,  hke  the  names  Nabu-
lus  and  Sebustieh,  has  maintained  itself  in  the  mouths  of  the
native  population,  while  the  earlier  name  has  perished.  This
circumstance  led  us  naturally  to  inquire,  whether  there  was  any
ancient  city  so  situated,  as  to  correspond  with  the  position  of
Lejjtin.  As  we  travelled  across  the  plain,  and  had  Ta'annuk
and  the  place  of  Lejjtin  continually  in  view,  we  could  not  resist
the  impression,  that  the  latter  probably  occupies  the  site  of  the
ancient  Megiddo,  so  often  mentioned  along  with  Taanach.  The
distance  of  Taanach  from  Legio  is  given  by  Eusebius  and  Je-

'  Maundrell,  March  22.

'  We  visited  Le^un  in  1852 ;  see  VoL
m.  Sect.  Ill,  under  Apr.  21st.

'  See  the  Onomast.  arts.  Aphraim,
Camona,  Nazareth,  Thaanach  and  Tha-
naach,  etc.

♦  Abulf.  Tah.  Syr.  p.  8,  and  Addenda
prefixed. — In  the  Latin  ecclesiastical  iVb-
titia  appended  to  the  History  of  William
of  Tyre,  the  name  Legionum  occurs  as  a
suffragan  see ;  WiU.  Tyr.  in  Gesta  Dei  p.
1046.  Reland  Pal.  p.  228.  From  this  it
has  sometimes  been  inferred,  that  Leijun
was  made  a  bishopric  in  the  age  of  the
crusades ;  Bachiene  Th.  Ill  iv.  p.  40.  Rau-
VoL.  II.— 28*

mer  Pal.  p.  141.  ed.  3.  That  list  is  ob-
viously composed,  on  the  one  hand,  of  ear-
lier materials ;  for  it  contains  Beit  Jibrrn
which  had  long  been  destroyed,  and  also
Neapolis  which  was  never  a  Latin  see  ;  aud
on  the  other  hand,  it  exhibits,  among  other
additions,  Nazareth,  which  was  made  a
bishopric  only  during  the  crusades,  and
Mount  Tabor,  which  appears  never  to  have
been  a  bishop's  seat  at  all.  If  Legionum
be  actually  the  same  as  Lejjun,  it  may  in
like  manner  have  been  added  as  the  seat
of  a  Christian  community ;  but  there  seems
to  be  no  other  trace  of  its  ever  having
been  a  bishopric.

iii.  178, 179

330

FROM  NABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[SecXIV.

rome  at  three  or  four  Eoman  miles  and  it  is  somewhat  remark-
able, that  Megiddo  is  rarely  spoken  of  i|*Scripture,  except  in
conjunction  with  Taanach ;  a  circumsflmce  which  likewise
implies  their  vicinity  to  each  other. The  chief  onslaught  also
in  the  battle  of  Deborah  and  Barak,  took  place  in  the  plain  near
Taanach  and  "  the  waters  of  Megiddo  ; "  and  whether  this  ex-
pression be  applied  to  a  large  fountain,  or  to  the  river  Kishon,
we  know  that  the  scene  of  battle  was  at  any  rate  not  far  from
the  Kishon.^  Megiddo  too  gave  its  name  to  the  adjacent  valley
or  low  plain  along  the  Kishon  ;  and  in  like  manner  Eusebius  and
Jerome  speak  of  the  plain  of  Legio.^  All  these  circumstances
make  out  a  strong  case  in  favour  of  the  identity  of  Legio  and
Megiddo  ;  and  leave  in  my  own  mind  little  doubt  upon  the
point.^

We  left  Solam  at  10|  o'clock  for  Nazareth  ;  our  road  passing
at  first  along  the  western  end  of  the  mountain  of  Duhy  on  high
ground.  The  general  direction  quite  to  Nazareth  is  N.  9°  W.
After  some  twenty  minutes,  we  began  to  turn  the  N.  W.  comer
of  the  mountain,  where  a  third  great  arm  of  the  plain  gradually
opened  upon  us,  running  up  between  the  Little  Hermon  and
Mount  Tabor.  At  11;^  o'clock  the  latter  for  the  first  time  rose
upon  our  view  in  the  N.  E.  an  hour  or  more  distant,  a  fine  round
mountain,  presenting  (as  here  seen)  the  appearance  of  a  segment
of  a  sphere  ;  sprinkled  with  old  oaks  .to  its  very  summit,  and
realizing  in  its  graceful  form  and  beauty  all  that  I  had  been  led
to  anticipate  respecting  it.  Yet  it  seemed  not  so  lofty  as  has
usually  been  represented  ;  and,  on  this  side,  it  is  surrounded  and

'  Onomast.  arts.  TTiaanach,  Thanaach,
'  So  as  being  each  the  seat  of  a  Ca-
naanitish  king,  Josh.  12,  21.  Both  were
assigned  to  Manasseh,  though  lying  within
the  borders  of  Issachar  or  Asher,  Josh.
17,  11.  1  Chr.  7,29.  Both  remained  long
unsubdued,  Judg.  1,  27.  The  battle  of
Deborah  and  Barak  took  place  near  both,
Judg.  5,  19.  Both  came  under  the  same
purveyor,  1  Kings  4,  12. — Ahaziah  fled
from  Jczreel  to  Megiddo,  and  Josiah  died
there ;  2  K.  9,  27.  23,  29.  30.
»  Judg.  5,  19.  21.

*  Valley  or  plain  of  Megiddo,  Hebr,
nspa  .  2  Chron.  35,  22.  Zcch.  12,  11.
Gr.  irfolnv  E.sdr.  1,  27. — Euscb.  vfUovr^]^
AtyeCivos,  Jerome  "campus  Legionis ;  "
Onomust.  arts.  Oabathon,  Arbela,  Camon,
etc.

'  The  identity  of  Megiddo  and  Lectin
was  already  recognised  by  R.  Parehi  early

iii.  179,  180

in  the  fourteenth  century  ;  see  in  Asher's
Benj.  of  Tud.  II.  p.  433.— After  my  re-
turn to  Europe,  I  first  learned  that  the
same  suggestion  had  been  made  by  the
Reviewer  of  Raumer's  Palastina  in  the
Munchner  Gelehrte  Anzeigen,  Dec.  1836,
p.  920.  He  however  adduces  no  ground
of  identity,  except  that  the  names  of
Megiddo  and  Legio  are  both  applied  to
tlie  plain. — It  might  at  first  seem  an  ob-
jection to  this  whole  hypothesis,  that  Euse-
bius and  Jerome  in  their  article  Mageddo,
make  no  mention  of  Legio.  But  it  is  evi-
dent from  the  article  itself,  that  the  name
Megiddo  was  already  lost ;  and  they  do
not  even  attempt  to  mark  the  position  of
the  place.  The  same  was  the  case  in  re-
spect to  Sichera  ;  and  even  the  identity  of
Sebaste  and  Samaria  they  only  give  as  a
report.  See  Onomast.  arts.  Mageddo,  Si-
c/iein,  Stmeron.

Junk  16.]

FIRST  VIEW  OF  TABOR.

331

shut  in  by  other  mountains  of  nearly  equal  altitude.  It  stands
out  almost  insulated  upon  the  plain,  being  connected  with  the
hills  in  the  N.  W.  only  by  a  low  ridge.  Across  tliis  ridge  on  the
left  of  Tabor,  we  could  here  again  see  the  lofty  peak  of  the  dis-
tant Hermon  ;  and  could  now  distinguish  the  ice  upon  its  summit
glittering  in  the  mid-day  sun.

This  third  branch  of  the  great  plain  is,  Hke  the  others,  about
an  hour  in  breadth,  but  is  more  distinct  and  marked  ;  the
mountains  which  enclose  it  being  higher  and  rising  more  abruptly
from  its  borders.  It  extends  around  and  beyond  Tabor,  quite
to  the  brow  of  the  J ordan  valley,  and  likewise  northwards  with
slight  interruptions  almost  to  Hattin.  In  this  part  its  waters
run  westwards  to  the  Kishon,  and  the  Mediterranean  ;  further
east,  as  we  shall  see,  beyond  Tabor,  they  flow  towards  the  Jor-
dan. •

Below  us,  on  the  left,  were  the  deserted  villages  of  Fuleh
and  'Afuleh  ;  the  former  next  to  us  about  half  an  hour  distant,
and  the  latter  beyond.  So  far  as  we  could  here  judge,  they
stand  nearly  upon  the  dividing  Hne  of  waters,  between  the  head
of  the  valley  of  Jezreel  and  the  more  western  plain.  But  there  is
here  no  apparent  ridge  or  swell  of  land  to  mark  the  water-shed  ;
the  ground  on  the  north,  south,  and  west,  is  level,  and  sends  its
waters  to  the  Mediterranean  ;  while  towards  the  southeast  it
begins  to  dechne  gradually,  to  form  the  great  valley  running  to
the  Jordan.

At  the  same  point  (ll^^  o'clock)  we  crossed  the  great  caravan
road  from  Eg}-pt  to  Damascus  ;  which,  coming  by  Gaza,  Ram-
leh,  and  Lejjun,  here  strikes  the  corner  of  the  Httle  Hermon,  and
passes  on,  one  branch  over  the  low  ridge  on  the  left  of  Tabor,
and  another  on  the  right  of  that  mountain  in  the  plain.  The
branches  unite  again  at  the  Khan  beyond  ;  and  the  road  con-
tinues and  descends  to  the  shore  of  the  lake,  about  three  quar-
ters of  an  hour  north  of  Tiberias.

We  now  descended  gradually  to  cross  the  arm  of  the  plain
before  us.  At  11.40  there  was  a  large  dry  water-course  coming
from  the  right  ;  and  at  11.55  another,  apparently  the  bed  of  the
main  stream  of  this  part  of  the  plain,  coming  from  the  direction
of  Mount  Tabor.  But  in  tliis  season  of  drought,  not  one  drop
of  water  did  we  meet  with  in  all  the  great  plain,  except  in  the
valley  of  J ezreel.  Near  this  latter  channel,  was  a  small  site  of
ruins,  called  el-Mezra'ah. '  On  our  right,  at  some  distance,  we
could  perceive,  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  little  Hermon,  the
hamlet  of  Nein  ;  and  at  the  base  of  Tabor,  the  village  Deburieh.
Nearer  at  hand  in  the  plain,  on  a  low  rocky  ridge  or  mound,  not

'  This  is  probably  the  "  Casal  Mesra"  of  which  Brocardus  speaks  in  this  quarter,
c.  7.  p.  1 76.  So  too  Marinus  Sanut.  p.  241.

iiL  180-182

332

FROM  NABULUS  TO  NAZARETH.

[Sbo.  XIV.

far  from  tlie  foot  of  the  northern  hills,  was  the  village  of  Iksal,
described  as  containing  many  excavated  sepulchres.'  It  is  prob-
ably the  ChesuUoth  and  Chisloth-Tabor  of  the  book  of  Joshua,
on  the  border  of  Zebulun  and  Issachar  ;  the  Chasalus  of  Euse-
bius  and  Jerome  in  the  plain  near  Tabor  ;  and  the  Xaloth  of
Josephus,  situated  in  the  great  plain.* — At  12.20  we  approached
the  border  of  the  plain  on  the  north,  being  still  ten  minutes
distant  from  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  which  here  rise  abruptly.'

We  were  here  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  narrow  Wady,
which  appears  to  come  out  directly  from  the  basin  of  Nazareth ;
and  is  skirted  on  the  east  by  the  steep  bluff  usually  called  the
mount  of  Precipitation.  A  path  leads  directly  up  this  valley
to  Nazareth  ;  but  it  was  said  to  be  difficult,  and  our  muleteers
chose  to  take  a  circuitous  road  lying  more  towards  the  west.
This  led  us  along  the  base  of  the  mounta^  for  a  short  distance,
passing  the  mouth  of  one  small  Wady,  and  then  winding  around
and  up  a  projecting  point  of  the  mountain,  to  gain  the  entrance
of  another.  We  thus  obtained  a  noble  view  of  the  western
part  of  the  great  plain,  and  of  the  third  great  eastern  arm  which
we  had  just  crossed.  The  plain  in  this  part  is  rich  and  fertile,
but  lay  mostly  untilled  ;  here  and  there  only  were  a  few  patches
of  grain,  intermingled  with  the  far  greater  portions  now  let  run
to  waste.  From  tbis  point  a  beaten  path  went  off  across  the
plain  towards  Lejjun,  falling  into  the  great  caravan  road  in  that
direction.

The  way  now  led  up  through  a  narrow,  rocky,  desert  Wady
northwards  ;  near  the  head  of  which  we  came  at  1^  o'clock  to  a
cistern  of  rain  water  with  flocks  waiting  around.  Not  far  from
tliis  spot,  in  another  vaUey  on  the  left,  is  the  Httle  \'illage  of
Yafa,  of  which  I  shall  speak  again.  Fifteen  minutes  further
brought  us  to  the  brow  of  the  valley,  or  basin,  in  which  Nazareth
is  situated  ;  from  which  point  descending  gradually  and  obhque-
ly,  we  reached  the  town  at  If  o'clock.  Passing  along  its  lower
side,  we  encamped  five  minutes  bej^ond,  among  the  oHve  trees  ;
just  above  the  public  fountain  known  as  that  of  the  Virgin.

'  Pococke  calls  this  village  Zal.    Re-  Acchaselutk  ;  "  Appellatnr  antem  et  qm-

turning  from  Tabor  to  Nazareth  through  dam  vicus  Chasalus  juxta  montem  Tbabor

the  plain,  he  says :  "  I  came  to  the  village  in  campestribus  in  octavo  milliaro  Dioc»-

of  Zal,  which  is  about  three  miles  [one  sareas  ad  orientem  respiciens."  Josephus

hour]  from    Tabor,    situated    on   rocky  B.  J.  3.  3.  1,  ivh  t/jj  iy       MeydXrji  wfSl  and  moim-
tains,  backed  by  the  higher  ones  beyond  the  lake  of  Tiberias,
and  in  the  northeast  by  the  majestic  Hermon  with  its  icy
crown.

Carmel  here  presented  itself  to  great  advantage,  extending
fer  out  into  the  sea,  and  dipping  his  feet  in  the  waters.  The
highest  pan  of  the  ridge  is  towards  the  south.  The  southern
end  of  the  proper  ridge,  as  here  seen,  bore  S.  80^  W.  and  the
highest  point  S.  86"  W.  Thence  it  declines  gradually  north-
wards, until  at  the  convent,  according  to  Schubert,  it  has  an
elevation  of  only  582  Paris  feet  above  the  adjacent  sea.  The
same  traveller  estimates  the  highest  point  at  1200  feet  :  which
seems  to  me  relatively  too  higL'  The  northern  extremity  bore
N.  58"  W.  Towards  the  southeast  Carmel  is  partially  connect-
ed with  the  moxmtains  of  Samaria,  by  the  broad  range  of  low
wooded  hills,  separating  the  great  plain  of  the  more  southern
coast  from  that  of  Esdraelon.  Here  large  trees  of  the  walnut
are  said  to  be  prevalent.  The  middle  point  of  this  connecting
range  bore  S.  64^  W.  The  same  appearance  of  bushes  and
trees  is  seen  on  many  parts  of  Carmel :  which  thus  presents  a
less  naked  aspect,  than  the  mountains  of  Judea.*

Seating  mvself  in  the  shade  of  the  Wely.  I  remained  for
some  hours  upon  this  spot,  lost  in  the  contemplation  of  the  wide
prospect,  and  of  the  events  connected  with  the  scenes  arotmd-
In  the  village  below,  the  Saviour  of  the  world  had  passed  his
childhood  ;  and  although  we  have  few  particulars  of  his  life
during  thijse  early  years,  yet  there  are  certain  features  of  nature
which  meet  our  eyes  now,  just  as  they  once  met  his.  He  must
often  have  visited  the  fountain  near  which  we  had  pitched  our
tent :  his  feet  must  frequently  have  wandered  over  die  adjacent
hills  :  and  his  eyes  doubtless  have  gazed  upon  the  splendid  pros-
pect from  this  very  spot.  Here  the  Prince  of  peace  looked  down
upon  the  great  plain,  where  the  din  of  battles  so  oft  had  rolled,

'  Rase  nt  p.  sit  aaad  Extnhs.  etc  p.  437  sq.  Par.  1529.

*  ProkeKh  Bene  ins  kJL  Laod  p.  At  preseniL  it  seems  to  be  called  br  tiie

SAMberfs  Base  m.  p.  205. — The  buk  Anbs  Jebel  ILir  Eljras,  fim  the  ea^vent

*d  Marcell.  ibid.  p.  552.  Yet  almost  as
Vol.  II.— 29*

a  matter  of  course,  monastic  tradition  as-
cribes the  later  church  to  Helena.

°  Antonin.  Mart  §  5.  It  is  remarkable
that  Antoninus  praises  the  beauty  of  the  fe-
males of  Nazareth,  as  is  also  done  by  some
travellers  at  the  present  day;  though  it
did  not  strike  us  particularly.  Turner's
Tour  in  the  Levant  II.  p.  135.  Berggren
Reisen  11.  p.  232.  Antoninus  ascribes  this
to  the  special  favour  of  the  Virg'n  Mary.

'  Adamnanus  ex  Arculf  2.  26.  St
Willib.  Hodoepor.  16.

*  Saewulf  Peregrinat.  p.  270.

iii.  196.  197

342

NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

memory  was  long  dierislied  in  tMs  region.*  In  the  new  ecclesi-
astical arrangements  of  the  country,  the  see  of  Scythopolis,  the
former  metropoHtan  seat  of  Palaestina  Secunda,  was  transferred
to  Nazareth  ;  which  then  first  became  a  bishopric,  and  remains
so  nominally  in  the  Greek  church  to  the  present  day.'  When
this  transfer  took  place  we  are  not  informed  ;  but  it  must  have
been  at  an  early  period  ;  for  in  A.  D.  1111  a  strife  already
existed,  between  the  bishop  of  Nazareth  and  the  convent  founded
by  the  Benedictines  of  Clugny  on  Mount  Tabor,  respecting  the
jurisdiction  of  the  bishop  over  the  latter.  The  matter  was  ad-
justed by  Gibehn,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  in  an  assembly  of
the  bishops  and  clergy,  with  the  consent  of  the  king  and  barons,
to  the  satisfaction  of  both  parties.  The  consecration  of  the
abbot  and  monks,  and  also  of  the  larger  church,  was  to  depend
only  on  the  patriarch  ;  while  the  bishop  of  Nazareth  was  to
exercise  all  other  episcopal  rights  over  the  convent.'

The  fatal  battle  of  Hattin,  in  A.  D.  1187,  was  followed  by
the  subjugation  of  almost  the  whole  land  by  Saladin,  and  of
Nazareth  and  Sepphoris  among  other  places.^  At  what  time
Nazareth  again  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Christians  is
uncertain  ;  but  in  A.  D.  1250,  king  Louis  of  France  made  a
pilgrimage  from  'Akka  thither,  and  to  Mount  Tabor  f  and  in
A.  D.  1263,  the  town  of  Nazareth  and  the  noble  church  of  the
Annunciation,  as  also  the  church  of  the  Transfiguration  on
Mount  Tabor,  were  laid  in  total  ruins  by  the  Sultan  Bibars.*
Nazareth  appears  afterwards  to  have  been  neglected,  and  the
church  not  to  have  been  again  built  up  until  after  several  cen-
turies ;  although  the  nominal  succession  of  Latin  bishops,  or
rather  archbishops,  was  long  continued  in  the  Romish  church.^
Brocardus,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  says  nothing  of  the  state
in  which  Nazareth  then  was  ;  but  writers  of  the  fourteenth,
describe  it  as  a  small  vUlage,  with  a  church  wholly  in  ruins,  and

'  Alb.  Aq.  7.  16.  Will.  Tyr.  9.  13.
Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  II.  pp.  33-37.—
Tancred  resigned  this  fief  after  two  or
three  years,  but  received  it  back  again  be-
fore bis  death  ;  WiU.  Tyr.  10.  10.  Alb.  Aq.
11.  12.  Wilken  ib.  pp.  92,  208.

»  Will.  Tyr.  22.  16.  Jac.  de  Vitr.  56.  p.
1077.  Marin.  Sanut.  p.  176.  Le  Quien
Oriens  Christ.  III.  1293  sq.  and  G!)4.— The
present  titular  Greek  bishop  of  Nazareth
resides  at  Jerusalem  ;  see  above,  Vol.  I.  p.
424.

'  See  the  document  containing  this  com-
pact in  Mansi  Concil.  Tom.  XXI.  p.  71.
Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  II.  p  365.  Gibelin
died  at  the  close  of  A.  0.  1111,  or  begin-
ning of  A.  D.  1112  ;  Will.  Tyr.  11.  11,  15.

*  Bohaedd.  p.  71.    Abulfed.  AnnaL  A.

iu.  197,  198

H.  583.  Mejr  ed-Din  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.
III.  p.  81.  Wilken  ib.  ni.  iL  pp.  293,  297.

<■  Wilken  ib.  VII.  pp.  277,  278,  and  the
authorities  there  cited.  —  The  emperor
Frederick  II.  affirmed,  that  the  possession
of  Nazareth  by  the  Christians  was  in-
cluded in  his  treaty  in  A.  D.  1229 ;  but
Arabian  writers  speak  only  of  places  on
the  route  between  Jerusalem  and  'Akka.
Yet  Nazareth  might  well  be  included  in
that  route.  Wilken  ib  VI.  p.  479.  Miirin.
Sanut.  p.  213.  Reinaud  Extraits,  etc.  p,
430.

'  Epist.  Urban.  IV,  in  Raynaldi  AnnaL
ecclesiast  A.  D.  1263.  §  7.  Abulf  AnnaL
A.  H.  661.  Reinaud  Extraits,  etc.  p.  484
Wilken  ib.  VII.  p.  461.

'  Le  Quien  Oriens  Chr.  IIL  1294  sq.

JroK  18."1

HISTORICAL  NOTICES.

343

a  fountain  ;  and  make  bitter  complaint  of  the  Muslim  inhabi-
tants.' In  tlie  fifteenth  century,  Nazareth  seems  hardly  to  have
been  visited  by  pilgrims.  About  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth,
Belon  describes  here  the  chapel  of  the  Annunciation  as  a  grotto
below  ground,  surrounded  by  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  church ;
the  village  was  inhabited  only  by  Muhammedans."  Cotovicus,
at  the  close  of  that  century,  confirms  this  account,  describing
the  people  as  the  worst  he  had  seen  ;  there  being  only  two  or
three  Christian  inhabitants.  The  former  church  still  lay  in
ruins.    His  party  were  here  treated  only  with  insult.'

It  was  in  A.  D.  1620,  that  the  Franciscan  monks  first  ob-
tained permission  from  the  celebrated  Fakhr  ed-Din,  then  master
of  this  region,  to  take  possession  of  the  grotto  and  rebuild  the
church  in  Nazareth,  with  which  they  naturally  connected  a
monastery.  The  circumstances  are  fully  related  by  Quaresmius,
as  they  happened  in  his  time ;  but  the  buildings  appear  not  to
have  been  completed  for  many  years.  Doubdan,  some  thirty
years  later,  speaks  of  the  place  as  a  miserable  village,  almost
ruined  and  deserted,  with  eight  or  ten  monks  residing  there
from  the  convent  in  Jerusalem.*  Surius,  a  few  years  before,
found  in  the  village  only  four  Maronite  and  two  Greek  families
of  Christians.^  At  the  close  of  the  same  century,  Maundrell
describes  the  monks  as  being  shut  up  in  their  convent  for  fear
of  the  Arabs.^  About  A.  D.  1720-30,  as  we  have  seen,  the
church  and  convent  were  repaired  and  enlarged. Since  that
day,  the  number  of  Christians  in  Nazareth  has  been  greatly
augmented  ;  and  the  character  of  the  place  has  undergone  an
entire  change.  Even  in  the  time  of  Korte,  there  were  here  only
one  hundred  and  fifty  families  in  all ;  but  the  Christian  popula-
tion is  said  to  have  increased  greatly  under  the  noted  Sheikh
Dhaher  of  'Akka,  about  the  middle  of  the  century.*

In  the  vicinity  of  Nazareth,  we  find  also  the  names  of  several
other  ancient  places  ;  of  which  it  may  be  proper  here  to  say  a
few  words.

Yafa.  The  little  village  of  Yfifa,  as  we  have  seen,  lies  some-
what more  than  half  an  hour  southwest  of  Nazareth,  in  another
valley.'    It  contains  about  thirty  houses,  with  the  remains  of  a

'  Brocardus  c.  6.  p.  175.   Sir  J.  Mann-  '  Belon  Obs.  Paris  1588.  p.  327.

deville  p.  112.  Lond.  1839.    W.  de  Bald-  '  Cotov.  Itin.  pp.  340,350.  Comp.

ensel  speaks  of  the  inhabitants  as  "  pessi-  Sandys'  Travels  p.  160.

mi  Saraceni ; "  p.  354.    L.  de  Suchem,  *  Quaresmius  Elucid.   II.  p.  837  sq.

Itin.  p.  94.  Reissb.  p.  850.    According  to  Doubdan  p.  569.

this  last  writer,  the  Saracens  had  endea-  '  Surius  Pelerin,  p.  305  sq.

voured  to  fill  up  the  fountain ;  and  had  '  Maundrell  Apr.  1 8.

polluted  the  ruined  church  as  far  as  pos-  '  See  above,  p.  334.

sible,  by  making  it  a  receptacle  for  the  '  Kortens  Reise  p.  298.  Mariti  Voyages

dead  bodies  of  asses,  camels,  cattle,  and  II.  pp.  153,  154.  Neuw.  1791.

dogs.  »  See  above,  p.  332.

iii.  198-200

344

ENVIRONS  OF  NAZARETH.

[Sec,  XIV.

church  ;  and  has  a  few  single  palm  trees.  The  Italian  monks
call  it  St.  Griacomo  ;  inasmuch  as  their  tradition  regards  it  as
the  residence  of  Zebedee  and  his  two  sons,  James  and  John.
The  name  seems  to  identify  it  with  the  Japhia  of  Scripture,  on
the  border  of  Zebulon,  described  also  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome.'
The  J apha  fortified  by  J osephus  was  probably  the  same,  a  large
and  strong  village  of  G-alilee,  afterwards  captured  by  Trajan  and
Titus  under  the  orders  of  Vespasian.  In  the  storm  and  sack
of  the  place,  according  to  the  same  writer,  fifteen  thousand  of
the  inhabitants  were  put  to  the  sword,  and  two  thousand  one
hundred  and  thirty  made  captives.'  The  earhest  trace  of  the
tradition  respecting  the  residence  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee  at  this
place,  seems  to  occur  in  Marinus  Sanutus  in  the  fourteenth
century ;  and  the  tradition  itself  is  therefore  probably  not  older
than  the  time  of  the  crusades.^

Semimieh.  Nearly  west  by  north  of  Yafa,  on  a  hiU,  lies
the  small  village  of  Semrmieh.  In  this  name  it  is  not  difficult
to  recognise  the  Simonias  of  Josephus  ;  which,  according  to  his
description,  was  situated  on  the  hills  north  of  the  plain  of
Esdraelon.  Here  an  attempt  was  made  by  the  Romans  to
surprise  Josephus  by  night,  and  make  him  prisoner.*  I  do  not
find  the  place  again  mentioned,  until  it  appears  in  the  present
century,  upon  the  map  of  Jacotin.  The  name  does  not  occur
in  the  Scriptures.

Jehdtha.  In  the  S.  S.  W.  from  Yafa,  on  one  of  the  low
hills  running  down  into  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  is  the  village  of
Jebatha.  This  would  seem  to  be ,  the  Gabatha  of  Eusebius  and
Jerome,  in  the  borders  of  Diocaesarea  (Sepphoris),  near  the  great
plain  of  Legio  or  Esdraelon.'  It  is  not  named  in  Scripture  ;
and  I  find  no  other  mention  of  it  except  upon  the  map  of
Jacotin  and  in  our  lists.

Seffurieh.  From  the  Wely  over  Nazareth,  we  saw  the
village  of  Seff'urieh  N.  by  W.,  near  the  southern  part  of  the  fine
plain  el-Buttauf ;  distant,  it  was  said,  about  an  hour  and  a  half
from  Nazareth.  It  is  a  small  vUlage,  lying  on  the  southern
slope  of  an  isolated  hill,  on  the  summit  of  which  are  the  ruins
of  a  large  ancient  tower.    This  name  is  obviously  the  Sepphoris

'  Josh.  19,  12.    Onomast.  art.  Japhic:  Saphar,  Saffra,  and  Saffa.    Later  travel-

"  Japhct  in  tribu  Zabulon,  nunc  usque  lers,  among  others  who  mention  this  Yafa,

Joppe  vocatur,  ascensus  Japho." — There  are :   Korte  p.  305.    Turner  II.  p.  133.

is  here  a  third  instance  of  the  falling  away  Schubert  III.  p.  203,  etc.

of  the  Hebrew  'Ain  at  the  end  of  names;  *  Joseph.  Vita  §  24.    Reland  Falsest  p.

the  two  others  being  el- Jib  and  Jelbon.  1017.

»  Joseph.  Vit.  §  37,  45.    B.  J.  2.  20.  6.  '  Onomast.  art.  Gahathon :  "  Et  alia

ib.  3.  7.  31.  villa  Gabatha  in  finibus  Diocoesareffi  juxta

'  Marin.  Sanut.  p.  253.    Sir  J.  Maun-  grondem  campum  Legionis."    The  Greek

deville  p.  115.  Lond.  1839.    Quaresmius  of  Eusebius  is  here  confused,  and  probably

II.  p.  843.  These  authors  write  the  name  corrupted,
iii,  200.  201

Jtok  18.]

SEFFURIEH,  SEPPHORIS.

345

of  Joscphus,  and  the  Tsippori  of  the  Rabbins,  a  place  not
mentioned  in  Scripture,  but  afterwards  called  by  the  Romans
Diocfesarea. '  Josephus  often  speaks  of  Sepphoris.  It  was
captured  by  Herod  the  Great,  and  afterwards  laid  in  ashes  by
Varus  ;  but  having  been  rebuilt  and  fortified  by  Herod  Antipas,
it  became  the  largest  and  strongest  city  of  Galilee  ;  and  at
length  took  precedence  of  Tiberias.'  There  were  here  many
synagogues  ;  a  4pro\'incial  Sanhedrim  was  established  here  by
Gabinius;  and  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  great
Jewish  Sanhedrim  is  said  to  have  been  transferred  to  Sepphoris
for  some  years,  before  it  went  to  Tiberias.'  The  city  appears
afterwards  to  have  become  the  seat  of  a  Christian  church,  and  a
bishopric  of  Palsestina  Secunda.^  Epiphanius  relates,  that  a
certain  Josephus,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Constantine,  received
permission  to  build  here  a  church.'  In  A.  D.  339,  Sepphoris
was  destroyed  by  the  Romans,  in  consequence  of  a  rebellion  of
the  Jews,  who  were  still  its  most  numerous  inhabitants.^  Near
the  close  of  the  sixth  century,  it  is  mentioned  by  Antoninus
Martyr  ;  who  speaks  here  of  a  cathedral  built  upon  the  spot,
where  the  Virgin  Mary  received  the  salutation  of  the  angel.'
In  this  account  we  may  probably  recognise  the  germ  of  the
later  legend,  which  makes  Sepphoris  to  have  been  the  residence
of  the  parents  of  the  Virgin.

We  hear  no  more  of  the  place  until  the  time  of  the  cru-
sades ;  when  Seffurieh  becomes  again  celebrated  for  its  large
fountain,  nearly  half  an  hour  southeast  of  the  town,  towards
Nazareth,  which  was  often  made  the  rendezvous  for  the  armies
of  the  Christian  warriors.'  Here  the  forces  of  the  crusaders
assembled  in  pomp  and  pride  before  the  fatal  battle  of  Hattin  ;
and  here,  a  few  days  later,  Saladin  encamped  with  his  victorious
host,  on  his  way  to  'Akka  ;  leaving  the  castle  to  be  subdued  by
his  troops  a  short  time  afterwards.'  Not  long  before  this  period,
Benjamin  of  Tudela  mentions  Sepphoiis  merely  as  containing
the  tomb  of  Rabbi  Judah  Hakkodesh,  who  died  here  ;  and
Phocas  describes  it  as  almost  uninhabited.*"

'  "  Saphorim  quae  hodie  appellatur  Dio-  220,  228  ;  ib.  p.  1001.    Le  Quien  Oriens

caesarea  ;  "   Hieron.  Procem.  in   Jonam.  Chr.  III.  p.  714.

Reland  Patest.  p.  999.    Coins  are  extant       '  Epiphan.  adv.  Hseres.  lib.  I.  p.  128.
of  Sepphoris  under  Trajan,  and  of  Diocae-       •  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  377.
sarea  under  Antoninus  Pius,  Commodus,       '  Antonin.  Mart  Itin.  §  2.    The  name

and  Caraca'.la  ;  Mionnet  Medailles  An-  is  there  erroneously  written  /caesarea.
tiques  Y.  pp.  482,  483.    Eckhel  Doctr.       «  So  under  Amalric,  Will  Tjt.  20.  27.

Numm.  IIL  p.  42.5.  Under  Baldwin  IV,  Will  Tvr.  22.  15,  16,  "

"  Jos.  Ant  14.  15.  4.  ib.  17.  10.  9.  ib.  25.— Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  lU.  ii.  pp.

18.  2.  1.    B.  J.  2.  18.  11.  ib.  3.  2.  4.  208,231.

Vita  §§  9,  45,  65.  »  Wilken  ib.  pp.  273,  274,  and  the  au-

'  Jos.  Ant.  14.  5.  4.    Lightfoot  0pp.  thorities  there  cited.  Ibid.  p.  292.— Bohaed.

Tom.  II.  pp.  144  sq.  229.  Ultraj.  1699.  Vit.  Salad,  p.  71.  Mejr  ed-Din  in  Fundgr.

Comp.  Buxtorf  Tiberias  pp  17,  22.  des  Or.  III.  p.  81.

*  See  the  Notitiae,  Reland  Pal.  pp.  217,       "  Benj.  of  Tud.  I.  p.  82.    Phocas  da

iii.  201-203

346

ENVIRONS  OF  NAZARETH.

[Sec.  XIV.

In  the  following  centuries,  SefFurieh  is  mentioned  as  a  town
with  a  castle  ;  to  which  latter  Marinus  Sanutus  gives  the  epi-
thet of  "  beautiful."'  But  the  chief  circumstance,  which  has
called  the  attention  of  pilgrims  to  the  place  since  the  crusades,
is  the  legend  of  its  having  been  the  residence  of  Joachim  and
Anna,  the  reputed  parents  of  the  Virgin  Mary.*  The  remains
of  a  church  are  still  to  be  seen  upon  the  hill,  dedicated  to  these
saints.  These  ruins  are  described  with,  a  good  deal  of  high-
wrought  colouring  by  Dr  Chirke,  who  apparently  holds  them  to
belong  to  the  church  erected  here  in  the  fourth  century,  as
above  described.  But  in  doing  this,  he  forgets,  that  he  had  just
spoken  of  them  as  the  remains  of  "  a  stately  Gothic  edifice  ;  "  a
circumstance,  which  of  course  limits  the  age  of  the  present
ruins  to  a  period  not  earlier  than  the  crusades,  when  the  pointed
arch  was  first  applied  to  churches.  The  legend  in  this  form  and
extent,  is  first  mentioned  by  Brocardus  ;  and  probably  had  been
dressed  out  by  the  Latin  monks  on  the  earlier  foundation,  to
which  Antoninus  alludes.  Dr  Clarke  found  here  some  Greek
paintings  on  wood  ;  which,  as  the  very  circumstances  show,
could  not  have  been  of  any  great  antiquity ;  probably  the
Greeks  may,  at  no  very  remote  period,  have  used  a  portion  of
the  ruins  as  a  church.^

At  the  present  day  Sefiurieh  is  a  poor  village,  situated  just
below  the  ruins  of  the  castle.  It  received  little  or  no  injury
from  the  earthquake  of  A.  D.  1837.  In  the  middle  of  the  last
century,  Hasselquist  describes  the  inhabitants  as  raising  great
quantities  of  bees,  and  obtaining  great  profit  from  the  honey.*

Kdna  el-Jelil.  The  monks  of  the  present  day,  and  aU
recent  travellers,  find  the  Cana  of  the  New  Testament,  where
Jesus  converted  the  water  into  wine,'  at  Kefr  Kenna,  a  smaU
village  an  hour  and  a  half  northeast  from  Nazareth,  on  one  of  the
roads  to  Tiberias.  It  lies  on  an  eminence  connected  with  the
hills  of  Nazareth,  on  the  south  side  of  a  shorter  plain  connected
with  el-Buttauf,  which  runs  up  towards  the  village  el-Lubieh.
Here  are  shown  the  remains  of  a  Greek  church,  and  of  a  house
reputed  to  have  been  that  of  St.  Bartholomew.*    So  fixed  indeed

hoc.  Sanct.  §  10.— This  tomb  of  R.  Hak-
ko'lesb  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Jewish
Itinerary  in  Hottinger's  Cippi  Hebraici,  p.
74.  2.  Also  in  other  Jewish  Itinera-
ries; fcc  Carmoly,  p.  18.5,  25G,  434.

'  Brocardus  c.  G.  p.  17.5.  Marin.  San.
p.  2.53,  "  castrum  valde  pulchrum."

"  Yet  Aima  had  too  lier  house  in  Jeru-
salem, where  the  Virgin  was  bom ;  see
Vol.  I.  p.  233.

'  Clarke's  Travels  in  the  Holy  Land,
4to.  pp.  417.  418,  See  also  Quaresmius
iii.  203,  204

II.  p.  8.52.  Doubdan  p.  586  sq.  Pococke
II.  i.  p.  62.

*  Hasselquist  Reise  p.  177  Michaud,
etc.  Corrcsp.  d'Orient  V.  p.  442  sq. — See
more  on  SefFurieh  in  Vol.  III.  Sect  III,
under  Apr.  20th,  1852.

'  John  c.  2.

'  Pococke  II.  i.  p.  66.  Mariti  Voyages
et*.  II.  p.  162.  Neuw.  1791.  Burckhardt
p.  336.  Clarke's  Travels  in  the  Holy
Land,  4to.  p.  444.  Scholz  p.  188.  Schu-
bert 111.  p.  222.— Dr  Clarke  saw  in  the

JVKB  18.]

KANA,  CAXA  OF  GALILEE.

347

has  the  impression  now  become,  that  this  was  the  trae  Cana,
that  most  travellers  probably  are  not  aware  of  there  ever  having
been  a  question  as  to  the  identity.

I  have  already  related,  that  from  the  Wely  above  Nazareth,
our  friend  Abu  Nasir  pointed  out  to  us  a  ruin  which  he  called
Kana  el-Jehl,  on  the  northern  side  of  the  plain  el-Biittauf,  about
N.  ^E.  from  Nazareth,  and  not  far  from  three  hours  distant.'  It
lay  at  the  foot  of  the  northern  hills  beyond  the  plain,  apparently
on  the  slope  of  an  eminence,  not  far  on  the  east  of  Kefr  Menda.
In  the  days  of  Quaresmius  it  contained  a  few  houses.  This
spot,  Abu  Nasir  said,  was  known  both  among  Christians  and
Muslims  only  by  this  name,  Kana  ;  while  the  same  name
was  sometimes  applied  by  Christians  alone,  to  the  village  Kefr
Kenna.  Now  as  far  as  the  prevalence  of  an  ancient  name
among  the  common  people,  is  any  endence  for  the  identity  of
an  ancient  site, — and  I  hold  it  to  be  the  strongest  of  all  testi-
mony, when,  as  here,  not  subject  to  extraneous  influences,  but
rather  in  opposition  to  them, — so  far  is  the  weight  of  evidence
in  favour  of  this  northern  Kana,  as  the  true  site  of  the  ancient
Cana  of  GalUee.  The  name  is  identical,  and  stands  the  same
in  the  Arabic  version  of  the  New  Testament ;  while  the  form
Kefr  Kenna  can  only  be  twisted  by  force  into  a  like  shape.''  On
this  single  grouiid,  therefore,  we  should  be  authorized  to  reject
the  present  monastic  position  at  Kefr  Kenna,  and  fix  the  site  at
Kana  el-Jelil ;  which,  likewise,  is  sufficiently  near  to  Nazareth,
to  accord  with  all  the  circumstances  of  the  history.

Tliis  view  is  further  confirmed,  and  indeed  the  question  set
entirely  at  rest,  when  we  trace  back  the  matter  in  history.  We
thus  find,  that  an  earlier  tradition  actually  regarded  the  present
Kana  as  the  ancient  Cana  ;  and  that  it  is  only  since  the  six-
teenth century,  that  monastic  convenience  has  definitely  as-
signed Kefr  Kenna  as  the  site.  Quaresmius  relates,  that  in  his
day,  two  Canas  were  spoken  of  among  the  inhabitants  of
Nazareth  and  the  vicinity  ;  one  called  simply  Cana  of  Galilee
(Kana  el-Jelil),  and  the  other  Sepher  Cana  (Kefr  Kenna)  ;  and
he  describes  their  position  as  above.  He  decides  however  very
distinctly  for  the  latter  place,  because  of  its  being  nearer  to
Nazareth  and  having  some  ruins  ;  without,  however,  as  he  says,
venturing  to  reject  the  other  tradition.'    Yet  it  probably  was

church  fragments  only  of  waterpots  ;  hut  '  See  the  Arabic  N.  T.  John  2,  1.  In
a  whole  one  has  since  been  set  up,  and  is  Kefr  Kenna,  the  word  Kefr  must  first  be
shown  as  one  of  the  original  six;  Richard-  dropped;  snd  then  the  first  radical  changed,
son  IL  p.  434.  Monro  I.  p.  304. — The  and  the  doubling  of  the  second  omitted,
distance  of  Kefr  Kenna  from  Nazareth  is  ^  Quaresmius  Elucidat.  IL  pp.  852,  853:
given  variously  by  travellers,  from  one  "  Posterior  ha:c  sententia  mihi  valde  pro-
hour  up  to  three  hours  and  a  half.  Burck-  babilis  videtur,  (licet  alteram  rejicere  non
hardt  by  some  error  has  the  latter.  audeam,)  quoniam  proximior  Nazareth  .  .
'  See  above,  p.  340.  et  quia  potest  adinveniri  memoria  ecclesiffl

iii.  204-206

348

ENVIRONS  OF  NAZARETH.

1_Sec.  XIV.

the  authority  of  this  very  writer,  "which  tended  more  than  any
thing  else  to  fix  attention  upon  Kefr  Kenna,  and  throw  the
true  Kana  into  the  shade  ;  for  from  that  time  forward  the  latter
is  very  rarely  noticed  hy  travellers.  It  may  he  remembered  too,
that  in  the  time  of  Quaresmius,  the  church  and  convent  at
Nazareth  were  first  built  up,  after  the  desolations  of  many
centuries  ;  and  this  circumstance  conspired  to  give  currency
among  travellers,  to  the  view  which  the  monks  adopted  respect-
ing Cana.'

It  is  apparent,  that  some  tradition  in  favour  of  Kefr  Kenna
had  existed  before  Quaresmius  ;  but  he  brings  forward  no  testi-
mony to  that  effect,  except  the  account  of  Bonifacius  in  the
middle  of  the  preceding  century  ;  which  however  is  doubtful.'^
But  on  the  other  hand,  Adrichomius,  near  the  close  of  the
sixteenth  century,  quoting  from  earher  writers,  places  Cana
three  miles  north  of  Sepphoris,  and  describes  it  as  having  a
mountain  on  the  north,  and  a  broad,  fertile,  and  beautiful  plain
towards  the  south  ;  all  which  corresponds  to  the  position  of
Kana,  and  not  to  Kefr  Kenna.  Anselm,  about  A.  D.  1507,
assigns  to  Cana  the  same  site  ;  and  so  does  Breydenbach  in  A.
D.  1483,  evidently  copying  former  accounts.'

But  the  most  distinct  notice  of  the  Cana  of  those  days,  is
from  Marinus  Sanutus  about  A.  D.  1321.  He*  describes  it  also
as  north  of  Sepphoris,  adjacent  to  a  high  round  mountain  on
the  north,  on  the  side  of  which  it  was  situated,  and  having  the
same  broad,  fertile,  beautiful  plain  on  the  south  extending  to
Sepphoris.  In  coming  from  Ptolemais  ('Akka),  he  says,  the
usual  course  was  to  proceed  first  eastwards  to  Cana  ;  and
thence  south  through  Sepphoris  to  Nazareth.*  All  this  leaves
no  doubt,  that  the  site  of  Kana  is  here  meant.  At  that  time
the  place  was  professedly  shown,  where  the  six  water-pots  had
stood ;  and  also  the  triclinium  where  the  feast  was  held  ;  but

constructas  in  loco  miraculi."  The  passage
preceding  this  is  quoted  in  full  in  Rosenni.
Bibl.  Geogr.  II.  ii.  p.  83.

'  Quaresmius  was  in  Palestine  as  a
monk  from  A.  D.  161G  to  1625;  and
again  as  Guardian  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre
from  1C27  to  1G29;  see  the  last  leaf  of  his
work. — Among  later  travellers,  Ncitzschitz
in  1G35  visited  Kefr  Kenna  with  monks
from  Nazareth,  p.  222  ;  Surius  about  1645,
p.  313.  Doubdan  copies  from  Quaresmius,
but  visited  only  Kefr  Kenna,  p.  582  ;  and
80  many  others.  Pococke  alone  seems
to  have  heard  of  K;ina  el-JcLl,  and  in-
clines correctly  to  regard  it  as  the  true
site  of  Cana  ;  Vol.  II.  i.  pp.  62,  66.

•  '  Bonifac.  de  percn.  cnltu  Terrte  Sanct.
quoted  by  Quaresmius  II.  p.  853.  He

iii.  20G,  207

places  Cana  three  miles  north  of  Nazareth
on  the  borders  of  a  large  and  fertile  plain.
It  is  on  the  strength  of  this  "  three  miles  "
that  Quaresmius  supposes  him  to  mean
Kefr  Kenna  ;  but  this  is  at  any  rate  wrong ;
and  the  rest  of  the  description  applies
better  to  the  other  place,  or  Kiina

'  Adrichom.  The.itr.  p.  138.  Anselmi
Descr.  Terr.  Sanct.  in  Canisii  Thesaur.  ed.
Basnage,  Tom.  IV.  p.  784.  Breydenb  in
Reissb.  pp.  123,  124.  These  three,  with
Bonifacius,  appear  to  be  the  only  wTiters
of  the  fifteenth  and  si.Kteenth  centuries,  who
speak  directly  of  Cana.

*  Marin.  Sanut.  p.  253.  On  his  map,
in  like  manner,  Cana  is  placed  north  of
Sepphoris.  The  account  of  Adrichomius
is  drawn  chiefly  from  this  writer.

JOWE  18.]

CANA  OF  GALILEE.

349

the  whole  was  in  a  crypt  or  cavern  under  ground,  like  the
grotto  of  the  Annunciation  and  of  the  Nativity.'  Brocardus,
if  he  was  not  tlie  original  author  of  this  account,  yet  gives
nothing  more.*  The  few  earlier  notices  go  to  confirm  the  same.
Saewulf,  about  A.  D.  1103,  describes  Cana  as  nearly  six  miles
north  of  Nazareth  on  a  hill,  and  nothing  then  remained  ex-
cept a  monastery  called  Architriclinium.^  St.  Willibald  in  the
eighth  century  found  here  a  large  church,  in  which  was  shown
one  of  the  six  water-pots.*  Antoninus  Martyr  near  the  close  of
the  sixth  century  was  likewise  at  Cana  ;  he  speaks  of  no  church,
but  saw  two  water-pots,  and  seems  to  say  that  he  filled  one  of
them  with  water  and  brought  forth  from  it  wine.*  The  only
other  account  of  Cana,  later  than  the  first  century,  is  that  of
Eusebius  and  Jerome,  who  merely  mention  it  as,  in  their  day,  a
small  town  of  Galilee.'

All  this,  as  it  seems  to  me,  together  with  the  strong  evidence
of  the  name,  goes  to  show  conclusively,  that  the  site  of  the
Cana  of  the  New  Testament  is  to  be  sought  at  Kana  north  of
Setfilrieh ;  and  that  there  is  no  good  ground  whatever,  for
regarding  Kefr  Kenna  as  having  any  relation  to  that  ancient
place.  I  hope  that  future  travellers  may  bear  this  in  mind  ;  so
that  the  former  site  may  be  reinstated  in  those  historical  rights,
which  have  now  so  long  been  usurped  by  the  latter  village.

The  Cana  of  the  New  Testament  does  not  occur  in  the
Old  f  but  is  mentioned  by  Josephus  as  a  village  in  Galilee.*
Our  Lord  not  only  performed  there  his  first  miracle,  but  after-
wards visited  the  place  ;  and  the  disciple  Nathanael  was  a  native
of  Cana.'

Monday,  June  18th,  continued.  Two  principal  roads  lead
from  Nazareth  to  Tiberias.  The  more  usual  one  passes  out  north-
east over  the  hUls  to  er-Reineh,  a  small  village  more  than  half  an

'  SiBwulf.  Perigrinat.  p.  271.  Phocas
in  the  same  century,  travelling  from  'Alika,
comes  first  to  Sepphoris,  then  to  Cana,  and
then  to  Nazareth  ;  §  10.

'  Hodoepor.  §  16.  p.  374.  ed.  Mabillon.
"  Itin.  §  1,   "Ex  quibus  hydria;  duas
ibi  sunt.    Implevi  aqua  unam,  et  protuli
ex  ea  vinura."

'  Onomast.  art.  Cana.
'  The  Old  Testament  has  only  Kanah
in  Asher,  southeast  of  Tyre  ;  a  plucc  which
we  afterwards  visited.    Josh.  19,  28.
«  Joseph.  Vita  §  16,  64.  B.  J.  1.  17.  5.
•  John  2,  1.  11.   4,  46.   21,  2. -See
the  subject  of  Cana  further  discussed  in
Vol.  III.  Sect.  Ill,  under  Apr.  I'Jth,  1852.

'  Ibid.  This  triclinium  B.  de  Salig-
niaco  professes  to  have  seen  in  A.  D.  1522.
Tom.  IX.  c.  9.

"  The  account  of  Cana  in  Brocardus,
affords  a  striking  instance  of  the  differ-
ence in  the  editions,  or  rather  recensions,
of  that  writer.  In  the  edition  of  Le  Clerc
it  is  merely  said,  that  in  proceeding  south-
east from  'Akka,  the  first  place  that  occurs
is  Cana  of  Galilee  after  four  leagues ;  c.  7.
p.  175.  But  in  the  edition  of  Cunisius
and  Basnage  (Thesaur.  IV.  p.  13),  in  the
very  same  connection,  is  subjoined  the  ac-
count of  the  miracle  and  a  description  of
the  place,  in  tlie  same  words  used  by  Ma-
rinus  Sanutus  It  might  be  difficult  to
decide,  which  is  the  original.

Vol.  II.— 30

iii.  207-209

350

MOUNT  TABOR.

[Sec.  XTV.

hour  distant,  and  so  to  Kefr  Kenna  ;  leaving  the  village  el-
Meshhad  on  a  high  hill  at  the  left,  just  before  reaching  the  latter
place  thence  it  goes  on  hj  Lubieh  to  the  lake.  The  second
leaves  Nazareth  over  the  lower  eastern  liills,  and  leading  by  the
village  'Ain  Mahil  and  the  Khan  et-Tujjar,  turns  more  northeast
by  Kefr  Sabt  to  Tiberias.  We  followed  a  third  route,  lying  still
further  to  the  right,  in  order  to  ascend  Mount  Tabor  and  spend
the  afternoon  and  night  upon  its  summit.  In  doing  this  we
anticipated  much  gratification,  and  were  not  disappointed.  As
a  guide,  we  took  with  us  a  young  man  of  Nazareth,  a  Christian,
recommended  by  Abu  Nasir.

Setting  otf  from  I^azareth,  or  rather  from  the  fountain  of  the
Virgin,  at  7.35,  we  came  in  ten  minutes  to  the  top  of  the  low
hills  on  the  east  of  the  valley,  and  kept  along  on  high  ground,
directing  our  course  towards  Tabor.  After  half  an  hour  we
descended  into  and  crossed  a  broad  Wady,  running  out  to  the
great  plain  on  the  right.  Hitherto  the  hills  had  exhibited  only
grass  and  herbs  ;  here  they  began  to  be  covered  with  bushes  and
many  oak  trees  with  caducous  leaves,  the  tirst  of  the  kind  we
had  yet  remarked.^  Along  the  gradual  ascent  beyond  this  valley,
there  was  a  large  orchard  of  these  oaks  ;  and  they  extend  more
or  less  thickly,  quite  to  the  foot  of  Tabor.  At  8|  o'clock  we
reached  the  brow  of  the  descent  towards  that  mountain  ;  and
could  look  down  upon  the  low  ridge  wliich  alone  connects  it  on
the  northwest  with  the  hills  we  had  just  crossed.  Deburieh  was
visible  below  us  on  the  southwest  slope  of  this  ridge.  Descending,
we  came  in  twenty-five  minutes  to  the  bottom,  in  a  Wady,  and
at  o'clock  to  another  Wady  ;  the  two  unite  and  run  out
southwards  into  the  plain  just  by  Deburieh.  The  branch  of  the
Damascus  road  passes  up  this  latter  Wady,  and  so  over  the  low
ridge  to  Khan  et-Tujjar.  We  came  to  the  proper  base  of  the
mountain  at  9.20  ;  leaving  Deburieh  about  ten  minutes  distant
on  our  right.

The  village  of  Deburieh  is  small  and  unimportant,  lying  on
the  side  of  a  ledge  of  rocks  just  at  the  base  of  Tabor.    It  is

'  According  to  Schubert,  both  er-Reineh  Kings  14,  25.     Qnaresmins  11,  p.  855.

and  Kefr  Kenna  suffered  severely  from  tlie  Jerome  too  says,  Proocm.  in  Jonara  :  "  Por-

earthquake  of  Jan.  1,  18;57.    Koise  III.  p.  ro  Geth  in  secundo  Sapliorim  miliario  qu!B

222.    But  Mr  Thomson,  who  passed  here  hodic  appellatur  Diociesarea  euntibus  Ty-

three  weeks  alter  the  event,  in  order  to  seek  beriadem,  baud  grandis  viculus,  ubi  et

out  the  sufferers,  says  tliat  while  er-Reineh  sepulc  hnim  ejus  ostcnditur."  Benj.imin

was  a  heap  of  niins,  Kefr  Kenna  sustained  of  Tudela  speaks  of  the  tomb  of  Jonah

no  injury,  and  had  not  a  house  cracked  ;  in  his  day,  as  on  a  mountain  near  Scppho-

Missionary  Herald  for  Nov.  1837,  pp.  439,  ris  ;  Itin.  I.  p.  80.  It  would  seem  tlierefore

442. — At  el-Meshhad  is  one  of  the  many  not  improbable,  that  this  village  may  be

Muslim  tombs  of  Kcby  Yunas,  the  prophet  the  Geth  of  Jerome.

Jonah. ;  and  hence  modern  monastic  tradi-  Qucrrtis  jligilop*,  according  to  Schn-

tiou  has  adopted  this  village  as  the  (iath-  bert,  Keise  III.  p.  172.
hepher,  where  the  prophet  was  born;  2
ill,  209.  210

Junk  18.]

DEBURIEH.     ASCEirr  OF  TABOR.

351

said  to  have  once  had  a  Christian  church,  the  ruins  of  which  are
still  %'isible. '  This  would  seem  not  improbably  to  be  the  Da-
berath  of  the  Old  Testament,  belonging  to  Issachar,  but  assigned
to  the  Le^•ites  ;  the  same  apparently  with  the  Dabira  of  Euse-
bius  and  Jerome  by  Mount  Tabor  in  the  region  of  Dioctesarea
and  probably  too  the  Dabaritta  of  Josephus  in  the  great  plaii?.^
The  mountain,  as  we  approached  it  on  this  side,  presented
the  form  of  a  truncated  cone  ;  we  began  to  ascend  it  at  9.25
from  the  W.  N.  W.  Our  muleteers  at  first  made  some  difficulty,
on  account  of  the  loaded  animals  ;  their  purpose  had  been  to
stop  below  and  let  us  ascend  on  foot,  which  by  no  means  tallied
■with  our  plans.  But  we  found  the  path  good,  except  in  two  or
three  spots,  and  even  these  were  far  less  difficult  than  the  passes
of  'Ain  Jidy  and  es-Sufah  ;  so  that  I  rode  with  facility  qi;ite  to
the  summit.  The  path  winds  considerably,  and  is  obviously
ancient ;  in  several  places  steps  are  hewn  out  in  the  rock.  The
soil  is  good  aU  the  way  up  ;  and  the  grass  tail  and  abundant,
though  now  dried  up.  The  sides  of  the  mountain  are  mostly
covered  with  bushes  and  orchards  of  oak  trees  (Ilex  and  -S^gi-
lops),  with  also  occasionally  the  Butm,  Hke  the  glades  of  a  forest,
presenting  a  beautiful  appearance  and  fine  shade.  We  were  an
hour  in  reaching  the  top,  and  encamped  at  10^  o'clock  for  the
day  and  night  on  the  southwestern  brow,  overlooking  the  wide
extent  of  plains  below.  The  path  by  which  we  ascended  from
the  W.  N.  W.  is  the  most  feasible  ;  the  acclivity  on  that  side
being  perhaps  less  steep  ;  yet  there  is  no  part  of  the  mountain,
where  a  person  on  foot  would  fijid  any  difficulty  whatever  in  the
ascent.

Tabor  is  a  beautiful  mountain,  wholly  of  limestone  ;  bearing
among  the  Arabs,  like  so  many  other  mountains,  only  the  general
name  Jebel  et-Tur.*  It  stands  out  alone  towards  the  southeast
fix>m  the  high  land  around  Nazareth  ;  while  the  northeastern
arm  of  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon  sweeps  around  its  base,  and
extends  far  to  the  north,  forming  a  broad  tract  of  table  land,
bordering  upon  the  deep  Jordan  valley  and  the  basin  of  the  lake
of  Tiberias.  The  mountaia  as  seen  from  the  southwest  presents,
as  has  been  already  remarked,  the  appearance  of  the  segment  of  a
sphere  ;  seen  from  the  W.  N.  W.  the  form  inclines  more  to  the
truncated  cone.    The  top  of  the  mountain,  as  a  whole,  is  rounded

•  Xeitzsohitz  p.  233.  Pococke  H  L  p.  65.
Schubert  III.  p.  1 74.

"  Josh  19,  12.  21,  28.  1  Chr.  6,  57.
[72.]  Onomast.  art  Dabira  ^afieipd.

=  Joseph.  Vita  §  62.  B.  J.  2.  21.  3.  See
however  Rcland  Pal.  p.  737. — William  of
Tyre  seems  to  speak  of  Deburieh  ;  22.  H  :
"Locus  sub  monte  "Ihabor,  cui  nomen

Btiria,  justa  KaLm."  Cotovicns  also  men-
tions a  Buria  ;  but  he  sets  it  too  far  west,
where  he  began  to  ascend  the  mountain  on
foot  to  Nazareth  ;  p.  347.  I  do  not  find
Deburieh  named  in  any  of  the  earlier  tra-
vellers.

*  So  too  in  Arabian  writers :  Abulfeda
AnnaL  A.  H.  661,  etc.

iii.  210-212

35S

MOUNT  TABOR.

[Sec.  xnr.

off,  and  is  perhaps,  in  all,  twenty  nainntes  in  diameter  ;  but  tlie
proper  summit  consists  of  a  beautiful  little  oblong  plain  or  basin,
twelve  or  fifteen  minutes  in  length  from  N.  W.  to  S.  E.  by  six  or
eight  in  breadth.  This  is  skirted  on  the  southwest  by  a  ledge  of
rocks  of  some  altitude,  covered  with  foundations  and  ruins  ;  and
on  the  northeast  by  lower  rocks  ;  and  this  higher  ground  on  both
sides  is  thickly  overgrown  with  bushes  and  small  trees,  while  the
basin  itself  hes  in  grass  without  trees  or  ruins.  We  pitched  our
tent  at  the  southeast  extremity  of  this  little  plain,  and  were  dehght-
ed  with  our  temporary  abode.  No  person  besides  our  party,  was  at
this  time  on  the  mountain  to  interrupt  us  ;  and  although  there
was  a  hot  Sirocco  wind,  which  in  the  afternoon  brought  up  a  hazy
atmosphere,  yet  even  this  was  more  tolerable  here  than  in  the
plains  below.  At  10  o'clock  the  thermometer  stood  here  at  98°
F.  At  2  P.  M.  it  had  fallen  to  95°,  At  sunset  it  stood  only  at
74°  ;  and  the  next  morning  at  sunrise,  at  64°  F.

We  estimated  the  height  of  Tabor,  after  many  comparisons,
at  not  over  one  thousand  feet  above  the  plain  ;  and  if  any  thing,
less.  Indeed,  it  appeared  to  us  to  be  little  more  elevated  above
Esdraelon,  than  is  Slount  Gerizim  above  the  plain  at  its  foot.*
The  mountains  towards  the  south,  those  of  Duhy  and  Gilboa,  are
apparently  at  least  as  high,  and  shut  out  the  prospect  in  that
direction.  The  former  we  had  first  seen  from  the  high  ground
south  of  Jenin  and  Kubatiyeh,  where  it  was  nearly  in  a  hne
between  us  and  Tabor,  and  entirely  excluded  all  view  of  the
latter  mountain  ;  so  that  not  even  a  trace  of  its  rounded  summit
was  anywhere  visible.  From  Tabor,  in  like  manner,  no  point  of
the  mountains  of  Samaria  is  visible  over  the  httle  Hermon.  All
this  shows,  at  least,  that  Tabor  cannot  rise  much  above  the
summit  of  the  latter. — As  seen  from  Tabor,  Mount  GUboa  lies
to  the  left  of  the  little  Hermon,  and  is  somewhat  higher.  Nor
are  the  highest  of  the  hills  west  of  Nazareth  much  inferior  in
elevation  to  Tabor  ;  they  shut  out  the  view,  not  only  of  the  bay
of  'Akka,  but  likewise  of  the  whole  horizon  of  the  sea  ;  which
is  not  seen  except  over  some  of  the  lower  ridges  in  that  direc-
tion.

Immediately  after  our  arrival,  I  took  a  walk  around  the
whole  brow  of  the  mountain,  in  order  to  examine  the  ruins,  mark
the  main  features  of  the  surrounding  country,  and  enjoy  the
glorious  prospect.  This  we  repeated  several  times  during  the
day  ;  and  also  the  next  morning,  when  the  air  was  again  clear
and  pure,  and  everything  could  be  seen  with  the  utmost  dis-

*  So  too  Elliott  estimates  the  height  of  the  sesi,  1748  Par.  feet ;  elevation  of  the

Tahor  as  not  exceeding  1000 feet;  Travels  plain  at  the  base,  438  feet;  leaving  for  the

n.  p.  3(;.'$. — The  result  of  Schubert's  ba-  heif^Iit  above  the  plain,  1310  Pur.  feet,

rometrical    measurement    is    somewhat  This  would  make  it  100  feet  higlicr  than

greater,  viz.    Elevation  of  Tabor  above  his  estimate  of  Carmel.  Reise  III.  p.  176.
iii.  212,  213

JUJIK  18.]

HEIGHT.  RUINS.

353

tinctness. — The  ruins  upon  the  summit  of  Tabor  belong  to  differ-
ent ages.  All  around  the  top  may  be  traced  the  foundations  of
a  thick  wall  built  of  large  stones,  some  of  which  are  bevelled,
showing  that  the  waU  was  perhaps  originally  entirely  of  that
character.  In  several  parts  are  the  remains  of  towers  and  bas-
tions. Thus  towards  the  northeast,  almost  beneath  the  brow,  is
a  structure  apparently  of  this  kind,  which  must  have  been  quite
extensive.  But  the  chief  remains  are  upon  the  ledge  of  rocks
on  the  south  of  the  little  basin,  and  especially  towards  its  eastern
end.  Here  are  high  heaps  of  ruins,  mingled  in  indiscriminate
confusion,  consisting  of  walls  and  arches  and  foundations,  ap-
parently of  dwelling-houses  as  well  as  other  buildings,  some  of
hewn  and  some  of  large  bevelled  stones.  The  walls  and  traces
of  a  fortress  are  seen  here  and  further  west  along  the  southern
brow  ;  of  which  one  tall  pointed  arch  of  a  Saracenic  gateway  is
stni  standing,  and  bears  the  name  of  Bab  el-Hawa,  "  Gate  of
the  Wind."  Connected  with  it  are  loopholes,  and  others  are
seen  near  by.  These  latter  fortifications  belong  obviously  to  the
era  of  the  crusades  ;  but  our  experience  at  Jerusalem  and  else-
where, had  taught  us  to  refer  the  large  bevelled  stones  to  a  style
of  architecture  not  later  than  the  times  of  the  Romans  ;  before
which  period  indeed  a  town  and  fortress  already  existed  on  Mount
Tabor.  In  the  days  of  the  crusaders  too,  and  earlier,  there  were
here  churches  and  monasteries.

On  the  southeast  part,  near  the  highest  point  among  the
ruins,  is  a  small  vault,  where  the  Latin  monks  from  Xazareth
celebrate  an  annual  mass  in  memory  of  the  Transfiguration  ;  the
scene  of  which  an 'early,  though  probably  legendary  tradition,
places  upon  this  mountain.  The  spot  is  merely  a  rude  cellar
with  an  altar,  and  a  small  side  vault  with  three  niches  or  altars.
The  Greeks  show  the  remains  of  a  church  on  the  north  side  of
the  little  basin  ;  in  which  they  have  a  temporary  altar  and  cele-
brate the  same  event.  The  Greek  priests  of  Nazareth  are  said
to  come  hither  on  the  festival  of  the  Virgin  ;  on  which  occasion
thousands  of  pilgrims  repair  to  the  mountain  with  their  families,
to  celebrate  the  day.' — The  summit  has  many  cisterns,  now
mostly  dry  ;  in  one  we  found  good  water.  A  wandering  family
sometimes  take  up  their  abode  here,  or  a  pilgrim  comes  to  so-
journ upon  the  sacred  mountain  for  a  few  days.''  The  usual
loneliness  of  the  spot,  and  its  forest  of  oaks  and  abundant  herb-
age, have  made  it  the  chosen  retreat  of  numerous  wild  swine.
We  started  two  of  these  animals  in  our  rambles  around  the
summit.

■  Burckhardt  p.  iiM  sq.  Schubert  fell  in  with  a  Syrian  pilgrim,

"  BuTckhardt  found  here  a  family  of    who  had  come  to  pass  forty  day.s  al  .ne
Greek  Christians  from  Hauran;  p.  334.    upon  the  mountain;  Reise  EH.  pp.  177, 178.
Vol.  n.— 30*  ill.  213-215

354

MOUNT  TABOR.

[Sec.  XIV.

The  view  from  Tabor  is  very  extensive  and  beautiful ;  far
more  so,  indeed,  than  we  had  anticipated  from  the  relative  height
of  the  adjacent  mountains.  The  Sirocco  of  the  afternoon  thick-
ened the  air,  and  for  a  time  dimmed  the  prospect  ;  but  the  next
morning  was  again  bright,  and  gave  us  the  full  enjoyment  of  one
of  the  finest  landscapes  in  Palestine.  The  view  towards  the
whole  western  and  northern  quarter,  between  S.  W.  and  N.  N.
E.  was  similar  to  that  from  the  Wely  near  Nazareth,  though  less
near  and  less  distinct.  It  embraced  the  western  part  of  the
great  plain  with  its  villages,  as  far  as  to  Lejjun  and  Carmel ;
but  the  sea  view  was  mostly  shut  out  by  intervening  heights.
Whether  the  sea  is  visible  at  all  on  the  left  of  Carmel,  as  at
Neby  Isma'il,  I  am  unable  to  say  ;  but  my  impression  is,  that
we  did  not  thus  perceive  it.  The  northern  end  of  Carmel  like-
wise, and  the  bay  of  'Akka,  do  not  appear  ;  but  on  the  right  of
Nazareth  a  portion  of  the  sea  is  seen  in  the  northwest,  as  well
as  slight  glimpses  in  other  parts.  In  the  north  and  northeast
are  Safed  and  its  mountains,  the  highest  point  in  all  that  region  ;
but  overtopped  by  Jebel  esh-Sheikh  and  its  snows  beyond.  Di-
rectly beneath  us,  in  the  same  direction,  lay  spread  out  the  great
plain,  which,  sweeping  from  Esdraelon  around  the  base  of  Tabor,
extends  far  northwards,  and  contains  several  villages.  In  this
plain,  at  the  distance  of  about  three  hours,  is  seen  J ebel  Hattin
or  Tell  Hattin,  the  mount  of  Beatitudes  so  called  by  the  Latin
monks,  a  low  ridge  or  saddle  with  two  points,  called  by  the
Arabs  Kurun  Hattin,  "  Horns  of  Hattin."  On  the  right  of  the
same  plain,  the  whole  outline  of  the  basin  of  the  lake  of  Tiberias
can  be  traced  ;  but  only  a  smaU  spot  of  the  lake  itself  Is  visible
in  the  northeast  on  the  right  of  Jebel  Hattin. '  Beyond  the  lake,
the  eye  takes  in  the  high  table  lands  of  Jaulan  and  Hauran  ;  and
further  south,  beyond  the  Jordan,  the  higher  mountains  of  the
ancient  Bashan  and  GUead.

Towards  the  south  the  view  is  of  course  bounded  by  the  ad-
jacent mountains  of  Duhy  and  Gilboa  ;  the  high  portions  of  the
latter  being  seen  over  the  low  ridge,  or  rather  the  high  plain,
running  out  eastwards  from  the  former,  and  forming  there  the
northern  side  of  the  valley  of  Jezreel.  We  could  look  over  this
tract  into  the  broad  valley  of  the  Jordan  around  Beisan,  though
that  place  itself  was  not  visible  ;  and  could  distinctly  perceive,
that  the  valley  from  the  Avest  spreads  itself  out  to  a  wide  plain
as  it  enters  that  of  the  Jordan  ;  so  that  the  latter  plain  might
be  said  to  come  up  and  meet  it,  or  rather  that  a  branch  from  the
Jordan  vaUey  runs  up  towards  'Ain  Jahld.    On  the  north  of

•  I  say  this  advisedly ;  because  various    p.  214.    Buckingliam's  Travels  in  Pal.  p.
travellers  pcem  to  speak  of  8cein<»  much    108.  4to.    Schubert'8  Keise  III.  p.  176.
more  of  the  lake  from  Tabor.  See  Morisoa

ill.  215.  216

June  18.]

PROSPECT.

355

Beisan,  as  seen  from  Tabor,  and  also  from  Zer'in,  tlie  valley  of
J ezreel  is  not  skirted  hy  mountains,  but  by  the  bigh  table  land
above  mentioned  ;  to  wbicb  the  side  of  the  valley  rises  by  a
gradual  ascent. — The  view  extends  in  this  quarter  far  down  the
Jordan  valley,  and  to  the  mountains  of  Gilead  beyond  ;  but
those  who  have  thought  they  could  distinguish  from  here  the
waters  of  the  Dead  Sea,  have  forgotten,  that  the  direction  of  that
sea  from  Tabor  brings  it  directly  behind  the  mountains  of  Duhy
and  Gilboa.'

The  mountain  of  Duhy,  as  already  remarked,  sinks  down
towards  the  east  into  a  low  ridge,  or  line  of  flat  hills,  along  the
valley  of  Jezreel.  On  its  northern  side,  as  seen  from  Tabor,  this
mountain  exhibits  a  double  ridge  ;  that  is,  upon  its  northern
slope  another  much  lower  ridge  springs  up  and  runs  off  east-
ward, parallel  to  the  main  mountain  ;  of  which  it  indeed  truly
constitutes  a  part.  Further  east,  this  ridge  and  that  running
off  from  the  mountain  itself,  are  about  of  equal  height ;  and
between  them  lies  the  higher  plain  or  table  land,  above  described
as  bordering  on  the  valley  of  Jezreel.  In  it  however  is  a  deep
depression  north  of  Kumieh,  drained  towards  the  south.  The
eastern  part  of  this  same  tract  is  drained,  according  to  Burck-
hardt,  by  a  small  Wady,  called  Wady  'Osheh,  which  runs  down
to  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  at  some  distance  north  of  Beisan.*

North  of  this  tract,  the  somewhat  lower  plain  around  Tabor
fills  up  the  space  quite  to  the  brow  of  the  Jordan  valley,  and
northwards  towards  Lubieh  and  Hattin.  Here  in  the  northeast  is
seen  the  Khan  et-Tujjar ;  from  which  the  bed  of  a  seemingly  shal-
low Wady  nans  first  southwards,  and  then  southeast  and  breaks
down  through  the  hills  to  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  about  half  an
hour  north  of  Wady  'Osheh. ^  This  is  there  called  Wady  el-  Bireh,
4  apparently  from  a  village  of  that  name  in  the  vicinity,  marked
in  our  lists.  All  along  this  Wady,  a  small  silvery  thread  of
water  was  visible,  coming  from  the  fountain  near  the  Khan,
This  Wady  as  it  descends  to  the  Jordan  valley,  is  deep  ;  but
further  north,  the  plain  appears  to  slope  up  eastwards  gradually
to  the  very  brow  of  the  cliffs  over  the  Ghor  and  lake  of  Tiberias,
presenting  there  no  appearance  whatever  of  hills  as  seen  from
this  side.

It  was  to  us  a  matter  of  particular  interest,  to  ascertain,  if
possible,  the  line  of  division  between  the  waters  running  to  the
Jordan,  and  those  flowing  to  the  Mediterranean  through  the
plain  of  Esdraelon.  This  it  was  not  difficult  to  do,  as  the  plain
lay  spread  out  like  a  map  before  us,  and  aU  its  charmels  and

»  Cotovicus  p.  355.     D'Arvieux  Me-       ^  Burckhardt's  Travels,  p.  342.
moires,  Tom.  II.   p.  284.  Par.   1735.       '  Burckhardt,  ibid.
Schubert's  Reise  lU.  p.  176.

iii.  216-218

356

MOUNT  TABOR,

[Sec  XIV.

water-courses,  though  now  mostly  dry,  were  nevertheless  dis-
tinctly \'isible.  The  water-shed,  then,  is  within  the  arm  of  the
great  plain  on  the  south  of  Tabor,  about  on  a  line  between  this
mountain  and  the  top  of  the  little  Hermon.  AU  the  waters
east  of  this  line,  go  to  the  Jordan  through  Wady  el-Bireh,  in
which  water  was  now  running  ;  and  from  the  village  of  Endor
on  the  northern  slope  of  the  lower  ridge  of  Hermon,  a  shallow
Wady  passes  down  northeast  to  join  the  same.  Not  far  west
of  Endor,  another  little  Wady  in  like  manner  goes  off  north-
west to  join  those  running  towards  the  Mediterranean.'

On  the  northern  slope  of  the  mountain  of  Duhy,  just  below
the  summit  towards  the  northwest  is  seen  the  small  village  of
the  same  name.  Somewhat  lower  down,  in  the  same  direction,
is  the  little  hamlet  of  Nein  ;  and  further  east  on  the  northern
slope  of  the  lower  parallel  ridge^  lies  Endor,  merely  an  ordinary
village.  These  two  are  ancient  places,  to  which  I  shall  recur
again.  On  the  line  of  low  hills  stretching  off  eastwards  from
the  little  Hermon,  we  could  perceive  again  Kumieh,  which  we
had  seen  from  Zer'in  ;  while  on  the  northern  Hne  of  hills,  the  ex-
tension of  the  lower  parallel  ridge,  between  the  Wadys  'Osheh
and  el-Bireh,  he  the  villages  el-Murussus,  Denna,  and  Kaukab
el-Hawa.*  Somewhere  in  the  same  region  are  also  Tumrah,
Kefrah,  and  Shiltta.^  North  of  Wady  el-Bireh,  towards  the
brow  of  the  Jordan  vaUey,  lie  the  \'illages  Sirin,  'Aulam,  etc.
This  last  may  not  improbably  be  the  Ulama  of  Eusebius  and
Jerome,  twelve  Roman  miles  from  Diocaesarea  towards  the  east.*

From  the  southeast  part  of  the  summit  of  Tabor,  we  took
many  important  bearings,  recorded  in  the  note  below.^

Mount  Tabor  is  several  times  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testa-

'  We  were  the  more  particular  in  this
examination,  because  the  fountain  near
Khan  et-Tujjar  is  sometimes  said  to  be  the
source  of  tlie  Kishon,  and  to  flow  oflF  around
Mount  Tnbor  westwards.  So  D'Arvieux
expressly;  Memoires,  Par.  1735.  Tom.
n.  p.  271),  280.  Mr  Paxton  also  errone-
ously makes  a  branch  of  the  Kishon  rise
nonh  of  Tabor,  and  flow  east  of  the  moun-
tain, and  then  south  and  west  around  its
foot.    Letter  xx.  p.  178.  Lond.  18.S9.

^  Burckhardt  passed  near  el-Muriissus
in  going  from  Nazareth  to  Beisan ;  he
mentions  also  the  other  two  villages  ;  Tra-
vels p.  342.  Kaukab  el-Huwa,  the  Belvoir
of  the  Franks,  was  celebrated  during  the
crusades ;  see  further  on.

*  Has  this  perhaps  any  connection  with
the  Beth-Shittah  of  Judg.  7,  22,  through
■which  the  Midianites  fled  when  defeated
by  Gideon  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel?

■*  Onomast.  art.  Ulamaus.
iii.  218.  219

'  Bearings  from  Mount  Tabor,  beginning
at  the  Wely  above  Nazareth  and  proceed-
ing towards  the  right :  Nebv  Isma'il  N.
68  W.  'Ain  Mahil  N.  54°  W.  Mes-hed
K  10'  E.  (?)  esh-Shajerali  N.  12'  E.
LiibiehX.  12  E.  Safed  N.  24' E.  Jebel
esh-Sheikh  or  Hermon  about  N.  28°  E.
Khan  et-Tuyar  N.  32'  E.  Jebel  Hattin,
middle,  N.  34"  E.  Kefr  Sabt  N.  44=  E.
Tiberias,  not  visible,  about  N.  63°  K
Ma'derah  E.  Wady  el-Bireh  as  it  passes
down  to  the  Jordan  vallev  S.  52'  E.
Kaukab  el-Hawa  S.  37  E.  Kefrah  S.
25  E.  Beis.'>n,  not  visible,  about  S.  15°
E.  Gilboa,  eastern  end  of  hisih  part.,  S.
Tumrah  S.  3"  W.  Kumieh  ^S.  10  W.
Endur  S.  16'  W.  Wezar  S.  16  W.  Little
Hermon,  east  end  of  high  part,  S.  23 '  W.
Kefr  .Musr  S.  26'  W.  Little  Hermon,
summit,  S.  35°  W.  Village  Duhy  S.  37'
W.    Nein  S.  40°  W.

Jzy-E  18.]

HISTORICAL  NOTICES.

357

ment  ;  first  as  on  the  border  of  Issachar  and  Zebulun  ;  and  then
as  the  place  where  Deborah  and  Barak  assembled  the  warriors
of  Israel,  before  their  great  battle  with  Sisera.'  The  beauty  of
the  mountain  and  its  conspicuous  position,  rendered  it  a  favour-
ite object  of  poetic  contemplation  ;  and  when  the  Psalmist
exclaims  :  *'  Tabor  and  Hermon  shall  rejoice  in  thy  name,"  he
selects  these  two  as  the  representatives  of  all  the  mountains  of
Palestine  ;  the  former  as  the  most  graceful,  and  the  latter  as
the  loftiest.''  There  appears  also  to  have  been,  in  those  days,  a
city  of  the  same  name,  doubtless  situated  upon  the  mountain,
which  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Zebulim,  but  was  assigned  to  the
Levites.^

In  the  New  Testament,  Mount  Tabor  is  not  mentioned.  In
Greek  and  Roman  writers,  the  name  takes  the  form  Itabvrion  or
Atabyrion.  which  appears  also  in  the  Septuagint.*  The  histo-
rian Polybius  relates,  that  Antiochus  the  Great  of  Syria,  after
having  captured  the  city  Philoteria  near  the  lake  of  Tiberias,*
"  ascended  the  mountain  and  came  to  Atabyrion,  a  place  lying  on
a  breast-formed  height,  having  an  ascent  of  more  than  fifteen
stadia  ;  and  by  stratagem  and  wile  he  got  possession  of  the
city,"  which  he  afterwards  fortified.'  This  was  in  the  year  218
B.  C.  and  shows  that  the  former  city  upon  the  mountain  still
remained.  According  to  Josephus,  a  battle  took  place  at  Mount
Itabyrion  about  53  B.  C.  between  the  Eoman  forces  under  the
proconsul  Gabinius  and  the  Jews  under  Alexander,  son  of
Aristobulus  ;  in  which  ten  thousand  of  the  latter  were  slain.^
At  a  later  period,  J osephus  himself  caused  Mount  Tabc>r  to  be
fortified,  along  with  various  other  places.'  He  describes  the
mountain  as  having  an  ascent  ot  thirty  stadia  on  the  north  it
was  inaccessible  ;  and'the  summit  was  a  plain  of  twenty-six
stadia  in  circumference.  This  whole  circuit  Josephus  caused  to
be  enclosed  with  a  wall  in  forty  days  ;  the  materials  and  also
water  being  brought  from  below,  since  the  inhabitants  had  only
rain-water."'  This  account,  although  exaggerated,  corresponds
well  with  the  remains  stUl  found  on  the  moimtain."    Still  later,

'  Josh.  19,  22 ;  comp.  ts.  12.  Jndg.  -t,  xpv^i  8e   nark  rhif  Koiphr  rovrop

6.  12.  14.    Joseph.  Ant.  5.  L  22.  ib.  5.  iyttpa  kou  trrpaTTiyiificeTi  Karicx^  "r^i"  x<^-

5.  3.  Xiy. — ' Ajr^aXiai-ufros  8e  koI  to  'Araffiptoy,

'  Ps.  89,  12.  Comp.  Jer.  46,  18.  Hos.  iy*'Cev{e.     See  Eeland.  Palest  p.  599.

5,  L  Jahi  Bibl.  Arch.  U.  L  p.  374.

'  1  Chr.  6,  77.    Pertaps  also  the  city  '  Jos.  Antiq  14.  6.  3.    B.  J.  1.  8.  7.

is  meant  in  Josh.  19,  22.  Jahn  BibL  ArchjeoL  XL  L  p.  546.

*  Hos.  5,  1  '\TaSvpw¥ ;  comp.  Hieron.  »  Jos.  Vita  §  37.  B.  J.  2.  20.  6.
Comm.  in  loc.    Josephus  L  c  Onomast.  •  Rufinus  reads  t«-entT  stadia,  -which
art.  Itab'T  on.  Polvb.  5.  70.  6  'Arafivpoiy.  corresponds  better  with  the  fifteen  stadia

'  For  Philoteria  see  Reland  PaL  p.  954.    of  Poljbius  and  with  the  truth-  Eeland

•  Poljb.  5.  70.  6.  .  .  .  vTfff Pti\e  riir    PaL  p."  332.

optuniy  ncaj  xof ijr  frl  'AraBvpuur  •  i  kutcu        '*  Jos.  B.  J.  4.  1.  8.
fjify  i-r\  k6ou  fiajTrofiiovs,  r^ty  Se  ■wp6alf
hours  from  Lejjun,  the  water  was  low  and  inconsiderable.  Shaw
is  the  only  traveller  who  appears  to  have  noticed  the  sources  of
the  permanent  stream.  "  In  travelling  under  the  eastern  brow
of  Carmel,"  he  says,  "  I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the
sources  of  the  river  Kishon,  three  or  four  of  which  He  within
less  than  a  furlong  of  each  other.  These  alone,  without  the
lesser  contributions  nearer  the  sea,  discharge  water  enough  to
form  a  river  half  as  big  as  the  Isis."'  The  length  of  the  stream
from  these  sources  to  the  sea,  he  estimates  at  seven  miles,  or
about  two  and  a  half  hours.  It  was  probably  somewhere  along
this  permanent  stream,  that  Elijah  slew  the  prophets  of  Baal.*

The  quantity  of  water  in  the  Mukutta'  as  it  passes  through
the  lower  plain  to  the  sea,  is  not  inconsiderable.  Schubert  ford-
ed it  in  May  in  travelling  directly  from  Xazareth  to  Haifa,  and
found  it  scarcely  forty  feet  in  breadth,  and  three  or  four  feet
deep  ;  the  water  coming  half  way  up  the  bodies  of  the  mules.^
Monro  crossed  the  river  near  its  mouth,  at  the  southeast  nook
of  the  bay  of  'Akka,  in  a  boat  ;  he  describes  the  stream  as
about  thirty  yards  in  width,  and  deep  ;  so  that  the  asses  with
their  heads  tied  to  the  boat,  were  compelled  to  swim.'  Yet
Shaw  relates,  that  the  Kishon  when  not  swollen  by  the  rains,
"  never  falls  into  the  sea  in  a  full  stream,  but  insensibly  perco-

'  See  above,  p.  356.  of  the  prophets  of  Baal,  some  travellers

'  We  crossed  the  Mukutta'  in  the  plain  are  disposed  to  derive  the  modem  name  of
in  18o2;  see  VoL  in.  Sect.  Ill,  under  the  river  el-Mukutta',  following  the  mean-
Apr.  21st.  ing  seciiit,  excidit,  of  the  Arahic  verb  So

'  Shaw's  Travels  4to.  p.  274.  Shaw  D'Arviens,  Mora.  II.  p.  294.  Berggren
savs  these  fountains  are  called  "  Has  el-  Reisen,  II.  p.  230.  But  among  the  com-
Kishon,"  which  cannot  be  true  as  to  the  mon  people  the  name  sijrnifies  merely  '  the
Arabs,  because  the  name  Kishon  is  here  ford,'  from  another  meaning  of  the  same
Tinknowu.  They  would  more  probably  verb,  trajeeit  flumen.  See  Frevtag's  Les.
bear  the  name  of  Ras  el-M>ikutta' :  and  Arab.  IH  p.  465.  D'Arvieus  learnedly
such  it  would  seem  from  D'Arvieux  is  refers  the  name  Kishon  (French  Cison)  to
actually  the  case  ;  Meraoires  IL  p.,  294.  the  same  slaughter ;  it  being,  he  says,  de-
Paris,  1735.  The  ponds  of  which  Shaw  rived  from  the  Latin  ecedere.
speaks,  four  miles  northeast  of  these  foun-  '  Reise  HI.  p.  206.
tains,  do  not  exist  '  Summer  Ramble  I.  p.  56.

*  1  Kings  18,  40.    From  this  slaughter

ToL.  II.— 31*  iii.  231-233

366

PLAIN  OF  ESDEAELON.

[Sec.  XIV.

lates  througli  a  bank  of  sand,  which  the  north  winds  throw  up
against  the  mouth  of  it ;  "  thus  he  found  it  in  the  middle  of
Ajiril  A.  D.  1722,  when  he  passed  it.'

Such  were,  in  general,  the  results  of  our  observations  and
inquiries  respecting  the  noble  plain  of  Esdraelon  and  the  objects
around  it.  We  took  leave  of  it  from  the  summit  of  Mount
Tabor,  as  it  lay  extended  before  us,  quiet  and  peaceful,  in  the
brilliant  light  of  an  oriental  morning  ;  so  tranquil  indeed,  that
it  was  difficult  to  connect  with  it  the  idea  of  battles  and  blood-
shed, of  which  for  a  long  succession  of  ages  it  has  been  the  cho-
sen scene.  Here  Deborah  and  Barak,  descending  with  their
forces  from  Mount  Tabor,  attacked  and  discomfited  the  host  of
Sisera  with  his  "  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron,"  from  Endor  to
Taanach  and  Megiddo,  where  the  Kishon  swept  them  away.*
In  and  adjacent  to  the  plain,  Gideon  achieved  his  triumph  over
the  Midianites  ;  and  here  too  the  glory  of  Israel  was  darkened
for  a  time,  by  the  fall  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  upon  Gilboa.^  It
was  also  adjacent  to  Aphek  in  the  plain,  that  Ahab  and  the
Israelites  obtained  a  miraculous  victory  over  the  Syrians  under
Benhadad  ;  while  at  Megiddo,  the  pious  Josiah  feU  in  battle
against  the  Egyptian  monarch.^  Then  came  the  times  of  the
Romans,  with  battles  under  Gabinius  and  Vespasian.'  The
period  of  the  crusades  furnishes  likewise  its  account  of  contests
in  and  around  the  plain  f  and  almost  in  our  day  the  battle  of
Mount  Tabor  was  one  of  the  triumphs  of  Napoleon.'  From
Mount  Tabor  the  view  took  in  also,  on  the  one  side,  the  region
of  Hattin,  where  the  renown  of  the  crusaders  sunk  before  the
star  of  Saladin  ;  while,  not  far  distant,  on  the  other  side,  the
name  of  'Akka  or  Ptolemais  recalls  many  a  deadly  struggle  of
the  same  epoch.  There  too  Napoleon  was  baffled  and  driven
back  from  Syria  ;  and  in  our  own  day,  torrents  of  blood  have
flowed  within  and  around  its  walls,  during  the  long  siege  and
subsequent  capture  of  the  city  by  the  Egyptian  army  in  A.  D.
1832.

The  ink  with  which  these  lines  were  penned,  was  hardly

'  Shaw's  Travels  4to.  p.  274.    See  also  between  one  hundred  and  fifty  knights,

Irby  and  Mangles,  p.  194.  Mariti  Voyages  both  Hospitalers  and  Templars,  with  600

II.  p  120.  Neuw.  1791.  foot,  and  the  Saracen  troops  under  Melek

"  Judg.  4,  12-15.  vs.  19-21.    Ps.  83,  el-'Adil.      The   Christians   were  almost

9.  10.  totally  destroyed;   the  Grand  Master  of

'  Judg,  c.  7.  1  Sam.  29,  1.  c.  31.    See  the  Hospitalers  slain  ;  while  the  Grand

above,  p.  327.  Master  of  the  Templars  escaped  with  diffi-

♦  1  Kings  26,  26-30.— 2  Chr.  35,  20-24.  culty.  Hugo  Plagon  in  Martene  et  Dn-
2  K.  2:i,  29.  30.  rand  T.  V.  p.  597  sq.    Rad.  Coggeshal.

'  See  above,  p.  357.  Chr  the  hands  of  the  con-
queror. The  grand  catastrophe  was  completed  ;  and  the  power
of  the  Christians  in  Palestine  fully  broken,  by  the  capitulation
of  the  Holy  City  ;  which  t^ok  place  on  the  third  day  of  Octo-
ber, three  months  after  the  battle  of  Hattin.*

'  This  account  of  Raynald's  death  is
drawn  cliiefly  from  Bohaeddin,  pp.  70,  71.
Comp.  Wilken  ib.  p.  289.  Reinaud  Extraits
p.  198. — The  Frank  writers  who  give  the
details  of  the  battle  of  Hattm  are :  Ber-
nardus  Thesaur.  in  Muratori  Scriptores
Rer.  Ital.  Tom.  VII.  c.  152  sq.  Radulph
Coggesliale  in  Mart«ne  et  Durand  Tom.
V.  p.  553  sq.  Hugo  Plagon,  ibid.  p.  600
Vol.  II. -32*

sq. — Arabian  cotemporary  writers  are :
Bohaeddin  the  secretary  and  friend  of
Saladin,  Vit.  Sal.  p.  67  sq.  Ibn  el-Athir
in  Reinaud  Extraits  pp.  1()0-199.  'Emad
ed-Din,  ibid.  The  latter  writer,  and  per-
haps also  the  two  others,  were  present
during  the  battle.

■  Wilken  ib.  pp.  291-311.

iiL  248,  249

378

FROM  MOUKT  TABOR  TO  TIBERIAS.

[Sec.  XV.

We  descended  from  Tell  Hattin,  the  scene  of  the  last
strupgle  in  the  memorable  conflict  above  described  ;'  and  at
12.25  bent  our  course  "westwards  to  regain  the  road  we  had  left.
As  however  this  lay  at  some  distance,  we  preferred  to  turn  down
a  cattle-track  nearer  at  hand,  though  still  circuitous  ;  a  steep
and  stony  path,  through  a  narrow  and  very  rugged  side  Wady.
This  brought  us  down  at  12.50  to  a  fine  fountain,  bursting  out
just  under  the  western  end  of  the  Tell,  still  in  the  ravine.  A
few  paces  before  coming  to  the  fountain,  are  the  remains  of  a
large  stone  building.  AU  the  cattle  of  the  village  seemed
collected  around  the  water ;  so  that  at  first  we  could  hardly
approach  it.

The  village  of  Hattin  lies  close  at  hand,  at  the  mouth  of
the  ravine,  which  here  opens  out  northwards  into  the  lower
plain.  It  is  an  ordinary  village  of  no  great  size  ;  the  houses
are  of  stone,  meanly  built.  The  plain  is  narrow,  hardly  twenty
minutes  in  breadth,  running  from  N.  W.  to  S.  E.,  and  forming
the  middle  step  of  descent  from  the  high  plain  south  of  TeU
Hattin,  to  that  of  Mejdel  and  the  lake  itself  On  the  southwest
it  is  sldrted  by  the  ridge  or  offset,  of  which  the  long  Tell  forms
a  part ;  the  latter  rising  on  this  side  nearly  or  quite  four
hundred  feet.*  On  the  northeast  it  is  bordered  by  what,  as  here
seen,  is  a  slight  swelling  ridge,  but  on  the  other  side  descends
steeply  some  three  hundred  feet  to  the  plain  of  Mejdel  and  the
lake.

Through  this  plain,  called  Sahil  Hattin,  passes  down  the
bed  of  a  mountain  torrent,  now  dry,  which  has  its  rise  in  the
hills  east  of  'Arrabeh  and  Deir  Hanna.  At  a  point  about  forty
minutes  N.  75°  E.  from  the  village  of  Hattin,  this  torrent
breaks  down  abraptly  through  the  ridge  to  the  plain  of  Mejdel,
by  a  steep,  narrow  valley,  called  "Wady  el-Hamam.  In  the
precipitous  sides,  are  the  singular  ruins  and  caverns  of  the
castle  Kul'at  Ibn  Ma'an,  of  which  I  shall  speak  further  on.
Just  at  the  upper  end  of  this  gap,  on  the  south  side,  are  the
ruins  of  what  appears  to  have  been  an  ancient  town.  It  bears
N.  80^  E.  from  Hattin,  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  dis-
tant ;  and  the  people  said,  that  among  the  niins  were  columns
and  tlie  remains  of  churches.  It  is  called  Irbid,  and  is  unques-
tionably the  spot,  which  Pococke  describes  under  the  name  of
"  Baitsida  ; "  where  were  columns  and  the  ruins  of  a  large
churcli,  with  a  sculptured  door-case  of  white  marble.'

That  traveller  held  it  to  be  the  Bethsaida  of  Galilee  ;  and

■  So  Ibn  el-Athlr  expressly,  Reinaud  Bay  there  are  here  "a  few  Romau  ruins;"

Extr.  p]).  195,  196.  p.  299.  [91.] — See  an  account  of  our  visit

»  Sie  above,  p.  370.  in  1852,  in  Vol  IIL  Sect.  VIII,  under  May

'  Pococke  Vol.  II.  i.  p.  68.— Irby  and  18tk
Mangles  -wTite  the  nnme  "  Erbed ; "  and
iii.  249-251

JONB  19.]

HATTIN.  IRBID.

379

granting  his  report  of  the  name  to  be  correct,  there  would  be
httle  room  for  doubt  in  the  case.  But  here,  as  in  manj'  other
instances,  I  must  question  the  accuracy  of  Pococke's  intbrma-
tion.  We  inquired  of  old  and  young  ;  but  no  one  knew  of  any
other  ruins  in  the  vicinity,  nor  of  any  other  name  than  Irbid.
We  repeated  particularly  the  names  of  Bethsaida  and  Chora-
zin ;  but  no  one  had  ever  heard  them.  And  afterwards,  we
made  similar  inquiries  at  Tiberias  and  all  along  the  lake,  but
with  no  better  success.  I  must  therefore  beheve  that  Pococke
was  mistaken  in  the  name ;  or  heard  it  perhaps  from  the
monks,  or  from  Arabs  in  some  way  connected  with  them  ;  or
not  impossibly  inquired  of  his  Arab  guide,  if  that  were  not
Bethsaida,  and  received  an  affirmative  reply.'  That  this  name
is  not  now  known  among  the  common  people,  is  very  certain  ;
and  there  is  also  good  reason  to  suppose,  that  this  place  is  no
other  than  the  ancient  Arbela  of  Josephus  ;  the  form  Irbid
being  probably  a  corruption  for  Irbil.  I  shall  recur  to  this
topic  again  when  I  come  to  speak  further  of  the  Kul'at  Ibn
Ma'an  ;  with  wliich  these  ruins  are  said  to  be  connected.

We  left  Hattin  at  1  o'clock  for  Tiberias,  keeping  near  the
foot  of  the  Tell  on  a  general  course  about  S.  E.  by  E.  along  the
plain.  In  this  direction  were  numerous  threshing-floors  belong-
ing to  the  ■village  ;  and  the  people  were  yet  engaged  in  gather-
ing the  harvest  on  the  plain.  As  we  passed  on,  the  opening  of
Wady  el-Hamam  and  the  site  of  Irbid  lay  about  twenty
minutes  distant  on  our  left ;  but  the  ruins  are  so  nearly  levelled
to  the  ground,  that  we  could  not  distinctly  make  them  out,
even  at  this  short  distance.  Not  far  beyond  is  a  low  water-shed
in  the  plain,  dividing  it  into  two  basins  ;  that  which  we  had
passed  is  drained  by  the  Wady  el-Hamam  ;  while  the  waters  of
that  to  which  we  now  came,  run  off  through  another  smaU
Wady,  which  in  like  manner  breaks  down  through  to  the  lake,
a  Httle  more  than  half  an  hour  north  of  Tiberias.

Across  this  latter  basin  ran  a  small  dry  water-course,  coming
down  from  the  higher  plain  on  our  right,  from  near  the  reputed
place  of  the  miracle  of  the  five  loaves  and  five  thousand.  Down
the  same  Wady  passes  the  main  Damascus  road,  as  it  comes
from  Mount  Tabor  ;  leaving  Tiberias  at  some  distance  on  the
right.  We  kept  on  our  course,  in  the  direction  of  Tiberias,
towards  the  top  of  the  intervening  ridge,  to  which  the  plain
here  runs  up  by  a  gradual  ascent.  As  we  rode  along,  many
flocks  of  the  Semermer  or  locust  bird  flew  up  around  us  ;  and

'  See  the  remarks  on  p.  112  of  VoL  L  its  name  was  KMn  "  Bat  Szaida ;  "  Zach's
In  the  same  way,  perhaps,  Seetzen,  at  the  Monatl.  Corr.  XVUI.  p.  348.  Rejsen  L  p.
well  known  Khan  Minyeh,  was  told  that    344,  345.

iii.  251,  252

380

TIBERIAS.

[Sec.  XV.

we  could  perceive,  that  almost  every  bird  had  a  locust  in  its
mouth.    They  are  a  great  blessing  to  the  country.

At  2 J  o'clock  we  reached*  the  brow  of  the  height  above
Tiberias,  where  a  view  of  nearly  the  whole  lake  opened  at  once
upon  us.  It  was  a  moment  of  no  little  interest ;  for  who  can
look  without  interest  upon  that  lake,  on  whose  shores  the
Saviour  lived  so  long,  and  where  he  performed  so  many  of  his
mighty  works  ?  Yet  to  me,  I  must  confess,  so  long  as  we
continued  around  the  lake,  the  attraction  lay  more  in  these
associations,  than  in  the  scenery  itself.  The  lake  presents
indeed  a  beautiful  sheet  of  Umpid  water,  in  a  deep  depressed
basin  ;  from  which  the  shores  rise  in  general  steeply  and
continuously  all  around,  except  where  a  ravine,  or  sometimes
a  deep  Wady,  occasionally  interrupts  them.  The  hills  are
rounded  and  tame,  with  httle  of  the  picturesque  in  their  form  ;
they  are  decked  by  no  shrubs  nor  forests  ;  and  even  the  verdure
of  the  grass  and  herbage,  which  earlier  in  the  season  might  give
them  a  pleasing  aspect,  was  already  gone  ;  they  were  now  only
naked  and  dreary.  Whoever  looks  here  for  the  magnificence  of
the  Swiss  lakes,  or  the  softer  beauty  of  those  of  England  and
the  United  States,  will  be  disappointed.  My  expectations  had
not  been  of  that  kind  ;  yet  from  the  romantic  character  of  the
scenery  aroimd  the  Dead  Sea,  and  in  other  parts  of  Palestine,  I
certainly  had  anticipated  something  more  striking  than  we
found  around  the  lake  of  Tiberias.'  One  interesting  object
greeted  our  eyes,  a  little  boat  with  a  white  sail  gliding  over  the
waters  ;  the  only  one,  as  we  afterwards  found,  upon  all  the
lake.

We  descended  the  slope  obliquely  from  the  northwest  to-
wards Tiberias.  Here  we  had  our  first  sight  of  the  terrors  of
an  earthquake,  in  the  prostrate  walls  of  the  town,  now  present-
ing little  more  than  heaps  of  rains.  At  3  o'clock  we  were
opposite  the  gate  upon  the  west ;  and  keeping  along  between
the  wall  and  the  numerous  threshing-floors  still  in  operation,  we
pitched  our  tent  ten  minutes  later,  on  the  shore  of  the  lake
south  of  the  city.

Tiberias,  in  Arabic  Tubariyeh,  lies  directly  upon  the  shore,
at  a  point  where  the  heights  retire  a  little,  leaving  a  narrow
strip,  not  exactly  of  plain,  but  of  undulating  land,  nearly  two
miles  in  length  along  the  lake.  Back  of  this  the  mountain
ridge  rises  steeply.  The  town  is  situated  near  the  northern  end
of  this  tract,  in  the  form  of  a  narrow  parallelogram,  about  half
a  mUe  long  ;  surrounded  towards  the  land  by  a  thick  wall,  once

■  "The  lake  of  Tiberias  is  a  fine  sheet    gether  devoid  of  character."    Irby  and
of  water,  but  the  land  about  it  has  no    Mangles,  p.  294.  [89.]
Btriking  features,  and  the  scenery  in  alto-

iii.  252-254

Jrxi:  19.]

THE  LAKE.     THE  JEWS.

381

not  far  from  twenty  feet  liigh,  with  towers  at  regular  interv-als.
Towards  the  sea,  the  city  is  open.  The  castle  is  an  irregular
mass  of  huilding  at  the  northwest  corner.  The  walls  of  the
town,  as  we  have  seen,  were  thrown  down  by  the  earthquake  of
Jan.  1,  1837  ;  and  not  a  finger  had  as  yet  been  raised  to  build
them  up.  In  some  parts  they  were  still  standing,  though  with
breaches  ;  but  from  every  quarter,  footpaths  led  over  the  ruins
into  the  city.  The  castle  also  suffered  greatly.  Very  many  of
the  houses  were  destroyed  ;  indeed  few  remained  without  injury.
Several  of  the  minarets  were  thrown  down  ;  but  a  slender  one
of  wood  had  escaped.  We  entered  the  town  directly  from  our
tent,  over  the  prostrate  wall,  and  made  our  way  through  the
streets  in  the  midst  of  the  sad  desolation.  Many  of  the  houses
had  already  been  rebuilt  in  a  hasty  and  temporary  manner.
The  whole  town  made  upon  us  the  impression,  of  being  the
most  mean  and  miserable  place  we  had  yet  visited  ;  a  picture
of  disgusting  filth  and  frightful  wretchedness.

The  Jews  occupy  a  quarter  in  the  middle  of  the  town,  adja-
cent to  the  lake  ;  this  was  formerly  suiTOimded  by  a  wall  with  a
single  gate,  which  was  closed  every  night.  We  found  many
Jews  in  the  streets  ;  but  although  I  addressed  several  of  them  in
German,  I  could  get  only  a  few  words  of  reply,  enough  to
make  out  that  they  were  chiefly  from  Russian  Poland,  and  could
not  speak  German.  The  men  were  poor,  haggard,  and  filthy ;
the  shadows  of  those  I  had  so  often  seen  in  the  fairs  of  Leipsic.
The  Jewish  females,  of  whom  also  we  saw  many,  looked  much
better,  and  were  neatly  dressed  ;  many  of  them  in  white.  Ti-
berias and  Safed  are  the  two  holy  cities  of  the  modem  Jews  in
ancient  Galilee  ;  hke  Jerusalem  and  Hebron  in  Judea.  This
place  retains  something  of  its  former  renown  for  Hebrew  learn-
ing ;  and  before  the  earthquake  there  were  here  two  Jewish
schools. '

Upon  this  people,  it  was  said,  fell  here  in  Tiberias  the  chief
weight  of  the  earthquake  ;  and  a  large  portion  of  the  hundreds
who  then  perished,  were  Jews.^  A  Muhammedan,  with  whom
my  companion  fell  into  conversation  at  the  threshing-floors,
related,  that  he  and  four  others  were  returning  down  the  moun-
tain west  of  the  city  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  earthquake
occurred.  All  at  once  the  earth  opened  and  closed  again,  and
two  of  his  companions  disappeared.    He  ran  home  affrighted ;

>  Bnrckhardt  p.  326.    Elliott's  Travels  weeks  after  the  earthquake,  brining  alms

n.  p.  34G — Stepb.  Schtilz  in  17.54  found  and  aid  to  the  sufferers  from  Beirut,  there

here  twenty  youths  studying  the  Talmud ;  probably  perished  at  Tiberias  about  seven

Leitungen,  etc.  Th.  V.  p.  200  sq.  hundred  persons,  out  of  a  population  of

»  See  also  Schubert's  Reise  III.  p.  234.  twenty-tive  hundred.    Miss.  Herald,  Nov.

According  to  the  report  of  Mr  Thomson,  1837." p.  438.
who  \i8ited  Safed  and  Tiberias  not  three

iiL  254,  255

382

TIBERIAS.

[Sec.  XV.

and  found  that  his  "svife,  mother,  and  two  others  in  the  family,
had  perished.  On  digging  next  day  where  his  tvro  companions
had  disappeared,  they  were  found  dead  in  a  standing  posture.'

The  earthquake  gave  of  course  a  terrible  blow  to  the  pros-
perity of  the  town.  All  the  statistics  we  could  now  obtain,
were  to  the  following  import.  Before  the  earthquake  the  taxa-
ble Muslims  were  numbered  at  two  hundred  ;  of  whom  more
than  one  hundred  had  perished,  or  been  impressed  as  soldiers.
The  Christians  are  all  Greek  Cathohcs  ;  and  number  from  one
hundred  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  men  ;  whUe  the  men  among
the  Jews  were  reckoned  between  one  hundred  and  fifty  and  two
hundred.  This  gives  scarcely  a  population  of  two  thousand
souls.^  The  fuUest  account  of  Tiberias  in  modern  times,  and
particularly  of  the  Jews,  is  by  Burckhardt.^

Close  on  the  shore,  in  the  northern  part  of  the  town,  is  the
church  dedicated  to  St.  Peter  ;  a  long  narrow  vaulted  building,
rude  and  without  taste,  which  has  sometimes  been  compared  not
inaptly  to  a  boat  turned  upside  down.  It  is  in  fact  merely  a
long  vault  with  a  pointed  arch,  without  windows  ;  having  at  its
west  end  a  very  small  court.  This  court  and  church  have  been
the  usual  resting  place  of  Frank  travellers  in  Tiberias  ;  and
have  in  this  way  become  somewhat  notorious,  for  the  swarms  of
fleas  by  which  they,  as  weU  as  all  the  houses  of  the  town,  are
infested.*  The  church  belongs  to  the  Latin  convent  of  Naza-
reth ;  the  monks  \asit  it  annually  on  St.  Peter's  day  and  cele-
brate mass  ;  at  other  times  it  is  lent  to  the  Greek  Catholics  of
Tiberias.'  Latin  monastic  tradition  places  the  edifice  on  the
spot,  where  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes  took  place  after  our
Lord's  resurrection,  and  where  he  gave  his  last  charge  to  Peter.*
Almost  as  a  matter  of  course,  too,  the  building  of  the  church  is

=  In  A.  D.  1759,  Oct  30th,  Tiberias
■was  in  like  manner  laid  waste  by  a  similar
earthquake.  Mariti,  who  visited  it  soon
after,  describes  it  as  utterly  in  ruins ;  and
says  that  several  buildings  were  swallowed
np;  Voyages  II.  p.  165,  166.  Neuw.  1791.
According  to  Volney,  tlie  shocks  of  the
same  earthquake  continued  for  three
months  to  disquiet  the  inhabitants  of
Mount  Lebanon ;  and  20,000  persons
were  reported  to  have  perished  in  the  val-
ley of  el  Bukii'a;  Vovage  I.  p.  276,  Paris
1787.  Comp.  Bachiene  Th  II.  Bd.  IV.  p.
134. — I  have  not  been  able  to  find  any
more  full  account  of  this  earthquake  ;
■which  .seems  to  have  been  not  less  terrific
than  tliat  of  1837.

"  In  1836  there  are  said  to  have  been
three  hundred  families  of  Jews  in  Tiberias;
Elliott's  Travels  II.  p.  316.  Burckhardt
in  1812  gives  the  populatioa  at  4000  souls,

iii.  255-257

of  -whom  one  fourth  part  were  Jews;  p.
322.  In  1815  the  number  of  houses  is
given  by  Turner,  on  the  authority  of  a
respectable  Jew,  at  400  Turkish,  100  Jew-
ish, and  50  Christian  ;  Tour  etc.  II.  p.  140.
Berggren  in  1822,  also  on  Jewish  author-
it}',  gives  the  number  of  souls  at  over
4000,  of  whom  oiJy  some  300  were  said
to  be  Jews.  Reise  II.  p.  244.

'  Travels  pp.  320-328.  Sec  also  Scholz
p.  248.

*  Hasselquistp.  181.  Burckhardt  p.  320.
Turner  p.  140,  142.  Irby  and  Mangles
pp.  294,  295.  [89,  90.]  Monro  I.  pp.  309,
313,  316.  The  natives  are  said  to  havo
here  the  current  saying  :  "  The  king  of
the  fleas  has  his  court  at  Tubariyeh;"
Clarke's  Travels  in  the  Holy  Land  p.  478.
4to.  Irbv  and  Mangles  1.  c.  Turner  1.  o.

'  Burckh.  p.  322.  Turner  L  c

•  John  c.  21.

JirxE  19.]

THE  EARTHQUAKE.

THE  BATHS.

383

ascribed  to  Helena,  or  at  least  to  the  fourtli  century  ;  and  even
Dr  Clarke  chimes  in  with  this  absurdity.'  The  pointed  arch
necessarily  limits  its  antiquity  to  the  time  of  the  crusades,  at
the  earliest  ;  and  Irby  and  Mangles  further  noticed,  "  that  one
of  the  stones  of  the  building  had  part  of  an  inverted  Arabic
inscription  on  it,"  which  also  goes  to  contradict  the  legend.^
We  observed  no  other  traces  of  antiquity  within  the  walls. ^

Passing  out  of  the  city  again  to  our  tent,  we  kept  on  south-
wards along  the  lake,  to  visit  the  celebrated  warm  baths.  On
the  way  are  many  traces  of  ruins,  evidently  belonging  to  the
ancient  city,  and  showing  that  it  was  situated  here  ;  or,  at  least,
extended  much  further  than  the  modem  town  in  this  direction.
They  consist  mostly  of  foundations,  with  traces  of  walls,  heaps
of  stones,  and  a  thick  wall  for  some  distance  along  the  sea.
Near  the  middle  lie  several  scattered  columns  of  gray  granite,
twelve  or  fifteen  feet  long  ;  and  at  some  distance,  a  single  solitary
column  is  stUl  standing.*  Among  the  threshing-floors  on  the
west  of  the  town,  were  also  two  blocks  of  a  column  of  polished
red  Syenite  granite,  about  three  feet  in  diameter  ;  they  were  said
to  have  been  carried  thither  from  these  ruins.  These  traces  of
ancient  remains  extend  nearly  to  the  baths.'

The  baths  are  on  a  part  of  the  shore  a  little  elevated  above
the  lake,  at  the  southern  end  of  the  strip  of  land  above  described,
and  about  thirty-five  minutes  from  the  city.  There  is  an  old
bathing  house,  now  in  decay,  though  baths  for  the  common
people  are  still  kept  up  in  it.*  A  new  building  has  been  erected
a  few  rods  farther  north  by  Ibrahim  Pasha  ;  it  was  commenced
in  1833,  and  passes  here,  and  with  reason,  for  a  splendid  edifice.
The  principal  or  public  bath  occupies  the  centre  of  the  building,
consibting  of  a  large  circular  apartment,  with  a  marble  pavement
all  around  the  circular  reservoir  in  the  middle,  to  which  several
steps  lead  down.    The  roof  is  supported  by  columns.    There  are

'  Xicephoras  Callistns  in  the  14th  cen-  tioned :   e.  g.  by  Quaresmius  11.  p.  86-1.

tuiT  places  here  one  of  Helena's  reputed  Van  Egmond  and  Heyman  IL    p.  33.

chnrches;  8.  30.    See  above,  YoL  I.  p.  Burckhardt  p.  328.    Burckhardt  says  also,

375.   Clarke's  Travels  etc.  pp.  465,  466,  that  there  are  other  remains  on  the  north

4to.    See  the  historical  notices  of  Tiberias  of  the  t  vrn,  on  a  hill  close  to  the  lake,

fiirther  on.  .  which  commands  the  town  and  seems  to

■  Travels  p.  295.  [89.]  have  been  once  fortified  ;  p.  329.  Irby

'According  to  Burckhardt,  "in  the  and  Mangles,  p.  293.  [89.]  But  these  are
street,  not  far  from  the  church,  is  a  large  probably  not  older  tian  the  eighteenth
stone,  formerly  the  architrave  of  some  eentnry;  see  further  on,  p.  394.
building ;  upon  which  are  sculptured  in  '  This  is  the  building  described  by
bas-rtlief  two  lions  seizing  two  sheep."  Burckhardt ;  p.  339.  According  to  See-
Travels  p.  322.  tzen  it  was  erected  by  Jezz'r  Pasha;

*  Burckhardt  speaks  also  of  columns  of  Zach's  Mouatl.  Corr.  XVIIl.  p.  349.  Rei-

gray  granite  lying  here  in  the  lake ;  and  of  sen  L  p.  348.    In  Hasselquist's  day  there

others  opp^'l^ite  the  town,  likewise  in  the  was  only  a  miserable  house  in  ruins ;  p.

water :  pp  321,  328.  557.    Quaresmius  speaks  only  of  a  hut

'  The  same  ruins  have  been  often  men-  (tugurium^  with  two  rooms  ;  II.  p.  866.

iiL  257)  258

384

TIBEEIAS.

[Sec.  XV.

several  doors,  and  between  them  niches  or  recesses  in  the  wall,
for  the  use  of  the  bathers.  We  passed  through  this  apartment,
and  found  the  heat  and  steam  so  very  oppressive,  that  I  was
glad  to  regain  the  open  air.  In  the  same  building  are  private
rooms  for  wealthier  guests  ;  furnished  in  an  uncommonly  good
oriental  style.  In  the  one  we  entered,  was  a  large  and  beautiful
bath  of  white  marble.  Just  above  the  old  building  is  the  round
reservoir,  arched  over  ;  in  which  the  water  from  the  springs  is
first  collected,  and  suffered  to  cool  to  the  proper  temj^erature  for
the  use  of  the  new  baths.  There  are  no  traces  of  antiquity
visible  around  the  baths.'

According  to  the  bath-keeper,  there  are  four  springs  ;  one
flowing  out  under  the  old  building,  and  three  others  at  intervals
of  a  few  paces  further  south.^  A  covered  channel  now  runs
along  before  them  all,  collecting  the  water  and  conducting  it  to
the  reservoir  ;  so  that  the  comparatively  small  quantity  which
still  flows  in  their  former  channels  down  to  the  sea,  appears
merely  as  if  oozing  out  of  the  groixnd,  rather  than  as  coming
from  large  springs.  The  more  southern  were  said  to  be  the
largest.  The  water,  as  it  issues  from  the  ground,  is  too  hot  to
bear  the  hand  in  it ;  a  pocket  thermometer  held  for  some  time
in  the  water,  and  then  examined  in  the  air,  stood  at  140°  F.
Our  friend  Mr  Hebard,  a  short  time  before,  had  carefully  ex-
amined his  thermometer  while  still  in  the  water,  and  found  it
standing  at  144°  F.^  The  taste  is  excessively  salt  and  bitter,  like
heated  sea  water  ;  there  is  also  a  strong  smell  of  sulphur,  but
no  taste  of  it.  The  water  deposits  a  sediment  as  it  runs  down
to  the  sea,  which  differs  in  colour  below  the  different  springs,
being  in  one  white,  in  another  greenish,  in  a  third  reddish  yellow,
etc.  I  am  not  aware  that  the  water  has  ever  been  carefully
analyzed.*  These  baths  are  regarded  as  efficacious  in  rheumatic
complaints,  and  in  cases  of  debility  ;  and  are  visited,  principally
in  July,  by  people  from  all  parts  of  Syria.

'  Irby  and  Mangles  speak  of  a  wall  than  at  ordinary  times.    See  Mr  Thom-

beyond  the  springs,  running  from  the  lake  son's  report,  Miss.  Herald  Nov.  1837,  p.

to  the  mountain's  side  ;  they  regard  it  as  438.

the   fortification    of   Vespasian's   camp,       ■*  Monro  speaks  of  an  analysis  made  for

•which  is  not  improbable;  p.  294.  [89.]  him  by  Dr  Turner,  the  result  of  which  is

See  Jos.  B.  J.  3.  10.  1  ;  comp.  4.  1.  3.  given    very  unsatisfactorily  as  follows:

'  The  mountain  has  here  a  dark  basaltic  "  The  deposite  consists  chiefly  of  carbonate

appearance.      Hasselquist   describes  the  of  lime,  with  a  very  small  proportion  of

rocks  under  which  the  sjjriiigs  flow  out,  as  muriatic  salts,  diflTering  in  no  respect  from

composed  of  a  black  and  somewhat  brittle  that  of  the  Dead  Sea;"  Summer  Ramble

sulphureous  stone,  which  he  seems  to  re-  I.  p.  312.    Pococke  brought  home  a  bottle

gard  as  the  stink-stone  of  tlie  Dead  Sea ;  of  these  waters,  and  says  :  "  It  was  found,

p.  .556.    See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  512.  that  they  had  in  them  a  considerable

'  At  the  time  of  the  earthquake,  Jaa  quantity  of  gross  fixed  vitriol,  sftine  alum,

1,  1837,  and  for  some  days  afterwards,  the  and  a  mineral  salt ;  "  Vol.  II.  i.  p  69.  See

quantity  of  water  flowing  from  the  springs  also  Hasselquist  Keise  p.  556.  Burckhardt

is  said  to  liave  been  immensely  increased ;  p.  329.
it  was  also  thoi'ght  to  have  been  hotter

iii.  258-260

Jose  19.]

HOT  SPRIXGS.

385

These  warm  fountains  are  mentioned  by  Pliny,  and  also  not
tinfrequently  by  Josephus  and  in  the  Talmud.'  According  to
Josephus,  they  were  not  far  from  Tiberias,  and  were  called
Ammaus,  signifying  '  warm  baths  ; '  so  that  this  name  would
seem  to  be  very  probably  merely  the  Greek  form  of  the  Hebrew
Hammath,  which  has  the  same  signification,  and  was  the  name
of  a  town  belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Naphtali.*  The  Talmud
also  everywhere  speaks  of  these  baths  as  the  ancient  Hammath  ;
and  although  this  position  would  perhaps  faU  more  naturally
within  the  limits  of  Zebulun,  yet  the  i)lace  might  still  have
been  assigned  to  another  tribe,  as  was  done  in  so  many  other
instances.*  The  present  Arabic  word  for  warm  baths,  is  in  like
manner  the  kindred  form  Hammam — Vespasian  for  a  time  had
a  fortified  camp  near  these  springs.*  I  find  no  further  direct
mention  of  them,  except  in  the  Rabbinical  writings  already  refer-
red to,  untn  the  time  of  the  crusades  ;  when  Benjamin  of  Tudela
describes  them.  They  are  rarely  spoken  of  by  subsequent
travellers  before  the  seventeenth  century.'

"We  returned  from  the  baths  ;  and  as  we  sat  at  evening  in
the  door  of  our  tent,  looking  out  over  the  placid  surface  of  the
lake,  its  aspect  was  too  inviting  not  to  allui'e  us  to  take  a  bath
in  its  limpid  waters.  The  clear  and  gravelly  bottom  shelves
down  in  this  part  very  gradually,  and  is  strewed  with  many
pebbles.  In  or  after  the  rainy  season,  when  the  torrents  from
the  neighbouring  hills  and  the  more  northern  mountains,  stream
into  the  lake,  the  water  rises  to  a  higher  level,  and  ovei-flows  the
court-yc.rds  of  the  houses  along  its  shore  in  Tiberias.'  The  lake
furnishes  the  only  supply  of  water  for  the  inhabitants  ;  it  is
sparkling  and  pleasant  to  the  taste  ;  or  at  least  it  was  so  to  us,
after  drinking:  so  long  of  water  carried  in  our  leathern  bottles.
Indeed,  I  should  not  have  hesitated  to  have  joined  Josephus  and
Quaresmius  in  pronouncing  it  sweet  and  most  potable,"  had  not
some  of  our  party  discerned  in  it  a  sHght  brackish  taste  ;  which,
considering  the  very  copious  brackish  fountains  that  flow  into  it,
is  not  improbable.'    Along  the  shore,  Schubert  picked  up  shells

'  PliiL  H.  X.  5.  15,  "  Ab  occidente  Ti-  Salignaco  Tom.  EL  c.  9.  Cotovic.  p.  359.

beriade,  aquis  calidis  salnbrL"    Joseph.  Quaresmius  II.  p.  866,  eta  etc.
Ant.  18.  2.  3.    B.  J:  2.  21.  6.  ib.  i.  1.  3.       «  Bnrckhardt  p.  332.    Turner's  Tour

Vit  §16.    l  or  the  Talmndic  passafres,  see  IL  p.  1-12.    See  the  remarks  on  the  rise

Lightfwt  Op.  II.  pp.  224,  225.  Bustorf  of  the  Jordan,  above.  Vol.  I.  pp.  oil,

Tiberias  p.  1?<.  542.

'  Joseph.  'A/jLuaovs  Ant.  18.  2.  3.  B  J.       '  .Joseph.  B.  J.  3.  10.  7,  Ai'uinj

4.  1.  3.    Heb.  rsn  Hammath,  Josh.  19,  fKvKiia   re   o/ias  icrrl  koI  rrortfiuri.Tri.

35.  Quaresmius  11.  p.  862,  "  Xon  ccBnosse.

'  Lightf  JOt  1.  c.  Reknd  Palaest  p.  161,  paludosjp,  vel  amarae,  sed  clarae,  dnlces,

1036.  potabiles,  et  fecnndse."

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  3.  10.  1 ;  comp.  4.  1.  3.  '  Schubert  limits  the  brackish  taste  of
See  above,  p.  3S4.  n.  1.  water  to  the  shallow  places  along  th»

'  E.  g.  Abulfeda  Tab.  Sjr.  p.  84.  B.  de  shore ;  IIL  pp.  237,  238.

Vol.  II.— 33  iii.  260,  261

386

TIBERIAS.

[Sec.  XV.

of  the  same  species  of  fresh-vrater  snails,  whicli  he  had  before
found  on  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea  near  the  mouth  of  the
Jordan.'

The  lake  is  fuU  of  fish  of  various  kinds  ;  and  Hasselquist
■was  the  first  in  modem  times,  to  note  the  remarkable  circum-
stance, that  some  of  the  same  species  of  fish  are  met  with  here,
as  in  the  Kile,  riz.  Silunis  and  Mvgil  (chub),  and  likewise
another  which  he  calls  Spams  Galikeus,  a  species  of  bream.'
We  had  no  difficulty  in  procuring  an  abundant  supply  for  our
evening  and  morning  meal ;  and  found  them  dehcate  and  well
flavoured.  The  fishing  is  carried  on  only  from  the  shore  ;  it  is
usually  farmed  out  by  the  government ;  but  we  did  not  learn  on
what  terms  it  was  at  present  held.^  The  little  boat  which  we
had  seen  with  its  white  sail,  as  we  descended  to  the  city,  was
now  lying  on  the  eastern  shore  five  or  six  miles  distant ;  it  had
gone  thither  in  order  to  fetch  wood  ;  and  we  pleased  oureelves
with  the  idea  of  taking  a  sad  in  it  upon  the  lake  the  next  day.
Schubert  saw  here  no  boat  the  preceding  year  ;  though  my  com-
panion found  one,  probably  the  same,  in  1834  and  again  in  1835.*

The  view  of  the  lake  from  Tiberias  embraces  its  whole  extent,
except  the  southwest  extremity.  The  entrance  of  the  Jordan
from  the  north  was  distinctly  visible,  bearing  N.  E.  by  N.  with  a
plain  extending  from  it  eastwards.  Further  west,  Safed  was
also  seen,  N.  6^  W.  Upon  the  eastern  shore,  the  mountain,  or
rather  the  wall  of  high  table  land,  rises  with  more  boldness  than
on  the  western  side,  and  two  deep  ra's'ines  are  seen  breaking  down
through  to  the  lake.  That  towards  the  north  is  the  Wady
Semak  of  Seetzen  and  Burckhardt  ;  the  more  southern  one  is
"Wady  Fik,  bearing  E.  by  N.  and  having  its  head  near  the  town
of  the  same  name.^  The  view  of  the  southern  end  of  the  lake
is  cut  ofi"  by  a  high  promontory  of  the  western  mountain,  which
projects  considerably,  not  far  bej'ond  the  hot  springs  ;  we  could
distinguish  only  the  southeast  corner  of  the  sea,  bearing  about  S.  S.
E.    "We  would  gladly  have  followed  the  shore  southwards  to  the

'  Schubert  m.  pp.  23",  238.  boat  had  fallen  to  pieces  the  year  before  ;

'  Hassclq.  Reise  pp.  181,  389,  412  sq.  p.  332.   According  to  Tnmer,  it  had  been

428  sq.    Josephus  speaks  also  of  kinds  of  built  by  Jezzilr  in  order  to  bring  wood  from

fishes  peculiar  to  this  lake,  B.  J.  3.  10.  7.  the  eastern  shore;  II.  p.  141.    Irby  and

'  When  Burckhardt -nas  here  in  1812,  JIangles  in  1818  found  no  boat  wliatever,

the  fishery  of  the  lake  was  rented  at  700  p.  2il5,  [90,]  although  Richardson  a  year

piastres  a  year ;  Trav.  p.  332.  earlier  speaks  of  seeing  two ;  Vol  II.  p.

*  Schubert  Reise  III.  p.  237.    Pococke  429.    According  to  Berggren  there  wa3

made  an  excursion  upon  the  lake  in  a  none  in  1 822,  II.  p.  242 ;  and  Prokeseh

boat,  whi^h  was  kept  "in  order  to  bring  affirms  the  same  in  1829  ;  p.  139.

wood  from  the  other  side  ; "  II.  i.  p.  C'J. —  '  Seetzen  in  Zach's  Mou.  Corr.  XYIIl

Seetzen  in  180G  found  a  .  ingle  boat  on  the  p.  317.    Reisen  I.  p.  343.    Burckhardt  p.

lake,  but  not  in  a  state  to  be  u^ed  ;  Zach's  281.    For  the  Wady  and  village  of  lilt,

MouatL  Corr.  XVIII.  p.  350.    Reisen  I.  p.  see  more  in  Burckhardt,  p.  279  sq.
SaO.    Burckhardt  in  1812  sajs  the  only

m.  261-263

Jbsk  19.]

SOUTH  E>*D  OF  THE  LAKE.

387

outlet  of  the  lake,  where  the  Jordan  issues  firom  it ;  but  our
time  did  not  permit.

The  distance  to  the  southern  end  of  the  lake,  according  to
Pococke,  is  four  toiles  from  Tiberias  ;  according  to  Mr  FLsk  it  is
one  hour  from  the  baths.'  Pococke  went  thither,  and  describes
the  end  of  the  sea  as  narrow  ;  the  Jordan  issues  near  the  western
side,  at  first  running  south  for  about  a  furlong,  and  then  turning
west  for  half  a  mile.  In  this  space,  between  the  river  and  the
lake,  there  is  a  rising  groxmd  called  Kerak,  where  at  present  is  a
Muslim  village  apparently  recently  sprung  up.  Pococke  speaks
here  only  of  traces  of  fortifications  and  ruins  ;  and  so  too  See-
tzen  and  others.  On  the  west  of  this  is  a  long  bridge,  or  cause-
way on  arches,  over  marshy  ground  ;  under  which  the  water
flows  into  the  Jordan  when  the  lake  is  high,  making  the  site  of
Kerak  an  island.  There  are  likewise  remains  of  a  bridge  over
the  Jordan  itself*  Here  was  unquestionably  the  site  of  the
ancient  Tarichfea,  which  Josephus  describes  as  situated  below
the  mountain  on  the  lake,  thirty  stadia  south  of  Tiberias.^  This
was  one  of  the  cities  fortified  by  Josephus  himself ;  and  was
taken  with  great  slaughter  by  Titiis,  acting  under  the  orders  of
Vespasian.*

Ab-Dut  a  quarter  of  an  hour  east  of  the  Jordan,  on  the  shore
of  the  lake  at  its  most  southern  pDint,  lies  the  village  of  Se-
makh,  containing  thirty  or  forty  poor  mud  houses,  and  a  few
built  of  black  stone.  According  to  Burckhardt,  the  beach  along
this  part  of  the  sea  is  a  fine  gravel  of  quartz,  flint,  and  tuf-
wacke  ;  there  is  no  shallow  water  ;  the  lake  being  of  consider-
able depth  close  in  shore,  and  without  either  reeds  or  rushes.
The  Ghor  is  here  not  cultivated,  except  a  small  tract  around
Semakh.  The  village  is  iohabited  by  Muslims  and  a  few  Greek
Christians.*

-  Pococke  VoL  K  L  p.  70.  See  life
of  Fiik:  also  Afi^s.  Herald.  1*24.  p.  308,
etc.  Berggren  has  also  one  hour ;  Beise
n.  p.  246.

'  This  description  is  drawn  chie9j-  frcnn
Pococke,  Descr.  of  the  East.  n.  L  p.  70.
It  is  confirmed  farther  by  Hardv,  Notices
of  the  Holy  Land.  Loni  ISSi.  p.  236.
Berggren  Eeis-.n  IL  p.  246.  Irbv  and
Manxes  pp.  2?6, 300.  [90, 91.]  The  bridge,
accopliag  to  the  latter,  has  ten  arches.  See
also  Lvncb's  021  Report,  p.  16,  and  Map.
Xarrat.  p.  172.

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  3.  10.  1.  Trta  §  32.
Pliny  says  also  of  the  lake  :  "  A  meridie,
Tarichaea :  ab  ocoidente  Tlberiade,  aqois
calidis  salubri  : "  H.  X.  5.  15.  See  Beland
Palaest.  p.  1026,

*  Jos  B.  J.  3.  10.  1-6.  Pococke  and
also  Xrby  and  Mangles  (as  above  died)

soggest,  that  the  place  may  have  heen  for-
tined  by  cntting  a  channel  on  the  ire^em
ade,  by  which  means  it  woald  be  snrroond-
ed  with  water.

'  Bnrckhardt  pp.  275,  276.  For  a  de-
scription of  the  Gh.-jr  and  the  Jordan  below
the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  see  abore,  VoL  L
pp.  537^540 :  also  ToL  HI.  Sect.  Vn,  un-
der May  loth.  1>52. — Besides  Kerri  and
Semakh,  the  fallowing  places  were  named
to  ns  as  lyin^  so^th  of  the  lake  in  the
Ghc  r,  viz.  el-'Obeidiyeh  and  d-Buk'ah  oa
the  western  bank  of  the  Jonlaii ;  and  Del-
hemiyeh  on  the  eastern  bank  oi^Kxate  the
latter,  aboat  half  a  mile  abore  the  month
of  the  Yarm-ik.  Oa  the  eastern  shore  of
the  lake,  are  Ehorbet  es-Simrah  an  hour
from  Semakh,  and  'ABweirib.'ai  farther
north  ;  comp.  Burckhardt  p.  279.

iii.  263  264

388

TIBEKIAS.

[Sec.  XV.

I  have  already  adverted  to  the  probable  depression  of  the
lake  of  Tiberias  below  the  Mediterranean  ;  a  depression,  how-
ever, the  amount  of  which  is  even  yet  not  accurately  ascer-
tained.' This  gives  to  the  deep  basin  of  the  lake,  and  the
adjacent  shores  and  valleys,  a  climate  and  vegetable  character
similar  to  those  around  Jericho  ;  though  less  intense  and  less
marked.  The  thermometer  at  sunset  stood  at  80°  F.  and  at
sunrise  the  next  morning  at  75°  F.  A  Sirocco  wind  the  next
day  raised  it  to  95°  F.  but  it  had  stood  at  the  same  point  and
even  higher  on  the  summit  of  Tabor.  The  winter  is  apparently
much  more  severe  and  longer  at  Tiberias,  than  at  Jericho  ;  and
ewn  snow  sometimes,  though  very  rarely,  falls.  At  the  latter
place  the  wheat  harvest  was  nearly  completed  on  the  14th  of
May  ;  while  here  at  Tiberias  it  was  in  about  the  same  state  of
advance  only  on  the  19th  of  June.  This  diJBference  may  not
improbably  arise,  in  part,  from  the  greater  depth  and  breadth  of
the  Ghor  around  Jericho,  shut  in  as  it  is  by  far  loftier  and  more
naked  mountains  ;  and  then,  too,  from  the  more  extensive  and
powerful  reflection  of  the  sun's  rays  from  those  mountains,  and
from  the  broad  tracts  of  desert  sand  which  occupy  the  southern
portions  of  the  great  valley.

The  products  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  around  Tiberias,  are
not  unlike  those  near  Jericho  ;  but  plants  of  a  more  southern
clime  are  here  less  predominant.  Scattered  palm  trees  are
seen  ;  and  further  north,  at  least  around  Mejdel,  the  thorny
Nubk  appears  again  ;  as  also  the  oleander,  which  we  had  found
in  such  abundance  in  and  near  Wady  Miisa.*  Indigo  is  also
raised,  but  in  no  great  quantity.^  The  usual  productions  of  the
fields  are  wheat,  barley,  millet,  tobacco,  melons,  grapes,  and  a
few  vegetables.  The  melons  raised  along  the  shores  of  the  lake
of  Tiberias,  are  said  to  be  of  the  finest  quahty,  and  to  be  in
great  demand  at  'Akka  and  Damascus,  where  that  fruit  ripens
nearly  a  month  later. ^ — The  main  formation  along  the  lake  is
everywhere  limestone  ;  yet  around  Tiberias,  and  as  one  ap-
proaches it  from  above,  black  basaltic  stones  are  found  scattered
upon  the  surface  of  the  ground,  having  a  volcanic  appearance  ;
indeed  the  walls  and  houses  of  Tiberias  are  in  part  buUt  of
them.^     Towards  the  north  end  of  the  lake,  as  we  shall  see,

'  See  above,  Vol.  11.  p.  183 ;  also  Note  and  that  several  people  had  it  in  their  gar

XXX,  end  of  Vol.  I.  den? ;  ibid.    Schubert  searched  for  it ;  but

'  For  the  N'ubk  see  above,  Vol  I.  pp.  could  neither  find  it  nor  hear  of  it ;  Reise

505,  5G0.  For  the  oleander,  see  Vol  IL  p.  III.  p.  238.

126.  »  Burckhardt  p.  321.    Schnbert  111  p.

'  Tomer  p.  141.    Comp.  above,  Vol  I.  232.    Dr  Clarke  remarked  b.valtic  pbe-

p.  561.  nomena  between  Kefr  Kenna  and  Tur'dn  ;

*  Burckhardt  pj  323.    Bnrckhardt  was  p.  447;  comp.  p.  46 1.  4to.    Indeed,  the

told,  that  the  ahrab  which  prodaces  the  stones  all  along  that  plain  are  volcanic
balsam  of  Mecca,  thrives  well  at  Tiberias,

iiL  264-206

JCSK  19.]

CLIMATE.

FOUNDED  BY  HEROD.

389

they  are  much  more  fi-equent,  and  thickly  cover  the  ground  in
Bomo  places.

The  earliest  notice  we  have  of  the  city  of  Tiherias,  is  in
the  Xew  Testanient and  then  in  Joseph  us.  The  latter  re-
lates, that  the  city  was  founded  by  Herodes  Antipas  on  the
lake  of  Gennesareth,  near  the  warm  baths  called  Ammaus  ;
and  was  so  named  in  honour  of  his  friend  and  patron  the  em-
peror Tiberius.*  The  Jewish  historian  gives  no  hint  of  its  being
built  up  on  the  site  of  any  former  place  ;  but  the  Eabbins,  with
one  voice,  regard  it  as  occupying  the  place  of  the  Kakkath  of
the  Old  Testament  ;  and  Jerome  affirms  that  it  was  anciently
called  Chinnereth.^  The  first  hypothesis  seems  to  have  arisen,
merely  from  the  juxtaposition  of  the  names  Eakkath  and  Ham-
math  in  the  biblical  text,  the  latter  of  which  the  Eabbins  held
to  be  at  the  warm  baths  ;  *  the  second  is  mentioned  by  J erome
himself  merely  as  a  report.^  Both  are  obviously  mere  conjec-
tures, which  can  neither  be  proved  nor  directly  disproved  ;  though
the  cii-cumstance  mentioned  by  Josephus,  that  there  were  here
many  ancient  sepulchres,  so  that  the  new  city  could  not  be  in-
habited by  Jews  without  becoming  ceremonially  polluted,  seems
to  show  that  no  town  had  formerly  occupied  the  precise  spot.*

Herod  collected  inhabitants  from  aU  quarters  for  has  new
city,  and  granted  them  many  privileges  ;  he  built  here  a  royal
palace,  which  was  afterwards  destroyed  in  a  popular  tumult  ;
and  favoured  the  city  so  far,  that  Tiberias  became  the  capital
of  Galilee,  and  was  not  improbably  Herod's  chief  residence.''
During  his  life,  and  for  some  time  afterwards,  it  took  rank  of
the  earher  Sepphoris  ;  at  a  later  period  it  was  bestowed  by  Xero
with  a  part  of  Gahlee  on  the  younger  Agrippa,  who  restored
Sepphoris  to  its  former  rank  as  the  chief  city  of  the  district.'
In  the  J ewish  war  which  ended  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,
Tiberias  bore  also  a  conspicuous  part  ;  especially  during  the
command  of  Josephus  in  Galilee,  who  fortified  the  city,  and  had
frequent  occasion  to  visit  it.'  At  that  time  there  was  here  an
immense  J evdsh  proseucJia,  a  house  or  place  of  prayer,  in  which
he  convened  a  public  assembly  of  the  people.'"  The  city,  as
also  Tarichfea,  still  belonged  to  Agrippa  ;  and  Vespasian  under-

'  John  6,  1.  23.  21,  1.  »  Jos.  Ant.  18.  2.  3.  Eosenmiiller  Bibl.

'  Jos.  Ant  18.  2.  3.  B.  J.  2.  9.  1.  Geogr.  II.  ii.  p.  75  sq.

'  Josh.  19,  35.    Lightfoot  0pp.  IL  p.  '  Jos.  ^\jit.  ibid.— Vita  §  12,  13.— Ibid.

223.— Hieron.  Comm.  in  Ezech.  48,  21,  §  9.  Bachiene  Th.  H.  §  693.  Kosenmul-

"  Tiberias  quae  olim  appellabatnr  Chene-  ler  1.  c.  p.  76.

reth."    Oiiomast.  art.  Chenrurcth.  Comp.  •  Jos.  Vita  §  9,  45,  65.     Antiq.  20.  8.

Deut.  3,  17.  Josh.  11,  2.  1  K.  15,  20.  4.    B.  J.  2.  13.  2.    See  above  under  Sef-

*  Josh.  19,  35.    See  above,  p.  385.  furieh,  p.  345.

'  Onomast.  art.  Chmncrcth  :  "  Tiberia-  «  Joseph.  Vita  §  8  sq.  12  sq.  17  sq.  32  sq.

dem  fernnt^  hoc  primum  appellatnm  no-  53  sq.  G3  sq. — B.  J.  2.  20.  6.

mine."   This  passage  is  added  by  Jerome  ;  "  Id.  Vita  §  54.
Eusebius  does  not  mention  the  rumour.

Vol.  II.— 33*  iii.  266,  267

390

TIBERIAS.

[Sec.  XV.

took  to  subdue  them  again  to  his  allegiance?  As  lie  approached
Tiberias,  the  principal  inhabitants  went  out  to  meet  him  and
made  their  submission,  imploring  peace.  This  was  granted,  in
accordance  with  the  wish  of  Agrippa  ;  and  the  Koman  army  en-
tered and  occupied  the  town.'  They  afterwards  erected  a  forti-
fied camp  at  Ammaus,  probably  not  far  south  of  the  warm
baths  ;  which  continued  to  be  the  head  quarters  during  the  siege
of  Tarich^a.  That  city  was  captured  by  troops  under  the
command  of  Titus  ;  but  great  numbers  of  the  inhabitants  hav-
ing escaped  by  water  in  their  boats  and  smaU  craft,  Vespasian
caused  boats  to  be  built  in  order  to  pursue  them  on  the  lake.
A  naval  battle  took  place,  in  which  the  Jews  were  totally  over-
thrown. In  this  lake  fight,  and  in  the  capture  of  the  city,  the
slain  amounted  to  six  thousand  five  hundred  persons.  Twelve
hundred  more,  who  were  either  too  old  or  too  young  to  bear  arms
or  to  labour,  were  put  to  death  in  cold  blood  in  the  stadium  of
Tiberias.^

It  was  probably  in  consequence  of  this  voluntary  submission
of  the  city  of  Tiberias  to  Vespasian,  that  the  Jews,  after  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  in  still  later  times,  were  not  only
permitted  to  reside  here  unmolested,  but  enjoyed  many  privi-
leges. Indeed,  the  terrible  catastrophes,  which  both  under
Titus  and  Adrian  drove  them  from  the  south  of  Palestine,  and
cut  off"  their  approach  to  Judea  and  J erusalem,  seem  not  to  have
fallen  upon  them  with  a  like  exterminating  power  in  Galilee.'
They  continued  to  occupy  this  district  in  great  numbers  ;  and
Epijihanius,  himself  a  native  of  Palestine,  relates  in  the  fourth
century,  that  especially  Tiberias,  Sepphoris,  Nazareth,  and  Ca-
pernaum, had  long  been  inhabited  exclusively  by  Jews  ;  and
none  of  any  other  nation,  neither  heathen,  nor  Samaritan,  nor
Christian,  was  permitted  to  dwell  among  them.*  Indeed,  in  his
age,  or  shortly  before,  they  had  rebelled  against  the  Romans,  and
Sepphoris  been  laid  in  ruins.^

Tiberias  itself  appears  to  have  remained  undisturbed  during
all  these  commotions,  ending  in  the  overthrow  of  the  Jewish
commonwealth.  Coins  of  the  city  are  still  extant,  bearing  the
names  of  the  emperors  Tiberius,  Claudius,  Trajan,  Adrian,
and  Antoninus  Pius.'  It  would  seem  too  that  Adrian  under-
took here  the  building  of  a  large  temple  ;  which,  being  left
unfinished,  bore  afterwards  the  name  of  the  Adrianium.'  At

»  Jos.  B.  J.  3.  9.  7,  8.  '  See  also  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  377.

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  3.  10.  1,  5,  6,  9,  10.  '  Eckhcl  Doctr.  Numni.  Tom.  TIL  p.

Comp.  4.  1 .  3.  426.  Mionnet  Medailles  Ant.  Tom.  V.  pw

»  See  above,  Vol.  I.  pp.  367-3G9,  371.  483  sq.

*  Epiphan.  iidv.  H.-eres.  1.  11.    0pp.  T.  '  i:pii)bnn.  adv.  Hser.  1.  12.  p.  136.  R»-

I.  p.  13(;.  Pai-Ls  1022.    Reland  Palajst.  p.  land  I'al.  1039.

1038  8q.

iii.  267-269

Jmre  19]

EAELT  HEBREW  SCHOOL.

391

any  rate,  Galilee,  arid  especially  Tiberias,  became  the  cbief  seat
of  the  Jews  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  their  expul-
sion from  Judea.  The  national  council  or  Sanhedrim,  accord-
inof  to  Jewish  accounts,  which  at  first  had  been  transferred  to
Jabneh,  came  after  several  removes  to  Sepphoris  and  then  to
Tiberias.'  This  was  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century,
under  the  presidency  of  the  celebrated  Rabbi  Judah  Hakkodesh  ;
and  from  this  time,  Tiberias  became  for  several  centuries  the
central  point  of  Jewish  learning.

Here  their  most  esteemed  Rabbins  taught  in  the  syna-
gogues ;  and  a  school  was  formed  for  the  cultivation  of  their
law  and  language.  As  head  of  this  school.  Rabbi  Judah  col-
lected and  committed  to  writing  the  great  mass  of  Jewish  tra-
ditional law,  now  known  as  the  Mishnah  ;  an  immense  work,
which  was  completed,  according  to  the  best  accounts,  about
A.  D.  190,  or  as  some  say  in  A.  D.  220.*  Rabbi  Judah  died
soon  after  ;  and  with  him  faded  the  chief  glory  of  the  academy.
The  latter  however  continued  to  flourish  more  or  less  for  several
centuries  ;  although  the  school  of  Babylon  soon  became  its  rival,
and  at  a  later  period  eclipsed  its  fame.  In  the  third  century
(A.  D.  230-270)  Rabbi  Jochanan  compiled  here  the  Gemara,  a
supplement  and  commentary  to  the  Mishnah,  now  usually
known  as  the  Jerusalem  Talmud.^  In  the  same  school  is  sup-
posed to  have  arisen  the  great  critical  collection  known  as  the
Masora,  intended  to  mark  and  preserve  the  purity  of  the  He-
brew text  of  the  Old  Testament.*  In  the  days  of  Jerome,  the
school  of  Tiberias  continued  (^.pparently  to  flourish  ;  for  that
father  employed  one  of  its  most  admired  teachers  as  his  in-
structor ia  Hebrew.^  After  this  time  there  seem  to  exist  no
further  certain  accounts  respecting  it.

Already,  under  the  reign  of  Constantino,  the  exclusive  pos-
session, which  according  to  Epiphanius  the  Jews  had  held  of
Tiberias  and  other  towns  of  Galilee,  was  broken  in  upon  ;  and
J osephus,  a  Jew  who  had  embraced  Christianity,  was  empowered
by  that  emperor  to  erect  churches  in  Tiberias,  Sepphoris,  Naza-
reth, Capernaum,  and  other  neighbouiing  villages.    In  Tiberias,

'  Ligbtfoot.  0pp.  Tom.  11.  p.  141-145.  and  minute ;  and  is  more  esteemed  by  the

Ultraj.  1699.  Jews.    Buxt.  Tiber,  p.  24r-28.  Ligbtfoot

■■'  Buxtorf  Tiberias  p.  19-24.    Ligbtfoot  L  c.  p.  149.

0pp.  T.  n.  p.  145. — See  in  general  Bas-  '  Buxtorf  Tiber,  p.  28  sq.    Ligbtfoot  1.

nage  Hist,  des  Juifs,  Tom.  IIL  p.  564.  c.  p.  149.

Rotterd.  1707.  ^  Hieron.  in  PkeC  ad  libr.  Paralipom.

'  Buxtorf  Tiber,  p.  23.    Ligbtfoot  1.  c.  ad  Domnionem  et  Rogat.  0pp.  Tom.  I.  p.

p.  145. — The  Gemara  or  Talmud  of  Baby-  1418.  ed.  Mart.  "De  Tiberiade  quendam

Ion  was  the  product  of  the  Babylonian  Legis  doctorem,  qui  apud  Hebraeos  admi-

school,  and  contains  their  commentary  and  ratione  habebatur,   assumpsi,  et  contuli

eupplenient  to  the  Mishnah.    It  is  referred  cum  eo  a  vertice,  quod  aiunt,  ad  extremum

to  the  sixth  century ;  is  much  more  full  nnguem,"  etc.

iu.  269,  270

392

TIBERIAS.

[Sec.  X7.

he  chose  for  the  site  of  the  church  the  unfiftished  temple  above
mentioned,  called  the  Adrianium  ;  and  being  hindered  in  hia
proceedings  by  magic  arts,  he  was  able  to  overcome  them  by  a
miracle,  which  led  to  the  conversion  of  many  Jews.'  Epipha-
nius  sjieaks  at  the  same  time  of  a  bishop  of  Tiberias  f  but  we
have  no  other  notice  of  any  such  dignitary,  until  the  name  of
John,  bishop  of  Tiberias,  appears  among  the  subscriptions  of
the  Robber  synod  of  Ephesus,  A.  D.  449,  and  again  at  the  coun-
cil of  Chalcedon  A.  D.  451.'  Another  John  appears  in  A.  D.
518  ;  George  in  A.  D.  553  ;  and  a  bishop  BasiHus  is  named  so
late  as  the  eighth  century.*

Justinian,  in  the  sixth  century,  rebuilt  the  walls  of  Tiberias  ;
and  the  city  is  barely  mentioned  by  Antoninus  Martyr.^  On
the  approach  of  the  Persian  army  under  Chosroes  against  Jeru-
salem, in  A.  D.  614,  the  Jews  of  Tiberias  and  the  neighbouring
parts  of  Gahlee  are  said  to  have  joined  the  expedition  ;  and  to
them  Eutychius  ascribes  the  chief  slaughter  of  the  Christians,  on
the  capture  of  the  Holy  City.'  The  emperor  Heraclius,  on  his
return  from  Persia,  is  reported  to  have  passed  through  Tiberias
on  his  way  to  Jerusalem,  bearing  the  true  cross.^  With  the  rest
of  Palestine,  both  Tiberias  and  Galilee  in  A.  D.  637  yielded  to
the  arms  of  the  Khalif  Omar  and  passed  under  the  Muhamme-
dan  dominion.  The  only  further  notice  of  the  city  before  the
crusades,  seems  to  be  that  of  WilUbald,  about  A.  D.  765,  who
describes  it  as  then  containing  many  churches  and  a  synagogue
of  the  Jews.'

Very  soon  after  the  crusaders  obtained  possession  of  the  Holy
Land,  the  district  of  Galilee,  as  we  have  seen,  was  given  by
Godfrey  of  Bouillon  as  a  fief  to  Tancred  ;  who  subdued  Tiberias,
and  erected  here  a  church,  as  well  as  others  in  neighbouring
places.'  The  city  was  also  made  the  seat  of  a  Latin  bishop,  the
only  suffragan  of  the  archbishopric  of  Nazareth  ;  and  the  title
continued  in  the  Latin  church  for  nearly  two  centuries.'"  The
city  appears  to  have  remained  without  interruption  in  the  pos-
session of  the  Christians  until  A.  D.  1187  ;  and  the  assault
upon  it  by  Saladin  in  that  year,  became  the  immediate  occasion
of  the  great  battle  of  Hattin,  already  described,  so  fatal  to  the

'  Epipban.  adv.  Hiier.  1.  4-12.  pp.  127-  "  See  Vol.  I.  p.  387.  n.  1.

137.  '  Anastasius  Biblioth.  p.  101.  ed.  Paris.

»  Ibid.  1.  4.  p.  128.  See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  388.

'  Labb.  Concil.  Tom.  IV.  pp.  118,  267,  "  Hodoepor.  §  IG,  "  Ibi  sunt  mulfeB  ec-

312.  Ibid.  pp.  82,  328,  460,  etc.  Le  Quien  clesia;  et  synngogoe  Judajonim."

Oriens  Cbrist.  III.  p.  708.  "  See  above,  p.  341.    This  was  very

*  Le  Quicn  ibid.    lie  had  previously  probably  the  present  church  of  St.  Peter,

been  stationed  at  Jericho  ;  comp.  above,  near  the  shore,  as  above  described,  p.  382.

Vol.  I.  p.  .'560.  n.  10.  So  too  Morison,  p.  203.

Procop.  de  yiidif.  Just.  5.  9.  Anton.  See  above,  p.  342.    Le  Quieu  Orieng

Martyr.  Itin.  §  7.  Chr.  UI.  p.  1302.
iii.  270,  271

Junk  19.]

MIDDLE  AGES.     LATER  HISTORY.

393

Christian  name  and  power.  The  castle  of  Tiberias  surrendered
the  day  after  the  conflict.'  Benjamin  of  Tudela  had  visited  the
phxce  some  twenty  years  before,  and  found  here  only  fifty  Jews
with  a  Rabbi  at  their  head  ;  he  speaks  also  of  a  Jewish  ceme-
tery, in  which,  among  others,  was  the  tomb  of  E.  Jochanan.'^ — •
At  a  later  period,  A.  D.  1240,  Tiberias  reverted  for  a  time  into
the  hands  of  the  Christians,  in  consequence  of  a  treaty  with  the
Sultan  of  Damascus  ;  but  in  A.  D.  1247,  while  in  the  possession
of  Odo  of  Montbeliard,  it  was  again  subdued  by  the  troops  of
the  Sultan  of  Egypt,  and  remained  thenceforth  under  the  Mu-
hammedan  dominion.^

From  that  time  onwards  until  the  seventeenth  century,  we
know  little  of  Tiberias.  Travellers  in  the  fourteenth  century
speak  of  it  as  a  small  place  ;  and  Arabian  writers  of  the  same
age,  who  mention  it,  describe  chiefly  the  warm  baths.''  About
the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  Bonifacius  relates,  evidently
on  hearsay,  that  Tiberias  was  no  longer  habitable,  on  account
of  the  multitude  of  serpents  ;  a  report  which  Zuallart  and  Coto-
vicus  repeat  near  the  close  of  the  century  ;  but  which  Quares-
mius  takes  pains  expressly  to  contradict.'  The  latter  writer  is
the  first  to  describe  the  city  correctly  ;  the  inhabitants,  he  says,
were  Arabs  of  the  worst  character  ;  and  the  ancient  church  was
then  used  as  a  stall  for  cattle.  Other  travellers  in  the  same
century,  and  even  later,  speak  of  the  church  in  the  same  man-
ner, and  describe  the  town  as  in  ruins  and  scarcely  inhabited.'
A  rich  Jewess,  it  was  said,  had  built  up  the  walls,  in  order  that
the  Jews  might  reside  there  ;  but  they  were  very  soon  driven
out  again  by  the  Turks.''

About  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Tiberias  made
part  of  the  domain  of  the  noted  Sheikh  Dhaher  el-'Omar,  whose
history  is  related  by  Niebuhr  and  Volney.'  His  family  belonged
to  the  Bedawin  on  the  north  of  the  lake,  along  the  upper

•  See  above,  pp.  373,  377.

'  Itin.  I  p.  87.  The  Jewish  Itinerary
in  Hettinger's  Cippi  Hebraic!  mentions
here  also  this  tomb,  and  especially  that  of
R.  Akiba  with  24,000  of  his  disciples  ;  p.
54.  Ed  2.  See  also  the  Jewish  Itineraries
published  bv  Carmoly,  Brux.  1847,  pp.
130,  185,  257,  385,  445.  Comp.  Light-
foot  0pp.  II.  p.  144. — Burckhardt  heard
of  this  latter  tomb ;  but  the  number  of
disciples  had  dwindled  to  14,000  ;  p.  328.

"  Hugo  Plagoii  in  Martene  et  Durand
Tom.  V.  pp.  722,  731.  (Comp.  Marin.
Sanut.  pp.  215,  218)  Wilken  Gesch.  der
Kr.  VI.  pp.  GOO,  (i52.  Comment,  de  Bell.
Cnic  pp.  201,  205.

*  \V.  do  Baldensel  in  Basnage  Thes.  IV.
p.  355.    Sir  J.  Maundeville  p.  115.  Lond.

1839.  AbulfedEE  Tab.  Syr.  p.  84.  Ibn
el-Wardi  ibid.  p.  184.  Yakut  in  Schult.
Ind.  in  Vit.  Salad,  art.  Tiberias.

^  Bonif.  de  perenn.  eultu  Terr.  Sanct.  in
Quaresmius  II.  p.  864 ;  comp.  p.  465.
Zuallart  p.  250.  Cotov.  Itin.  p.  359.

'  Elucid.  IL  pp.  864,  865.  D'Ar\-ieux
Memoires  IL  p.  276.  Paris  173.5.  Von
Troilo  pp.  429,  430.  Morisou  p.  203.  So
too  Van  Egmond  and  Heyman,  Reizen  IL
p.  31.

'  D'Arvieux  1.  c.  Thevenot  Voyages
IL  p.  676.  Amst.  1727.  Yet  this  appears
to  be  only  an  old  story  revamped ;  the
same  is  mentioned  by  Fiirer  of  Haimen-
dorf  in  1566,  p.  278.

"  Niebuhr  Reisebeschr.  Ill  p.  72  sq.
Volney  Voyage  c.  xxv,  Tom.  II.  p.  84  sq.

iii.  272,  273

394

FROM  TIBERIAS  TO  SAFED.

[Sec.  XV.

Jordan  ;  and  seems  to  have  acquired  considerable  power  in  the
neighbouring  region.  On  the  death  of  his  father  'Omar,  he
succeeded  to  the  possession  of  Safed  ;  to  which  he  afterwards
added  Tiberias  and  Nazareth.  Pococke  found  him,  in  A.  D.
1738,  erecting  a  fort  on  a  hill  north  of  Tiberias,  and  strength-
ening the  old  walls  with  buttresses  inside  ;  he  being  at  that
time  in  strife  with  the  Pasha  of  Damascus.'  Hasselquist  in  A.
D.  1751  relates,  that  he  had  recently  built  up  walls  around  the
city,  and  also  erected  a  castle  on  a  hill  outside.'^  In  A.  D,
1749,  Sheikh  Dhaher  by  a  sudden  march  got  possession  of
'Akka,  which  he  fortified  ;  and  here  maintained  himself  almost
as  an  independent  chief  for  many  years,  against  aU  the  attacks
and  intrigues  of  the  surrounding  Pashas.  In  A.  D.  1775,  at
the  age  of  ninety  years,  he  was  still  able  to  mount  a  fiery  horse  ;
but  a  fleet  being  sent  against  him  in  that  year  by  the  Porte,  he
was  entrapped  by  fraud,  and  his  head  sent  to  Constantinople.^

The  French  had  possession  of  Tiberias  for  a  short  time,  dur-
ing the  invasion  of  Syria  by  Napoleon  in  A.  D.  1799.*

.Wednesday,  June  20th.  It  had  been  our  plan  to  proceed
from  Tiberias  along  the  lake  northwards,  and  so  by  the  Jordan
and  the  'shore  of  el-Huleh  to  Banias.  Here  we  proposed  to
search  out  aU  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,  and  then  take  the
route  up  Wady  et-Teim  by  Hasbeiya  and  Rasheiya  to  Damas-
cus. From  this  city  we  hoped  to  cross  Anti-Lebanon  to  Ba'al-
bek,  and  so  by  way  of  the  cedars  over  Lebanon  to  Beirut.  For
all  this  we  still  had  a  sufficient  number  of  days  at  our  com-
mand. But  the  time  had  now  come,  when  the  disturbances  in
the  north  of  Palestine  were  to  alfect  our  plans,  and  compel  us
to  change  our  intended  course.  As  we  yesterday  visited  the
warm  springs,  we  found  there  a  special  messenger  with  a  letter
from  our  friend  Abu  Nasir  of  Nazareth,  whom  we  had  left  only
on  Monday  morning  ;  informing  us,  that  soon  after  our  depar-
ture news  had  come,  that  the  rebel  Druzes  from  the  Lejah  had
made  an  inroad  upon  Hasbeiya,  seized  the  place  by  surprise,
and  killed  the  governor  and  all  the  Turkish  and  Christian  in-
habitants. In  consequence,  not  only  this  road,  but  also  that  by
the  bridge  and  Kuneitirah,  had  become  unsafe  ;  inasmuch  as  the
rebels  were  on  the  look  out  for  caravans  and  travellers,  whom
they  were  said  not  only  to  rob,  but  also  to  murder.

'  Pococke  Descr.  of  the  East,  11.  i.  p.  '  Hasselquist  Reise  pp.  181,  182.

69. — The  niins  spoken  of  by  Burckhardt  '  Volney  1.  c.  p.  87.  Niebuhr  1.  c.  p.  76.

on  the  north  of  the  town  are  perhaps  re-  '  See  Clarke's  Travels  etc.  p.  479.  4ta

mains  of  this  fort ;  see  above,  p.  383.  etc.  etc.
a  6.

iil  273-275

June  20.]

RISING  OF  THE  DRUZES.

395

Wc  did  not  doubt  but  that  this  intelligence  was  veiy
greatly  exaggerated  ;  yet  as,  on  inquiry  in  Tiberias,  we  learned
that  similar  accounts  had  been  also  received  from  the  eastern
side  of  the  lake,  we  thought  it  more  prudent  to  obtain  further
information,  before  we  ventured  to  proceed  directly  towards
Damascus.  It  was  evident  that  Abu  Nasir  had  considered  the
source  of  his  intelligence  as  trustworthy  ;  for  his  solicitude  led
him  to  despatch  a  special  messenger  on  our  account ;  a  kindness
which  another  native  would  hardly  have  rendered  to  us.  We
concluded  therefore  to  remain  this  day  encamped  at  Tiberias  ;
hire  the  little  sail  boat,  and  visit  all  the  places  along  the  western
shore  as  far  north  as  to  the  entrance  of  the  Jordan  ;  and  the
next  day  proceed  directly  to  Safed,  where  we  might  hope  to  ob-
tain later  and  more  authentic  information.

Such  was,  and  such  is,  tliis  land  of  wars  and  rumours  of
wars  !  Eeports  fly  current  from  mouth  to  mouth,  of  which  no
one  can  learn  whether  they  are  true  or  false  ;  suspense,  agita-
tion, and  anxiety  prevail  continually  ;  without  the  possibility  of
ascertaining  whether  or  not  there  actually  exists  the  slightest
cause  of  inquietude.  In  the  present  instance,  the  hopes  and
wishes  of  the  Christian  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  were  strongly
on  the  side  of  the  Egyptian  troops.  "  May  God  give  victory  to
our  Effendi,"  was  the  concluding  prayer  of  Abu  Nasir's  letter  to
us  ;  and  this  wish  was  not  unnatriral,  although  the  war  itself
was  totally  unjust  and  conducted  with  horrible  atrocity.  The
Christians  were  anxious  for  the  sviccess  of  Ibrahim,  because  this
was  connected  with  the  maintenance  of  the  Egyptian  govern-
ment, in  opposition  to  the  Turkish  ;  under  which,  for  the  first
time,  they  were  treated  as  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  Muham-
medans,  and  enjoyed  rights  and  a  security  in  person  and  proper-
ty, which  they  had  never  known  before.

We  rose  early  this  morning,  in  the  hope  of  a  pleasant
excursion  upon  the  lake,  so  often  honoured  by  the  presence  of
our  Saviour.  But  a  strong  southwest  wind  had  been  blowing  all
night  and  stiU  continued  ;  so  that  the  boat  had  not  returned,
nor  could  it  be  expected.  Under  these  circumstances,  we  deter-
mined to  set  otf  at  once,  and  proceed  to  day  along  the  shore  of
the  lake  to  the  entrance  of  the  Jordan  ;  and  thence  to  morrow
to  Safed.  We  started  accordingly,  following  along  the  western
wall,  which  presented  a  melancholy  spectacle  of  ruin  ;  and
leaving  the  gate  at  8.20.  The  hill  we  had  descended  yester-
day, comes  quite  down  to  the  shore  on  the  north  of  the  town  ;
and  the  path  leads  along  its  steep  side,  at  some  distance  above
the  water.  At  about  forty  minutes  from  Tiberias,  a  small
Wady  breaks  down  through  to  the  lake,  the  upper  entrance  of

iii.  275,  276

396

FROM  TIBERIAS  TO  SAFED.

[Sec.  XV.

whicli  we  had  yesterday  passed  in  coming  from  Hattin. '  Down
this  Wady  comes  the  main  Damascus  road  from  Mount  Tabor  ;
and  then  follows  the  shore  as  far  as  to  Khan  Minyeh.

Here,  at  the  mouth  of  the  little  Wady,  is  a  small  space  of
arable  plain  along  the  shore,  on  which  were  a  few  patches  of
vegetables,  with  a  miserable  hut  or  two  for  the  keepers.  On  the
lower  part,  just  by  the  beach,  are  five  or  six  fountains  near  each
other,  one  of  which  is  very  large  and  copious  ;  the  water  rushing
forth  with  violence.  The  water  is  clear,  and  slightly  brackish  ;
the  temperature  was  about  the  same  as  that  of  the  air,  not  far
from  80°  F,  The  pkce  bears  the  name  of  'Ain  el-Barideh,
"  Cold  spring  ; "  in  distinction  from  the  hot  sources  on  the  south
of  Tiberias.  We  saw  here  for  the  first  time  a  kind  of  struc-
ture, which  we  are  not  fully  able  to  explain.  Each  fountain
had  once  been  enclosed  by  a  round  reservoir  of  stone,  ten  or
twelve  feet  deep,  perpendicular  on  the  inside,  and  fifteen  or
twenty  feet  in  diameter  ;  only  two  of  these  are  still  in  tolerable
preservation.  The  obvious  purpose  of  these  structures  was,  to
raise  and  retain  the  water  at  a  considerable  height  above  the
fountain  ;  on  the  same  principle  as  the  reservoirs  at  the  celebra-
ted Has  el-'Ain  near  Tyre.  But  whether  it  was  thus  raised  for
bathing,  or  for  irrigation,  or  for  other  uses,  it  is  difficult  to  de-
cide. The  former  is  not  impossible  ;  and  the  waters  may  an-
ciently have  been  used  in  some  connection  with  the  hot  baths  ;
though  we  did  not  learn  that  any  medicinal  virtue  is  attributed
to  them  at  the  present  day.  The  reservoirs  may  or  may  not  be
of  ancient  workmanship  ;  there  seemed  to  be  no  distinctive
marks  about  them.^  Upon  the  plain  grow  oleanders  and  trees
of  the  Nubk.

Beyond  this  spot,  the  mountain  again  comes  down  to  the
shore  ;  and  the  path  leads,  as  before,  along  its  side  above  the
water.  At  9|-  o'clock  another  large  plain  opened  before  us  ;
and  just  here  lies  el-Mejdel,  a  miserable  little  Muslim  village,
looking  much  like  a  ruin,  though  exhibiting  no  marks  of  anti-
quity. From  Tiberias  hither,  or  rather  from  beyond  the  hot
baths,  the  general  direction  of  the  coast  is  about  from  S.  E.  to
N.  W.  But  from  this  point  onwards  the  coast  trends  off
towards  the  N.  N,  E.  while  the  hills  retire  in  a  curve,  leaving  a
beautiful  plain  an  hour  in  length  and  about  twenty  minutes  in
breadth,  in  the  form  of  an  irregular  parallelogram,  verging
almost  to  a  crescent.  In  the  southwest,  the  mountain  forming
the  ridge  or  step  between  this  plain  and  the  Sahil  Hattin  is
steep,  and  not  less  than  three  or  four  hundred  feet  high.  The

'  See  above,  p.  379.  the  exiifrgoratcd  account  of  Riickinjihuin,

'  Irby  and  Munffonatl.  Corr.  XVIII.  p.  348.  Rei-  et-Tabighah,  h:is  ab-eady  sometimes  bieen

sen  I.  p.  314.    The  name  stinds  wpon  his  reported  as   Bethsaida  ;    so   Fiirer  von

map.      Burckhardt's    J  ravels,    p.    318.  Haimendorf  in  1566;    p.  277.  Xumb.

Buckingham's  account  of  et-Tabighah  is  1046.    Elliott's  Travels,  Lond.  1839.  VoL

drawn  chiefly  from  his  own  imagination  ;  11.  p.  348.
Travels  pp.  4C8,  469.  4to.

ui.  297,  298

Jvsz  20.]

TELL  HUM.

407

shore,  the  only  one  now  standing  ;  on  a  nearer  approach,  it  is
seen  to  have  been  laid  up  in  later  times,  with  the  hewn  stones,
columns,  and  pilasters  of  former  buildings.'  Not  far  off  are  the
prostrate  ruins  of  an  edifice,  which,  for  expense  of  labour  and
ornament,  surpasses  any  thing  we  had  yet  seen  in  Palestine.

The  extent  of  the  foundations  of  this  structure,  is  no  longer
definitely  to  be  made  out.  We  measured  one  hundred  and  five
feet  along  the  northern  wall,  and  eighty  feet  along  the  western  ;
perhaps  this  was  their  whole  length.  Within  the  space  thus
enclosed  and  just  aroimd,  are  strewed,  in  utter  confusion,  numer-
ous columns  of  compact  limestone,  with  beautifiil  Corinthian
capitals,  sculptured  entablatures,  ornamented  friezes,  and  the
like.  The  pedestals  of  the  columns  are  often  stUl  in  their  plac?,
though  sometimes  overturned  and  removed.  The  columns  are
large,  but  of  no  great  length.  Here  we  found,  for  the  first  time,
the  singularity  of  double  columns  ;  that  is,  two  attached  shafts,
with  capitals  and  base,  cut  from  the  same  solid  block.  The
shafts  are  parallel,  showing  that  they  were  not  intended  to  form
the  comer  of  a  colonnade.  The  same  singularity  is  seen  on  a
much  larger  scale,  in  some  of  the  immense  Syenite  columns  of
the  ancient  church  in  Tyre.  Another  peculiarity  here,  consists
in  several  blocks  of  stone,  nine  feet  long  by  half  that  width,  and
of  considerable  thickness,  on. one  side  of  which  are  sculptured
pannels  with  ornamental  work,  now  defaced.  They  have  much
the  appearance  of  a  stone  door  ;  but  have  no  mark  of  having
been  suspended,  and  were  mo'-e  probably  employed  as  pilasters,
or  perhaps  as  pannels,  in  the  ornamented  wall.

The  stones  of  this  edifice  were  large  ;  and  the  whole  must
once  have  been  an  elegant  structure.  The  material  is  every-
where compact  limestone  ;  unless  some  of  the  blocks  may  be
regarded  as  passing  over  into  a  coarse  marble.  The  character  of
the  building  it  is  difficult  to  determine.  We  could  discern  no
connection  of  the  foundations  with  the  shore  ;  and  could  only
regard  the  structure  as  having  been  either  a  church  or  a  heathen
temple.  But  the  only  distinctive  mark  (if  such  it  be)  in  favour
of  the  former  supposition,  was  the  circumstance,  that  the  longest
direction  of  the  building  appears  to  have  been  from  west  to
east.  The  confusion  is  too  great  and  hopeless,  to  admit  of  any
certainty.  Some  sUght  excavations  had  recently  been  made
among  these  ruins  ;  we  could  not  learn  by  whom  or  for  what
purpose.  The  foundations  were  thus  laid  open  in  spots  ;  but
not  enough  to  make  out  the  plan.-

'  This  is  probably  the  "small  church       '  This  structare  we  found,  in  1S52,  to
of    white  marble "   of  which    Pococke    be  of  Jewish  origin ;  see  VoL  III.  Sect,
gpeaks.    His  "round  port  f  r small boata"    VIH,  under  May  18th.
we  did  not  remark.    VoL  II.  i.  p.  72.

iii.  298,  299

408

FROM  TIBERIAS  TO  SAFED.

[Sec.  XV.

The  whole  place  is  desolate  and  mournM.  The  bright
waters  of  the  lake  still  break  upon  its  shore,  and  lave  the  ruins  ;
as  once  they  reflected  the  edifices  and  bore  the  little  fleets  of
what  of  old  was  '  no  mean  city.'  But  the  busy  hum  of  men  is
gone.  A  few  Arabs  only  of  the  Semekiyeh  were  here  encamped
in  tents  ;  and  had  built  up  a  few  hovels  among  the  ruins,  which
they  used  as  magazines.'

That  these  nameless  ruins  should  have  been  taken  for
Capernaum,  was  not  unnatural ;  they  are  obviously  the  remains
of  a  place  of  some  importance,  of  which  it  is  perhaps  no  longer
possible  to  ascertain  the  name.  The  considerations  already
adduced,  which  show  with  certainty  that  Capernaum  was  con-
nected with  the  plain  of  Gennesareth,  prove  conclusively  that
these  ruins,  an  hour  distant  from  that  plain,  cannot  mark  its
site.  Yet  the  opinion  which  regards  them  as  Capernaum  goes
back  for  some  centuries,  but  not,  apparently,  to  the  time  of  the
crusades  ;  it  existed  apparently  along  with  that,  wliich  fixed
the  site  at  Khan  Minyeh.  I  find  the  name  of  Tell  Hum  for
the  first  time  in  Nau,  and  then  in  Pococke  ;  both  of  whom
visited  the  spot,  and  speak  of  it  as  the  place  then  commonly
shown  as  Capernaum.'  The  same  position,  however,  is  thought
by  some  to  be  assigned  to  Capernaum  by  Marinus  Sanutus  in
the  fourteenth  century  ;  while  Brocardus,  on  the  other  hand,
apparently  refers  the  latter  to  Khan  Minyeh.^  The  next  notice
of  Tell  Hum  is  by  Burckhardt,  who  speaks  only  from  hearsay  ;
and  since  his  day  the  spot  has  not  unfrequently  been  visited.^
We  inquired  particularly,  both  of  the  Arabs  encamped  here  and
of  others  along  the  coast,  whether  there  was  now  or  formerly
any  different  name  for  these  ruins  ;  but  they  had  never  heard  of
any  other  than  Tell  Hum.

We  left  this  interesting  spot  at  1.25,  and  soon  crossed  a  dry

'  From  Tell  Hum  the  bearings  were  :  the  same  mountain  ;  his  account  then  an-

Tiberias  S.  20°  W.    Mejdel  S.  45°  W.  swers  to  Khan  Minyeh ;  c.  4.  p.  173.  If

Tell  Hattln  S.  52°  W.  however  the  two  leagues  of  M.  Sanutus

'  Nau  writes   the   name   Telhhoum ;  are  to  be  reckoned  from  the  north  end  of

Voyage  p.  572.    Pococke  has  Telhoue,  the  lake,  as  is  most  probable,  they  reach

and  strangely  enough  supposes  it  to  be  the  to  Khiin  Minyeh;  and  he  then  coincides

site  of  Tarichaja  ;  Vol.  II.  i.  p.  72. — Korte  with  Brocardus.

in  the  same  year  (1738)  seems  to  have       '  Burckhardt  in  returning  from  Jerash,

been  pointed  to  Khau  Minyeh  as  Caper-  speal-;s  of  Tell  Hum  as  on  the  east  side  of

naum ;  p.  309.  the  lake  ;  but  afterwards,  in  passing  from

'  Marin.  Sanut.  p.  247,  "  Cafarnaum  Safed  to  Tiberias,  he  places  it  correctly ;

prope  latus  aquilonare  maris  Galilajx  ad  pp.  270,  319.    Subsequent  vi.sitors  are:

duas  leucas."     If  tliese  "  two  leagues  "  Buckingham  p.  472,  4to.    Berggreu  Reise

are  to  be  estimated  from  a  point  on  the  II.  p.  250.    Monro  II.  p.  8     Elliott  II.  p.

shore  near  Mcjdel,  apparently  assumed  as  341),  etc.    Seetzen  passed  along  this  road,

the  foot  of  the  Mount  of  Beatitudes,  of  but  docs  not  speak  of  Tell  Hum  ;  tliough

■which  the  writer  had  ju.«it  been  speaking;  tlie  name  is  found  on  his  map;  Zach's

they  serve  to  fix  the  site  of  his  Caperiianin  Mmiatl.  Corr.  XVII.  p.  348.    Keisen  I.  p.

at  Tell  Hum.    Brooardus  places  it  at  one  344.
league  from  the  same  place  at  tlie  foot  of

iii.  209-301

iJOL]        TELL  HIDL     E^TTRiJrCE  OF  THE  JOBDAJT.

409

"Wadv,  of  which  we  could  here  learn  no  name  ;  but  fonnd  next
dar,  that  higher  up  towards  the  north,  it  is  caUed  'Ayim  el-
'Abbasy.  The  ground  continues  all  the  wav  to  rise  gently  from
the  lake  towards  the  northwest ;  but  there  Ls  no  high  hill,  no  steep
acclivity,  as  along  the  southern  parts  of  the  lake.  The  surface
is  ererywhere  strewed  with  the  same  black  stones  ;  and  the
path  lies  at  some  distance  from  the  shore.  At  1.50  we  crossed
a  shallow  Wady  near  its  head,  with  a  little  water  rising  from
small  springs  just  by  ;  it  is  called  Wady  el-Eshsheh.  At  2^
oi'clock,  after  an  hour  and  five  minutes  frDm  TeU  Hum,  we
reached  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  just  at  its  entrance  into  the
lake.  The  river  here  runs  near  the  foot  of  the  western  hills,
which  next  its  valley  are  steep,  but  not  high  ;  while  on  the
other  side  of  the  stream,  a  fine  fertile  plain  stretches  oft  along
the  end  of  the  lake,  £)r  an  hour  or  more,  quite  to  the  mijuntaina
which  skirt  the  eastern  shore.

The  estuary  of  the  Jordan  here  presents  an  unusual  appear-
ance. The  strong  southerly  winds  have  driven  up  a  bank  of
sand  before  the  mouth,  which  now  riaes  above  the  water,  and
being  connected  with  the  eastern  shore,  extends  out  for  fifteen
or  twenty  rods  southwest,  forming  a  channel  for  the  river  for
some  distance  along  the  shore  on  that  side.  "We  had  thought
of  CTOfising  the  J ordan  and  encamping  on  the  other  bank  ;  but
as  we  found  the  stream  not  easilv  fordable  with  the  lusci'asre,
and  the  ground  also  at  this  point  was  not  favourable  tor  en-
camping, we  concluded  to  go  to  some  tents  which  we  saw  on  the
western  bank,  eight  or  ten  minutes  higher  up.  An  intervening
marsh,  occupied  in  part  as  a  rice  field,  compelled  us  to  make  a
circuit  quite  to  the  foot  of  the  hills  ;  and  after  a  quarter  of  an
hour  we  reached  the  tents  and  pitched  tor  the  night  in  their
neighbourhood.  Among  the  tents  were  several  huts  slightly
built  of  reeds  ;  these  are  common  in  this  quarter,  as  well  as
around  the  south  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  Ghawarineh  who
dwell  here,  have  a  few  magazines  rudely  built  of  stone.  Other
similar  encampments  of  the  same  people,  are  scattered  upon
the  plain  east  of  the  river.

This  plain,  skirted,  as  I  have  said,  on  the  east  by  the
mountains  which  enclose  the  lake,  is  shut  in  also  on  the  north
by  similar  mountains,  or  rather  hilLs.  of  considerable  altitude,
which  approach  close  to  the  Jordan  higher  up,  and  confine  it  to
a  valley  of  no  great  width.  The  plain  has  much  the  appear-
ance of  an  alluvial  deposit  brought  down  by  the  Jordan  ;'  or
more  probably  driven  up  by  the  prevailing  southerly  winds  from
the  bottom  of  the  lake.    At  the  northwest  comer  of  the  plain,

'  So  Semen,  Zach's  Monad.  Corr.  XVHL  p.  346.
Vol.  n.— 35  iii  301,  302

410

FROM  TIBERIAS  TO  SAFED.

[Sec,  XV.

a  lower  spur  or  promontory  from  the  nortliern  mountains,  runs
out  for  some  distance  southwards  along  the  river,  and  fonns  for  a
time  the  eastern  wall  of  its  vaUey.  On  its  southern  extremity
we  could  distinguish  ruins ;  the  people  on  the  spot  call  it
simply  et-TeU,  and  knew  for  it  no  other  name.*  The  plain
itself  bears  the  name  of  Batihah,  signifying  a  low  tract  liable  to
be  overflowed  by  streams.*

As  we  approached  the  north  end  of  the  lake,  I  had  for  some
time  felt  myself  unwell.  The  thermometer  for  some  hours  had
risen  to  95°  and  96°  F.  with  a  strong  southwest  wind  of  the
same  temperature,  sweeping  over  the  lake.  I  had  perhaps
unwisely  exerted  myself  too  much,  in  ascending  the  hill  by  the
Round  fountain  under  such  circumstances,  and  then  in  over-
taking the  party  on  foot  at  Wady  er-Riibiidiyeh.  Whatever
might  be  the  cause,  I  now  felt  myself  seized  by  a  burning  fever,
and  the  wind  came  over  me  with  a  scorching  glow  ;  although  to
my  companions  it  was  cooHng  and  refreshing.  I  sought  for  a
shade  ;  but  not  a  tree  was  in  sight  which  afforded  one  ;  the
many  thorn  bushes,  although  large,  yielded  no  shadow  ;  and  all
I  could  do,  while  the  tent  was  pitching,  was  to  cast  my  Arab
cloak  over  one  of  these  latter,  in  order  to  procure  shade  at  least
for  my  head,  while  I  lay  down  for  a  few  moments  in  the  vain
hope  of  sleep.  But  the  heat  was  too  scorching,  and  I  was  glad
to  retreat  as  soon  as  possible  to  the  tent,  heated  and  confined  as
the  air  there  was.  We  had  proposed  to  cross  the  river  in  order
to  explore  the  beautiful  plain,  and  examine  several  sites  of
ruins  which  the  Ghawarineh  spoke  of ;  and  the  Sheikh,  a  very
civU  and  intelligent  man,  had  offered  to  accompany  us.  But  in
my  present  state,  it  would  have  been  madness  for  me  to
attempt  such  an  excursion  ;  and  I  was  therefore  compelled,
with  sadness,  to  see  my  companions  depart  without  me.  My
only  remedy  lay  in  abstinence  and  sleep.  They  were  absent
nearly  two  and  a  half  hours,  and  returned  highly  gratified.  The
following  notices  of  the  plain  are  drawn  chiefly  from  Mr  Smith's
notes.

Taking  the  best  mules,  and  accompanied  by  the  Sheikh  on
his  fine  mare,  they  forded  the  river  below  our  tent  near  the  lake
on  a  sand-bar,  where  the  water  came  half  way  up  the  sides  of
the  mules.  Leaving  the  ford  at  5  o'clock,  their  course  lay  at
first  about  S.  40°  E.  along  the  shore.  In  five  minutes  they
came  to  the  ruins  of  a  village  of  moderate  size,  called  el-A'raj,

'  So  too  Seetzen,  Reisen  I.  p.  .343.    But       '  Burckhiirdt  heard  of  this  name  as  he

he  also  writes  tlie  name  Tclliiiiihje  ;  ib.  p.  crossed  the  Jordan  at  the  bridge  liigher

,342,  345;  misprinted  Tellaiiilije  in  Zach's  up;  and  by  a  not  unnatural  mistake  ap-

Mon.  Corr.  XVIU.  p.  241)  sq.     I'ococko  plies  it  to  a  village  at  this  point;  p.  316.

has  Telouy,  II.  i.  p.  72.    Wo  heard  no-  His  orthography  is  also  incorrect;  see

thing  of  any  such  name.  Freytag  Lex.  Arab.  Tom,  I,  p.  130.
iii,  303,  304

JONK  20.]

PLAIN  EL-BATIHAH.

I

411

consisting  entirely  of  unhewn  volcanic  stones,  like  those  along
the  western  coast.  The  only  relic  of  antiquity  noticed  here,
was  a  small  sarcophagus  of  the  same  material.

Proceeding  still  in  the  same  direction  along  the  coast,  they
reached  at  5.20  the  similar  village  of  el-Mes'adiyeh.  The
houses,  built  of  the  same  species  of  stone,  are  mostly  in  ruins  ;
but  several  of  them  are  kept  in  a  sort  of  repair  by  the  Ghawari-
neh,  as  magazines  for  their  grain,  and  other  products.'

The  Sheikh  spoke  of  Dukah  as  another  like  ruin,  further
down  upon  the  coast ;  they  went  on  and  reached  it  at  5.47.  It
occupies  a  slight  eminence  projecting  a  httle  into  the  lake,  and
is  considerably  larger  than  either  of  the  villages  already  de-
scribed. Like  them,  it  is  composed  entirely  of  volcanic  stones,
and  several  of  the  houses  are  repaired  as  magazines.  It  lies
within  a  short  distance  of  the  eastern  mountains,  where  they
come  down  to  the  sea  and  give  to  the  coast  a  southern  direc-
tion.*

The  party  had  now  rode,  in  forty-seven  minutes,  over  nearly
the  whole  length  of  the  plain  along  the  lake,  but  at  a  much
more  rapid  pace  than  usual;  so  that  the  whole  distance  may  be
taken  at  somewhat  more  than  an  hour,  according  to  the  ordinary
rate  of  travel  with  mules.  The  average  breadth  they  estima-
ted at  perhaps  half  the  length.  The  general  direction  of  the
coast  from  the  mouth  of  the  Jordan  to  Dukah  is  about  S.  25°
E.  From  Dukah  to  the  Tell  the  course  lay  diagonally  across
the  plain,  and  afforded  an  opportunity  of  examining  it  more
closely.  It  is  perfectly  level,  and  a  more  fertile  tract  can
scarcely  be  imagined.  There  is  a  striking  resemblance  between
it  and  the  Ghuweir  north  of  Mejdel,  in  form,  climate,  soil,  and
productions  ;  yet  the  Batihah  appears,  if  anything,  to  be  supe-
rior. Like  the  other,  it  is  given  up  to  the  Ghawarineh,  who
cultivate  upon  it  wheat,  barley,  millet,  maize,  and  rice.  Burck-
.  hardt  says  the  inhabitants  raise  large  quantities  of  cucumbers
and  gourds,  which  they  carry  to  the  market  of  Damascus,  three
weeks  before  the  same  fruits  ripen  there.  The  excellent  honey,
which  according  to  that  traveller  is  produced  here,  we  did  not
hear  o£^  The  Ghawarineh  have  also  large  herds  of  horned
cattle,  among  which  are  many  buffalos  ;  all  these  were  now
returning  from  pasture  across  the  plain,  to  pass  the  night  near
the  tents  of  their  owners  ;  and  presented  a  greater  appearance
of  ease,  not  to  say  of  wealth,  than  we  had  yet  seen  among  the
Arabs.

'  The  following  bearings  were  taken
here :  Tiberias  S.  39°  W.  A'raj  N.  40°
W.  et-TeU  N.  5°  E.  Dnkah  about  S.
25°  E.

'  From  Dukah,  Tiberias  bore  S  W.
Kuriin  Hattln  S  70'  W.  et-Tell  N.  6"  W.

'  Burckhardt's  Travels  in  Syria,  etc.  p.
316.

iii.  304-306

412

FROM  TIBERIAS  TO  SAFED.

[Sec.  XV.

These  buffalos  are  of  course  a  different  species  from  tlie  vast
herds  bearing  that  name,  which  roam  over  the  western  wilds  of
North  America.  They  are  very  common  in  Egypt,  being  kept  both
for  milk  and  for  labour  ;  and  are  found  also  in  Italy,  especially
in  the  Pontine  marshes.  In  Egypt,  as  likewise  here  and  around
the  lake  el-Huleh,  they  are  mingled  with  the  neat  cattle,  and
are  applied  in  general  to  the  same  uses.  But  they  are  a  shy,  iU-
looking,  iU-tempered  animal.  They  doubtless  existed  anciently
in  Palestine  ;  though  probably  in  a  wild  state,  or  unsubdued  to
labour,  as  at  the  present  day  in  Abyssinia.'  The  remark  was
made  to  me  in  Egypt,  that  the  Abyssinians,  when  they  come  to
that  country,  are  astonished  at  the  comparative  tameness  of  the
buffalo,  and  stand  in  much  greater  fear  of  them  than  the  Egyp-
tians do.  The  actual  existence  of  this  animal  in  Palestine,
leaves  little  doubt  that  it  is  the  Jteem  of  the  Hebrew  Scrip-
tures ;  for  which  both  ancient  and  modern  versions  have  substi-
tuted the  apparently  fabulous  unicorn.'^  The  present  name  of
the  buffalo  in  Arabic  is  Jamtis.

The  plain  is  owned  by  the  government,  which  receives  a
share  of  the  produce  from  the  Ghawarineh,  its  only  cultivators.
The  extreme  fertility  is  owing  not  only  to  the  fine  soil  of  black
loam,  but  also  the  abundance  of  water.  Not  less  than  three
perennial  streams,  besides  the  Jordan,  contribute  to  its  irriga-
tion. These  were  crossed  by  my  companions  in  passing  from
Dukah  to  the  Tell.  The  easternmost  and  largest,  Wady  es-
Siinam,  they  reached  at  ten  minutes  past  6  o'clcok  ;  it  comes
down  from  the  mountains  through  a  large  ravine  at  the  north-
east corner  of  the  plain.  The  next,  Wady  ed-Dalieh,  was
crossed  at  6\  o'clock  ;  and  the  third,  Wady  es-Sufa,  five  minutes
later  ;  these  two  descend  near  each  other  from  the  mountains
north  of  the  plain.  AU  were  thickly  bordered  with  oleanders
now  in  full  blossom.  My  companions  faUed  to  notice  where
these  waters  enter  the  lake  ;  for  though  in  passing  along  the
coast,  they  crossed  two  or  three  small  creeks,  yet  none  of  them
attracted  attention  at  the  moment  as  the  mouths  of  Wadys.

The  Ghawarineh  were  encamped  all  along  the  shore,  mostly
in  small  huts  made  of  reeds  and  rushes  ;  though  a  few  had
tents  of  black  cloth.  They  never  live  in  houses.  There  may
have  been  in  all  not  far  from  a  hundred  and  fifty  of  these
temporary  dwellings.  The  people,  for  the  most  part,  were
sitting  listless  in  and  around  their  open  tents  and  huts  ;  ex-
posing themselves  fully  to  the  strong  lake  breeze  under  the
temperature  of  90°  F.  and  apparently  enjoying  themselves  in

'  SeeBnice's  Travels,  etc.  Vol.  V.  p.  82.    [11.]    The  Ream  is  several  times  coupled
'  Num.  23,  22.    Deut.  33,  17.  Job  39,    with,  or  compared  to,  the  ox;  see  espo-
9.  10.    Ps.  22,  21.  [22  ]   29,  6.  92,  10.    ciaUy  Job  L  c.

iii.  306.  307

JujfE  20.]

PLAIN  EL-BATIHAH,

413

their  indolent  mode  of  life.  They  had  been  all  disarmed,  and
soldiers  had  been  taken  from  them  by  the  government ;  as  was
also  the  case  with  the  Arabs  we  saw  on  the  west  of  the  lake.
On  the  east  of  the  river,  in  the  district  of  Jaulan  and  else-
where, the  Arabs  had  not  been  disarmed.

The  party  reachd  et-Tell  at  6.40.  It  is  the  largest  of  all
the  ruins  around  the  plain,  and  is  considered  as  a  sort  of  capital
by  the  Ghawarineh  ;  although  they  have  lost  the  ancient  name,
aiid  now  occupy  in  it  only  a  few  houses  as  magazines.  The
Tell,  as  we  have  seen,  extends  from  the  foot  of  the  northern
mountains  southwards,  near  the  point  where  the  Jordan  issues
from  them.  The  ruins  cover  a  large  portion  of  it,  and  are  quite
extensive  ;  but  so  far  as  could  be  observed,  consist  entirely  of
unhewn  volcanic  stones,  without  any  distinct  trace  of  ancient
architecture. '

•  In  returning,  they  forded  the  Jordan  not  far  from  the  Tell,
where  the  water  reached  no  higher  than  the  bellies  of  the  mules.
The  land  along  the  banks  was  here  so  abundantly  irrigated,  as
to  become  in  several  places  almost  a  marsh.  They  reached  our
tent  at  twenty  minutes  past  7  o'clock.*

This  Tell  and  the  ruins  upon  it  above  described,  are  proba-
bly no  other  than  the  site  of  the  ancient  Bethsaida  of  Gaulon-
itis,  afterwards  caUed  Juhas  ;  which  Pliny  places  on  the  east  of
the  lake  and  the  Jordan,  and  Josephus  describes  as  situated  in
lower  Gaulonitis,  just  above  the  entrance  of  the  Jordan  into  the
lake.'  It  was  originally  but  a  village,  called  Bethsaida  ;  but
was  built  up  and  enlarged  by  Philip  the  Tetrarch,  not  long
after  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  received  the  name  of  Julias  in
honour  of  Julia  the  daughter  of  Augustus.*  Philip  would
seem  to  have  made  it  in  part  his  residence  ;  here  he  died  and
was  buried  in  a  costly  tomb.'  This  is  the  Bethsaida  near  to
which  Jesus  fed  the  five  thousand  on  the  east  of  the  lake  ;  and
probably  also  the  same,  where  the  blind  man  was  healed.*

'  From  the  Tell,  Tiberias  bore  S.  3V  W.  the  east  of  the  Jordan,  as  decidedly  as

Entrance  of  the  Jordan  S.  45'  W.   ^^urun  that  of  Galilee  does  the  other  Bethsaida

Hattin  S.  54=  W.  on  the  west;  John  12,  21.    To  this  day

''  The  following  are  the  bearings  taken  the  adjacent  district  on  the  east  of  the

from  the  tent :  Tiberias  S.  37°  W.  Tabor  Jordan  bears  the  name  of  JauLin. — So

S.  50°  W.   Mejdel  S.  54°  W.  Kuriin  Hat-  too  Jerome,  Comm.    in  Matt.  16,   13  :

tin  S.  60°  W.    et-Tell  N.  60°  E.  "  Philippus  .  .  .  ex  nomine  filia  ejus  (An-

'  Plin.  H.  N.  5.  15 :  "  Jordanes  in  la-  gusti)  Juliadem  trans  Jordanem  extmsit."

cnmsefundit,  .  .  .  amoenis  circnmseptum  '  Luke  3,  1.     Joseph.  Ant.  18.  2.  1,

oppidis,  ab  oriente  Juliade  et  Hippo."  Jos.  i>iXiinros  .  .  ■  Kii/xriv  Si  Btj&o-oiSoi'  irphs
B.  J.  2.  9.  1.

'lopdayov  irrrfCLiS  iv  Tlav^i^i  -kSKiv  Krl^ei  trx^^v  a|i&i/io,  irXiibd  t€  oiKruopuv  5e  tj

^aicipfiav,    Ktiv   tt)    Kara)    TavKavtTiKy  SAAp  Suvd/xft,  louX'ia  ^vyarpl  t»}  KaiVapoy

'lovKidSa.    lb.  3.  10.  7,  Aiafieiijias  8e  (&  dftdyv/ioy  iKoKeffev. — See  also  the  preceding

'lopZivris)  €T€povs  fKarbv  (Xkoci  ffTaStovs,  note.

^ero  ir6Kiv  'lovMaiSa  StfKTf/xyei  rriv  r^yvrj-  '  Joseph.  Ant.  18.  4.  6.

.  ed.  Basnage.

•  Beinaud  L  c.  p.  502.    Wilken  L  c  p.       '  See  above,  pp.  393  sq.  424.
615.  *  Burckhardtp.  317.

iii.  329-331

JincE  21.]

JEWISH  SCHOOL  OF  LEARXIXG.

429

but  says  not  one  worii  of  Safed.'  The  latter  was  then  a  fortress
in  the  hands  of  the  Christians  ;  and  it  follows  conclusively  from
Benjamin's  silence,  that  no  Jews  at  that  time  dwelt  in  the
place.  Nor  were  the  circumstances  of  Safed,  during  that  and
the  following  century,  such  as  were  likely  to  allure  them  to  take
up  their  ab.xle  there.  The  rules  and  sway  of  the  Templars
were  not  favourable  to  tolerance,  and  least  of  all  to  the  Jews.
During  the  fifty  years  of  Muhammedan  dominion,  after  the
capture  of  Safed  by  Saladin,  it  is  indeed  possible,  that  some
of  this  people  may  have  repaired  thither;  but' when  in  A.  D.
1240  the  Templars  regained  possession  for  six  and  twenty  years,
it  is  hardly  to  be  supposed,  that  Jews  could  have  formed  a  por-
tion of  the  inhabitants.  Bibars,  as  we  have  seen,  repeopled  the
place  anew  with  a  colony  from  Damascus.  Most  writers  also
of  the  two  following  centuries,  make  no  mention  of  Jews  at
Safed  *  Later  Jewish  Itineraries  speak  here  of  the  tomb  of
the  prophet  Hosea.'

Bat  in  whatever  period  the  first  establishment  of  that  peo-
ple here  may  fall,  or  whenever  their  school  of  learning  may  have
been  founded,  it  is  certain,  that  the  latter  was  in  its  most  floi;r-
ishing  state  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  ;  and
various  circumstances  render  the  suppooition  probable,  that  its
origin  is  not  to  be  placed  much  if  any  further  back,  than  the
early  part  of  the  same  century.^  All  the  celebrated  Eabbis,
who  are  known  to  have  lived  and  taught  in  Safed,  fall  within
this  period.  One  of  the  first  meadoned  is  Jacob  Be-Kab,  a  Span-
ish exile,  who  was  first  chief  Rabbi  at  Fez  in  Africa  and  then  at
Safed,  where  he  became  celebrated  as  a  writer  and  teacher,  and
died  in  A.  D.  1541.  Among  his  more  distinguished  pupils,  who
became  also  his  colleagues  and  successors  at  Safed,  were  :  Moses
de  Trani  of  Apulia,  who  taught  as  Eabbi  for  fifty-four  years
from  1525  to  1580,  the  year  of  his  death  ;  Joseph  Karo  of
Spanish  descent,  one  of  the  chief  ornaments  of  the  academy
from  1545  until  his  death  in  1575  ;  and  Solomon  Alkabez,  who
began  to  distinguish  himself  as  a  writer  in  1529,  and  was  still
living  in  1561.'    A  pupU  and  colleague  of  Karo  and  Alkabez

'  Benj.  of  Tud.  L  p.  82.  Parchi  a  centurv  later  has  the  name  Tse-

'  The  oiily  exception  I  fonnerlv  found  fath ;  but  nothing  more ;  see  in  Asher's

is  Ludolf  de  Sncbem  (A.  D.  1.536-50  ',  Benj.  of  Tud.  II.  p.  420.

who  msT^ly  relates  that  in  his  time  a  Jew  '  Carmoly,  p.  381,  447.  Hettinger  Cippi

and  his'wile  from  Westphalia  were  living  Heb.  p.  58.

at  Saf-id :  Itin.  p.  97.    Reissb.  p.  852.  *  Basnage  adduces  the  silence  of  Ben-

Sce  Brocardua  c.  4.  p.  173.    Marin.  Sannt  jamin,  as  showing  that  there  could  then

pp.  222,  248.    W.  de  Baldensel  p.  355.  have  been  no  Jewish  school  at  Safed  ;  but

Sir  J.  Ifa'mieville  p.  117.  London  1839. —  remarks  conjectnrally,  or  at  least  without

But  the  .Jewish  Itinerary  of  Samuel  bar  referring  to  any  authority,  that  it  was

Simson  in  1210  speaks  of  communities  fjunded  not  long  after.    Hist,  des  Juifs

of  the  Jews  at  Safed;  see  Carmoly,  Brux.  Tom.  V.  p.  1942.    Rotterd.  1707.

1847.  pp.  132, 133;  cump.  pp.  187, 261,  447.  »  See  De  Eoasi  Dizionario  Storico  degli

iii.-331}  332

430

SAFED.

[Sec.  XV.

was  Moses  of  Cordova,  the  most  famous  caBbalist  since  the  day8
of  Simeon  Ben  Jochai ;  he  died  as  chief  Rabbi  of  Safed  in  A.
D.  1570.  Moses  Galante,  a  native  of  Rome,  was  somewhat
later  and  died  in  1618.  But  the  academy  was  not-indebted  for
its  fame  to  strangers  alone ;  Samuel  Oseida  and  Moses  Alsheikh,
both  natives  of  Safed,  contributed  to  its  celebrity  during  the
sixteenth  century  ;  the  latter  died  between  1592  and  1601.'

The  writings  of  all  these  learned  men  are  numerous  and  of
high  renown  in  Jewi.sh  literature  ;  and  under  their  teaching,  the
school  of  Safed  "became  famous,  and  was  frequented  by  pupils
from  every  quarter.  It  appears  also,  that  a  printing-office  was
already  estabUshed  ;  and  a  work  of  Galante,  a  comment  on  the
book  of  Ecclesiastes,  is  extant,  bearing  the  imprint  of  Safed
1578.^  To  this  period  is  doubtless  to  he  referred  the  descrip-
tion of  tlie  former  prosperity  of  the  Jews  in  Safed,  as  given  by
Nau  nearly  a  centur}'  later.  Safed  was  to  them  hke  another
Jerusalem.  They  dwelt  there  in  great  numbers  ;  and  had  a
vast  Khan  like  a  square  fortress,  covered  with  lead,  in  which
many  hved,  and  where  there  was  a  fine  synagogue.  Besides  the
schools  in  which  the  sciences  were  taught,  they  counted  eighteen
synagogues  distiaguished  by  the  names  of  the  several  nations
which  possessed  them  ;  as  the  Portuguese,  Spanish,  Italian,  and
others.'

The  cessation  of  this  prosperity  is  ascribed  to  the  oppressions
of  the  Muhammedans  ;  and  probably  took  place  by  degrees.
Some  of  the  renowned  Rabbis,  as  appears  above,  continued  their
labours  into  the  seventeenth  century  ;  and  Quaresmius,  writing
about  A.  D.  1625,  speaks  of  Safed  as  inhabited  chiefly  by
Hebrews,  who  had  their  synagogues  and  schools  ;  and  for  whose
sustenance,  contributions  were  made  by  the  Jews  in  other  parts
of  the  world.''  The  further  accounts  of  this  people  in  Safed,
from  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  onward,  have  already
been  adverted  to.^

Closely  connected  with  the  history  of  the  Jews  in  Safed,  and
perhaps  originally  the  occasion  of  their  setthng  here,  is  the  \'il-
lage  of  Meiron,  lying  about  two  hours  distant  W.  N.  W.^  Here
are  the  reputed  tombs  of  several  ancient  holy  Rabbis  ;  and  as
a  place  of  pilgrimage  for  the  Jews,  this  is  now  the  most  famous
and  venerated  in  Palestine.    It  seems  to  be  mentioned  in  the

Autori  Ebrei,  etc.  Parma  1802,  arts.  Be-  Jakob;"  Dc  Rossi  1.  c.  art.  Galant».  Bar-

Rab,  Trani,  Karo,  Alkabez.    See  also  for  tolocci  Biblioth.  Kabb.  Tom.  IV.  p.  67.

thege  and  the  other  Rabbins  mentioned,  The  later  accounts  of  this  press  have  al-

Bartolocci  Biblioth.  Rabbin,  under   the  ready  been  given  ;  see  above,  p.  421.

several  names.    Basnage  Hist,  des  Juifs  ^  Nan  Voyage,  etc.  pp.  560,  501.

Tom.  V.  p.  1943  sq.  Rotterd.  1707.  Quaresinius  II  p.  904.

'  De  Rossi  1.  c.  arts.  Cordovero,  Otdante,  '  See  above,  p.  421.

Oscida,  AUrheieh.  '  We  visited  Meiron  in  1852;  see  ia

'  The  title  of  the  book  is  "  Kchilat  VoL  III  Sect.  H,  xmder  Apr.  14tL.
iii.  332-334

June  21.]

JEWISH  SCHOOL.  MEIBON.

431

Talmud  as  Meron  and  Beth  Meron.'  Benjamin  of  Tudela
speaks  of  it  about  A.  D.  1165  ;  and  relates  that  in  a  cavern
near  by,  were  the  sepulchres  of  the  celebrated  Jewish  doctors
Hillel  and  Shammai,  as  also  of  twenty  of  their  disciples  and
other  Kabbis.*  The  Jewish  Itinerary  of  Samuel  bar  Simson
(1210)  mentions  here  likewise  the  tombs  of  these  two  masters,
and  describes  in  addition  the  sepulchre  of  K.  Simeon  Ben  Jo-
chai,  the  reputed  author  of  the  cabbaKstic  book  Zohar  ;  while
later  Itineraries  in  like  manner  speak  of  aU  these  tombs.'  At
the  present  day,  there  is  at  Meiron  quite  a  cemetery  of  ancient
Jewish  tombs.  The  sepulchres  are  described  as  hewn  out  of
the  rock,  each  large  enough  to  contain  several  bodies,  and  cov-
ered with  immense  stones,  some  of  them  a  foot  in  thickness.*
The  most  sacred  of  the  tombs  at  present,  is  that  reputed  to
belong  to  R.  Simeon  Ben  Jochai  ;  but  which,  to  judge  from  the
silence  of  Benjamin,  must  be  of  far  later  date.  To  this  tomb
the  Jews  make  an  annual  procession  in  May,  in  memory  of  the
saint ;  and  over  it  they  are  said  to  burn  the  most  costly  articles
they  possess,  including  sometimes  valuable  Cashmere  shawls.'
The  occasion  was  described  to  us,  I  hope  slanderously,  as  a  fes-
tival, during  which  the  Jews  give  themselves  up  to  reveliy  and
intoxication.'

The  situation  of  Safed,  as  we  have  seen,  is  very  high.  The
whole  region  of  Galilee  is  in  general  less  elevated,  than  the
mountainous  tract  of  Judea  ;  yet  Safed  itself,  and  especially  the
two  eminences  half  an  hour  further  north,  cannot  well  be  much
lower  than  Jerusalem  and  the  Mount  of  Olives.  These  emi-
nences, although  as  here  seen  only  rounded  hills,  form  one  of
the  highest  points  of  Galilee  ;  around  which  in  winter  the
clouds  gather,  and  cause  an  abundance  of  rain.    In  summer

'  See  the  passages  in  Lightfoot  0pp.  11.
p.  693.    Reland  Pal.  p.  817.

"  Benj.  of  Tud.  L  p.  82.— Hillel  and
Shammai  are  reputed  to  have  heen  the
heads  of  different  schools  before  the  Chris-
tian era,    Lightfoot  0pp.  II  p.  6.  fol.

'  See  in  Carmolv,  p.  13.5 ;  also  pp.  184,
260,  381.  Parchi  in  Asher',*  Benj.  of
Tud.  II.  p.  427.  Hottinger's  Cippi  Hebr.
Ed.  2.  p.  68 ;  compare  above,  Vol.  I.  p.
332.  n.  2  Nicbuhr  Reisebeschr.  III.  p.
69. — R.  Ben  Jochai  is  said  to  havf>  been  a
pupil  of  R.  Akibii,  and  to  have  flourished
about  A.  D.  120.  The  Zohar  is  a  cabba-
listic commentary  upon  the  Pentateuch  ;
De  Rossi  regards  it  as  having  been  com-
piled by  tlie  pupils  of  Ben  Jochai,  half  a
century  later.  See  De  Ros.  driven
out  from  Tiberias  ;  who  fi.xed  themselves  at
Safed,  perhaps,  on  account  of  its  vicinity
to  Meiron.

iii.  334.  335

432

SAFED.

[Sec.  XV.

the  air  is  pure,  and  the  climate  not  unlike  that  of  the  Holy-
City.  Our  thermometer  stood  here  in  the  afternoon  -with  a
west  wind  at  82°  F.,  and  the  next  morning  at  61°  ;  hut  at  ten
o'clock  it  had  risen  to  87°  F.  with  a  serene  atmosphere  and  the
heat  not  oppressive.  The  ohve,  the  pomegranate,  the  fig,  and
the  vine,  were  here  frequent,  and  seemed  to  thrive.

From  the  isolated  hill  of  Safed,  and  particularly  from  the
castle,  there  is  a  wide  and  diversified  prospect  on  every  side  ex-
cept the  north  ;  where  the  view  is  cut  off  hy  the  two  higher
peaks  above  mentioned.  In  the  southeast  the  lake  of  Tiberias
lies  spread  out  before  the  spectator  in  its  deep  basin  ;  while  be-
yond, and  towards  the  east,  the  eye  takes  in  the  whole  extent
of  the  high  table  land  of  Jaulan,  the  ancient  Gaulonitis,  present-
ing the  appearance  of  a  vast  uneven  plain,  intereected  by  deep
valleys  and  chasms  running  towards  the  lake.  The  view  stretch-
es even  beyond  this  district ;  and  embraces  a  great  part  of
Hauran,  quite  to  the  borders  of  el-Lejah.  The  sightly  mountain
Kuleib  Hauran,  "  the  Dog,"  which  is  everywhere  a  conspicuous
object  in  travelling  through  that  countiy,  was  here  verj^  distinct-
ly visible.'  Far  in  the  south,  the  fine  mountains  of  'Ajlun,
around  el-Husn,  were  seen  across  the  Ghor  below  the  lake  ;
and  then  more  towards  the  right  came  Tabor,  the  Httle  Hermon,
and  a  small  portion  of  the  great  plain  northwest  of  Jenin,  with
the  mountains  of  Samaria.  In  the  southwest  and  west,  two
dark  mountain  ridges,  partially  covered  with  shrubs  and  trees,
shut  in  the  view  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  hours.  To-
wards the  east  and  north,  the  mountains  around  Safed  are
naked.''

A  visit  to  Safed  had  not  been  included  in  our  original  plan  ;
and  our  main  object  in  coming  liither,  was  to  obtain  intelhgence
respecting  the  safety  of  the  roads  to  Damascus.  This  therefore
had  been  our  earliest  inquiry  ;  but  we  could  gather  at  first  very
little  information  ;  every  one  being  silent  for  fear  of  the  govern-
ment. Eveiy  one  advised  us,  however,  not  to  go  at  all  by  the
way  of  Hasbeiya  ;  nor  by  the  way  of  the  bridge  without  a  cara-
van. By  degrees,  the  intelligence  we  had  received  at  Tiberias
was  here  confirmed ;  and  it  was  further  supposed,  that  by  this
time,  the  troops  which  had  been  sent  against  the  rebels  must
have  been  successful,  and  that  the  roads  were  now  open  and
safe,  or  would  soon  become  so.  Indeed,  in  this  expectation,  a
email  company  of  nvuleteers  and  merchants  was  already  forming
at  Safed,  to  set  off  for  Damascus  on  Saturday.    The  regular

'  See  Burckhardt's Travels  in  Syria,  pp.  '  Bearings  at  S.-ifed  from  the  castle:

90,  92.  Col.  Leake  regards  this  mountain  Jebel  Kuluib  Hauran  S.  6'.>   E.  Senii'v  S.

as  tie  Alsadanins  of  Ptolemy,  lib.  5.  15.  80°  W.  Meiron  two  hours  distant  N.  67  W.

Pref.  to  Burckliardt  p.  xii.  Sa'so'  N.  45°  W.
iii.  335-337

JoOT  21.]

PROSPECT.     ROADS  UNSAFE.

433

Friday's  fair  was  to  be  held  in  Safed  to-morrow,  whicli  is  usual-
ly attended  by  persons  from  Hasbeiya  and  Rasheiya  ;  and  the
merchants  in  question  were  now  waiting  to  receive  further  in-
formation fi-om  this  source.  We  concluded  to  join  the  company,
should  it  depart  as  proposed  ;  and  at  any  rate  to  wait  here
until  Friday  noon,  for  the  sake  of  the  expected  inteUigence.

All  these  items  we  could  pick  up  only  by  degrees  and  with
difficulty,  chiefly  by  the  aid  of  our  muleteers,  and  from  their
associates.  The  agent  of  the  American  consul  at  Beirut,  who
resides  here,  was  now  absent ;  as  were  also  two  or  three  other
individuals  whom  we  had  hoped  to  find.  My  companion  called
upon  the  Mutesellim,  where  he  was  for  the  first  time  on  our
journey  received  with  impoliteness  ;  that  dignitary  would  say
nothing,  but  that  the  road  to  Damascus  was  open  ;  whether  it
was  safe  or  not,  he  would  not  aver.  I  lighted  upon  a  Jewish
Eabbi  who  spoke  tolerable  German  ;  but  the  same  fear  of  the
government  kept  him  back  from  giving  any  explicit  information.
Some  other  Jews  whom  I  addressed,  seemed  almost  too  stupid  to
reply.

The  next  morning,  Friday,  the  expected  fair  was  held  at
Safed  ;  but  not  an  individual  appeared  from  Hasbeiya  or  its
immediate  vicinity.  People  from  the  northern  part  of  the  basin
of  the  Huleh  were  there  ;  and  reported,  that  Hasbeiya  was  in  a
state  of  siege  from  the  troops  of  the  Pasha  ;  that  predatory
bands  of  the  Druzes  had  made  inroads  even  into  the  Huleh  and
the  villages  round  about  it,  and  especially  upon  the  eastern
roads  to  Damascus.  There  was  too  a  rumour,  that  the  troops
had  been  worsted  in  an  encounter  with  the  rebels  ;  but  this
seemed  to  need  confirmation.  The  general  news,  however,  was
of  such  a  tenor,  that  the  company  at  Safed  gave  up  their  pur-
pose of  proceeding  nest  day  to  Damascus  ;  and  we  wei-e  thus
again  left  to  ourselves.  We  did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  set  off
alone.  We  might  indeed  wait  for  the  larger  caravan,  which  was
soon  to  leave  'Akka  for  Damascus,  and  pass  the  night  at  the
Khan  Jubb  Yiisuf ;  but  we  could  not  leam  when  it  was  to
start,  and  no  orders  had  yet  been  received,  when  to  furnish
supplies  at  the  Khan.  Add  to  all  this,  our  time  was  limited  ;
for  the  steamer  was  to  leave  Beirut  at  the  very  latest  on  the
10th  of  July.  Under  these  circumstances,  we  felt  reluctantly
compelled  to  abandon  our  further  journey  towards  Damascus,
and  proceed  directly  to  Beirut  by  way  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  ;
flattering  ourselves,  that  from  Beirut  we  should  still  be  able  to
make  an  excursion  to  Ba'albek,  and  return  by  way  of  the  ce-
dars of  Lebanon. — It  was  well  that  we  now  came  to  this  deter-
mination ;  for  we  afterwards  learned  at  Beirut,  that  just  at  this
period  the  whole  region  of  Lebanon  and  Anti-Lebanon  had  been

Vol.  II.— 37  iii.  337,  338

434

BEGION  OF  THE  HTJLEH.

[Sec.  XV.

unsafe  and  impassable  ;  and  all  the  roads,  even  between  Da-
mascus and  Beirut,  bad  been  for  a  time  shut  up.

Towards  tbe  close  of  the  fair,  I  strolled  to  the  market  place
where  it  was  held,  on  the  southwest  side  of  the  castle  hiU.
Many  people  were  still  there,  though  the  business  was  mostly
over.  The  main  articles  exposed  for  sale,  were  new  wheat
and  barley  ;  the  rest  were  chiefly  garden  vegetables  and  fruits.
There  seemed  not  to  have  been  many  purchasers. — The  first
time  we  passed  over  the  market  place,  not  long  after  our  arrival,
we  were  hailed  by  a  quarantine  guard  -mth  the  question,
Whence  we  came  ?  On  our  replying,  From  Hebron,  they  in-
quired further  :  Whether  we  had  been  in  Jerasalem  ?  Our  an-
swer in  the  negative  put  an  end  to  the  examination.

BEGION  OF  THE  HULEH.

While  we  were  thus  waiting  in  uncertainty  at  Safed,  being
very  desirous  to  obtain  a  view  of  the  basin  of  the  Huleh  and
the  country  around  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,  our  younger
muleteer,  who  was  here  at  home,  proposed  to  take  us  to  a  spot
about  an  hour  northeast  of  the  town,  where  he  said  we  might
have  an  extensive  prospect.  We  accordingly  set  off"  about  4
o'clock  of  Thursday  afternoon,  and  proceeding  northeasterly
around  the  head  of  the  deep  vaUey  on  the  north  and  northwest
of  Safed,  came  in  half  an  hour  to  the  ridge  constituting  the  gap
between  the  two  higher  peaks  already  mentioned.  Here  Safed
bore  S.  40°  W.  and  Benit,  the  place  to  which  we  were  going,
N.  45°  E.  The  path  now  descended  a  little,  crossing  the  heads
of  one  or  two  Wadys  which  run  off  eastwards,  but  keeping  in
general  upon  high  table  land,  until  in  about  twenty-five  minutes
more,  we  reached  Benit.  Here  are  the  slight  remains  of  a
former  village,  situated  directly  on  the  brow  of  the  mountains
enclosing  the  Huleh,  and  commanding  a  splendid  view  over  the
whole  basin  and  the  surrounding  region.

Almost  directly  at  our  feet  lay  the  lake  el-Hiileh,  separated
from  the  mountain  on  which  we  stood  only  by  a  lower  tract  of
uneven  table  land,  the  continuation  of  that  between  the  moun-
tains of  Safed  and  the  Jordan.  This  lower  intervening  tract
hid  from  our  view  the  southwestern  and  western  shores  of  the
lake  itself,  and  caused  it  to  appear  to  us  as  of  a  triangular  form,
running  out  almost  to  a  point  at  its  southeast  extremity,  where
the  Jordan  issues  from  it  about  an  hour  above  the  bridge.  The
length  of  the  lake  we  estimated  at  about  two  hours,  or  from  four
to  five  geographical  miles  ;  its  breadth  at  the  northern  end  is

iiL  338-340

June  21.]  EXCURSION  TO  BENIT.    THE  LAKE.

435

probably  not  less  than  four  miles.'  On  tbe  north  the  waters  of
the  lake  are  skirted  by  a  marshy  tract  of  considerable  extent,
covered  with  tall  reeds  and  flags  ;  into  which  our  guide  assured
us  neither  man  nor  beast  could  penetrate.

At  the  season  when  the  lake  is  full,  if  not  indeed  at  aU
times,  this  tract  is  doubtless  covered  with  water  ;  so  that  the
whole  may  properly  be  regarded  as  pertaining  to  the  area  of
the  lake.  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  lake  and  its  marshes  may
be  said  to  occupy  nearly  the  southern  half  of  the  basin  of
the  Huleh,  and  may  be  reckoned  at  five  or  six  geographical
miles  in  length  by  four  or  five  in  breadth.  Through  this  great
marsh,  two  or  three  small  streams  are  seen  pursuing  their  way
towards  the  lake,  chiefly  from  the  north,  and  one  or  more  from
the  west ;  they  wind  exceedingly,  and  occasionally  swell  out  into
small  ponds.  These  glitter  in  the  midst  of  the  marsh  and
among  the  reeds  ;  but  neither  deserve,  nor  admit,  the  name  of
separate  lakes.*

On  the  east,  the  lake  extends  quite  to  the  foot  of  the  high
ground,  which  shuts  in  the  basin  on  that  side.  On  the  south-
western and  western  side,  there  is  a  tract  of  arable  land  aU  the
way  between  the  lake  and  the  mountains,  along  which  the  road
passes.  This  would  seem  to  be  somewhat  uneven  ;  for  my
companion,  in  travelKng  through  it  twice,  in  A.  D.  1834  and
the  following  year,  had  been  able  to  get  from  the  road  only  one
or  two  glimpses  of  the  lake.  At  the  northwest  corner  of  the
clear  part  of  the  lake,  adjacent  to  the  marsh,  a  small  miU
stream  enters,  which  rises  from  a  single  large  fountain  called
'Ain  el-Mellahah,  at  the  foot  of  the  western  mountain.^  The
tract  on  the  southern  end  of  the  lake  and  on  its  western  side,  as
far  north  as  to  el-MeUahah,  is  caUed  Ard  el-Khait  or  Belad  el-
Khait ;  and  the  lake  itself  sometimes  takes  the  same  name,  el-
Khait.  This  district,  which  is  arable  and  apparently  nowhere
marshy,  is  under  the  government  of  Safed.  Near  'Ain  el-Mel-
lahah, there  is  usually  a  large  encampment  of  the  Ghawa-
rineh  in  tents  and  reed  huts.

North  of  el-Mellahah,  the  arable  tract  still  continues  of
variable  width,  between  the  marsh  and  the  western  mountain.
At  the  distance  of  an  hour  is  another  similar  fountain,  called
Belat  or  Belateh,  with  a  copious  stream  running  into  the  marsh,

'  Pococke  describes  the  lake  as  fovir       '  Burckhardt  extends  the  name  of  the

miles  broad  at  its  northern  end,  and  two  fountain,  el-Mell  ihah,  by  mistake,  to  the

miles  at  the  southern  ;  th»  waters,  he  says,  whole  southwest  coast  of  the  lake  ;  which

are  muddy  und  reckoned  vmwholesome.  he  wrongly  says  is  covered  by  a  saline

Vol  II.  i.  p.  73.  crust  j  Travels  p  316.    This  name  is  here

»  Something  of  this  kind  doubtless  gave  of  long  standing ;  for  William  of  Tyre  ap-

occasion  for  the  story  of  a  small  lake  plies  it  to  the  whole  lake  :   "  circa  lacum

north  of  the  Huleh;  Buckingham's  Tra-  Aleleha Will.  Tyr.  18.  13.
Tela  among  the  Arab  Tribes  p.  406.  4to.

iiL  340  341

436

BEGION  OF  THE  HULEH.

[Sec.  XV.

and  usually  a  like  encampment  of  Ghawarineh.  The  water  of
both  these  copious  fountains  is  not  cold  ;  and  is  described  by
my  companion  as  much  resembhng  that  of  'Ain  es-Sultan  near
Jericho.  At  these  points,  and  along  these  streams,  the  marsh
extends  up  westwards  almost  to  the  fountains. — The  marsh
itself,  towards  the  north,  gradually  passes  over  into  a  still  more
extensive  and  broader  tract  of  fine  meadow  land,  occupied  by
nomadic  Arabs,  who  are  mostly  if  not  entirely  Ghawarineh,  and
whose  main  employment  is  the  raising  of  cattle,  chiefly  buffa-
los.'  The  road  passes  up  on  the  western  side  ;  and  along  it,  for
a  considerable  distance,  runs  an  artificial  ditch  or  canal  for  irri-
gation, which  can  be  crossed  only  with  difficulty  ;  east  of  it  the
ground  is  more  firm,  though  still  so  low,  that  the  Arabs  culti-
vate rice.  This  canal  branches  off  from  the  stream  which
comes  from  Hasbeiya,  not  far  below  the  bridge  Jisr  el-Ghujar  ;*
and  forms  with  the  main  stream  a  sort  of  Delta,  in  which,  near
the  northern  end,  is  the  miserable  village  ez-Zuk  belonging  to
the  Ghawarineh.  StUl  further  north,  the  groimd  rises  more;  and
a  most  fertile  plain  extends  towards  Banias,  on  which  grain  is
cultivated.  But  the  whole  region  is  given  up  to  Bedawin  and
Ghawarineh.  A  few  villages  are  scattered  upon  the  eastern
hills  ;  two  or  three  of  which  are  inhabited  by  Nusairiyeh.  The
whole  length  of  the  basin  may  thus  be  about  fifteen  geographi-
cal miles.

The  name  el-Huleh,  therefore,  as  used  at  present  by  the
inhabitants,  belongs  strictly  to  that  part  of  the  basin  north  of
el-Mellahah  and  the  lake  ;  though  it  is  commonly  so  extended
as  to  comprise  the  whole.  ^  The  more  eastern  portion,  including
some  villages  around  Banias,  is  called  Hulet  Banias,  and  be-
longs to  the  government  of  Hasbeiya.  Around  and  below  Bani-
as itself,  the  region  is  called  Ard  Banias.''  The  northwest  part
of  the  basin  falls  within  the  district  of  Merj  'Ayun,  which
extends  down  so  as  to  embrace  it.  In  1834,  my  companion,  Mr
Smith,  on  his  way  to  Damascus,  travelled  from  Tiberias  to
Hasbeiya,  a  good  two  days'  journey,  encamping  for  the  night  at
'Ain  el-Mellahah.  The  next  year  he  passed  from  Safed  along
the  lake,  encamped  at  Belat,  and  pursued  his  journey  through
Merj  'Ayftn  and  by  Jezzin  and  Deir  el-Kamr  to  Beirut.  In
neither  instance,  did  he  hear  of  any  inhabited  village  in  the
Htileh  near  the  road.

*  Willibald  in  the  eighth  century  speaks  '  So  called  frma  the  village  el-Ghujar

here  also  of  buffalos:  "  Armenta  mirabilia  not  far  distant.

longo  dorso,  brevibus   cruribus,  magnis  ^  So  already  Bohaeddin,  Vit.  Salad,  p.

cornibus  creati ;  omnes  sunt  uiiius  colons."  98.    Abulfeda  speaks  only  of  the  lake  of

He  describes  them  in  sommer  as  inimers-  Banuis  ;  Tab.  Sjt.  pp  147,  155.

ipg  themselves  wholly  in  the  marshes,  ex-  *  Burckhardt  p.  38.
cept  the  head,  etc.  llodcepor.  §  17.  p.  375.
ui.  341-343

June  21.]

THE  PLAIN.     GENERAL  FEATURES.

437

Such  was  the  amount  of  our  observations  and  information,
in  respect  to  the  lake  and  basin  of  the  Huleh  itself.  The  town
of  Banias  in  its  northeast  quarter  we  could  not  here  see  ;  it
being  hidden  behind  some  projections  of  the  hiUs  in  its  vicin-
ity. But  the  ruined  Saracenic  castle,  Kid'at  Banias,  called
by  Arabian  writers  Kul'at  es-Subeibeh,  standing  upon  a  thin
ridge  cut  off"  from  Jebel  esh-Sheikh  by  a  deep  ravine,  was  dis-
tinctly visible.  From  the  point  where  we  now  stood,  this  castle
bore  N.  40°  E.  and  we  judged  the  distance  to  be  not  far  from
fifteen  or  sixteen  geographical  miles.  Beyond  it,  nearly  in  the
same  direction,  and  perhaps  twice  as  remote,  towered  the  lofty
summit  of  Jebel  esh-Sheikh,  here  seen  in  all  its  majesty,  with
its  long  narrow  glaciers,  like  stripes  of  snow,  extending  down
below  its  icy  crown,  and  glittering  in  the  sun.  Our  position
enabled  us  to  obtain  a  good  general  idea  of  the  country  on  the
north,  around  the  sources  of  the  Jordan  ;  and  the  same  was
confirmed  by  further  observation,  on  our  subsequent  journey.

The  mighty  parallel  ridges  of  Lebanon  and  Anti-Lebanon,
the  Jebel  Libnan  and  Jebel  esh-Shurky  (East  Mountain)  of  the
Arabs,'  enclose  the  noble  valley  now  called  el-Buka'a,  once
Ccele-Syria  proper,  watered  throughout  the  greater  portion  of
its  length  by  the  river  Litany,  the  ancient  Leontes.  The  gener-
al direction  of  the  mountains,  the  valley,  and  the  stream,  is
from  northeast  to  southwest.  The  lofty  southern  end  of  Anti-
Lebanon  is  called  Jebel  esh-Sheikh.  It  rises  to  its  highest
elevation  nearly  south  of  Rasheiya  and  over  Hasbeiya  ;  and  is
supposed  to  be  somewhat  higher  than  Jebel  Sunnin  near  Beirftt.
The  usual  estimate  of  its  height  is  ten  thousand  feet  above  the
Mediterranean.  The  top  is  partially  crowned  vsdth  snow,  or
rather  ice,  during  the  whole  year ;  which  however  lies  only  in
the  ravines,  and  thus  presents  at  a  distance  the  appearance  of
radiant  stripes,  around  and  below  the  summit.  The  mountain
afterwards  slopes  off  gradually  and  irregularly  towards  the  W.
S.  W.  quite  down  to  the  opening  of  Wady  et-Teim  upon  the
plain,  northwest  of  Banias.  In  this  part  there  is  some  cultivation,
and  several  villages.  From  the  southeastern  base  of  the  high
part  of  Jebel  esh-Sheikh,  a  low  broad  spur  or  mountainous  tract
runs  off  towards  the  south,  forming  the  high  land  which  shuts
in  the  basin  and  lake  of  the  Huleh  on  the  east.  According  to
Burckhardt,  this  tract  is  called  Jebel  Heish  ;  the  higher  portion
of  it  terminates  at  Tell  el-Faras,  nearly  three  hours  north  of
Fik  ;  but  the  same  high  plain  of  Jaulan  continues  towards  the

'  These  are  general  names  ;   but  the  nin,  etc. — The  name  Jebel  Libnan  occurs

Arabs  more  commonly  employ  particular  in  Edrisi,  par  Jaubert  pp.  336,  356,  361.

names  for  different  parts  of  these  moun-  Abulfeda  Tab.  Syr.  pp.  163,  164.
tains ;  e.  g.  Jebel  esh-Sheikh,  Jebel  Sun-

VoL.  II.-37*  -      iii.  343-345.

438

REGION  OF  THE  HULEH.

[Sec.  XT,

south,  until  the  mountains  of  'Ajlun  rise  again  above  it,  in  the
district  el-Wastiyeh  and  around  el-Husn.'

The  chain  of  Lebanon  or  at  least  its  higher  ridges,  may  be
said  to  terminate  at  the  point,  where  it  is  broken  through  by  the
river  Litany,  somewhat  north  of  Tyre.  But  a  broad  and  lower
mountainous  tract  continues  towards  the  south,  bordering  the
basin  of  the  Hiileh  on  the  west ;  it  rises  to  its  greatest  elevation
around  Safed  (Jebel  Safed)  ;  and  ends  at  length  abruptly  in  the
mountains  of  Nazareth,  as  the  northern  wall  of  the  plain  of
Esdraelon.  This  high  tract  may  be  regarded  as  the  prolonga-
tion of  Mount  Lebanon.

Wady  et-Teim  lies  along  the  western  base  of  Jebel  esh-
Sheikh  and  Anti-Lebanon  ;  being  separated  from  the  proper
valley  of  the  Litany  by  a  ridge  and  line  of  hills,  extending  north
as  far  as  'Anjar.  The  water-shed,  which  is  also  the  head  of  the
southern  valley,  is  not  far  north  of  Rasheiya.  It  enters  the
basin  of  the  Hiileh  about  an  hour  west  of  Banias.  It  is  a  fer-
tile valley  with  a  considerable  stream  ;  skirted  on  each  side  by
declivities  of  various  height,  usually  cultivated  ;  with  no  plain
along  the  middle,  except  at  the  southern  end.  On  the  hiUs  are
many  villages.  It  is  divided  into  two  districts,  called  the  Uppex
and  Lower  Wady  et-Teim  ;  the  capital  of  the  former  being
Rasheiya,  and  that  of  the  latter  Hasbeiya.  The  lower  district
includes  also  Banias  and  the  vicinity.  These  and  some  other
districts,  form  the  pro\ance  of  Jebel  esh-Sheikh.'^

West  of  the  southern  part  of  Wady  et-Teim,  between  it
and  the  Litany,  lies  the  fine  region  of  Merj  'Ajxm,  separated
from  the  Teim  by  a  range  of  hiUs.  It  is  an  oval  or  almost
circular  basin,  about  an  hour  in  diameter,  a  beautiful,  fertile,
well-watered  plain,  surrounded  by  hills,  which  in  some  parts  are
high,  but  mostly  arable.  On  the  north,  they  retain  this  charac-
ter quite  to  the  brow  of  the  descent  towards  the  Litany.  To-
wards the  south,  Merj  'Ayun  communicates  with  the  plain  of
the  Huleh  by  a  narrow  entrance,  through  which  flows  a  stream.

Merj  'Ayun'  forms  a  district  within  the  government  of
Belad  Besharah,  a  large  province  occupying  the  moimtaius  be-
tween the  Huleh  and  the  plain  of  Tyre,  and  having  for  its
capital  the  castle  of  Tibnin.*    The  route  of  my  companion  from

"  Burckhardt  pp.  281,  286  sq.  city  Ijon,  (Heb.  "ji'S)  of  the  Old  Testa-

"  The  Arabian  writer  edh-Dhfihiry  in  mcnt,  which  lay  somewhere  in  the  neigh-

the  ir)th  century,  speaks  of  Wady  et-Teim  bourhood  of  Dan  and  Naphtali.   1  Kings

as  a  district  in  the  province  of  Damascus,  1,5  20.  2  Chr.  16  4.

80  called  from  the  Wady,  and  containing  <  Tlic  district  of  Merj 'Ayfin  is  mentioned

360  villa0  s(i.  Herald  for  Nov.  1837,  p.  435  sq.

"  Summer  Kanihle,  Vol.  II.  p.  IGsq.  33.

iii.  306,367

June  22.]

THE  CRATER.  EL-JISH.

445

different  kinds  .or  ages. — Near  the  northwestern  fextremity,  a
space  of  a  few  feet  in  width  slopes  up  more  gradually  from  the
bottom,  leaving  a  sort  of  entrance  through  the  wall  of  the
crater.  The  hasin  is  usually  filled  with  water,  forming  a  pond  ;
but  was  now  nearly  or  quite  dry,  and  contained  nothing  hut
mud.  All  around  it  are  the  traces  of  its  former  action,  ex-
hibited in  the  strata  of  lava  and  the  vast  masses  of  volcanic
stones.  It  may  not  improbably  have  been  the  central  point  or
Ableiter  of  the  earthquake  of  1837.  Mr  Thomson,  who  passed
here  a  short  time  afterwards,  mentions  the  spot  in  his  report ;
but  appears  not  to  have  examined  it  in  reference  to  its  possible
connection  with  the  earthquake.'  Our  friends  also,  a  few  weeks
before,  had  seen  it ;  and  in  their  letters  had  directed  our  atten-
tion to  it.'^  The  pond  bears  the  name  of  Birket  el-Jish,  from
the  next  village.^

Further  on,  and  still  in  the  plain,  one  road  to  Tyre  goes  off
more  to  the  left ;  our  friends  who  preceded  us,  had  taken  this
route,  and  visited  upon  it  a  place,  where  a  species  of  chalcedony
is  found  in  great  abundance.  Our  path  continued  straight
onward  ;  at  2.25  we  reached  the  extremity  of  the  high  plain,
and  had  before  us-  a  fine  lower  basin-Kke  plain,  tUled  and
surrounded  by  bushy  liills.  Its  waters  here  flow  off  northwest
through  a  narrow  valley.  Before  us  was  el-Jish  on  a  conical
hill ;  and  further  to  the  left,  Sa'sa',  on  a  similar  hill,  on  the
north  of  the  line  of  mountains  already  mentioned,  running  off
northwest  from  the  vicinity  of  Safed,  and  limiting  the  prospect
on  that  side.*

We  came  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  el-Jish  is  situated
at  2.35,  on  the  north  of  the  beautiful  plain  just  described,  and
having  in  the  northeast  a  deep  narrow  Wady,  a  ravine,  running
N.  N.  W.  Jish  was  totally  destroyed  by  the  earthquake  ;  not
a  house  of  any  kind  was  left  standing.  The  Christians  were  at
prayers  in  their  church  ;  which  fell  upon  them,  and  destroyed
more  than  one  hundred  and  tlairty  persons.  Two  hundred  and
thirty-five  names,  in  all,  of  those  who  perished  in  the  village,
were  returned  to  the  government.  A  large  rent  in  the  ground
just  on  the  east  of  the  viUage,  when  seen  nearly  three  weeks
afterwards,  was  about  a  foot  wide  and  fifty  feet  long  ;  it  was
described  as  having  been  at  first  much  larger.^  As  we  now  saw
the  village,  it  had  been  partly  rebuilt,  and  began  to  assume
again  its  former  aspect.

'  See  his  Report,  Miss.  Herald  1.  c.  p.  '  From  the  crater,  Safed  bore  S.  27°  E.

436.              _  and  Benit  S.  65  E.    See  p.  434,  above.

'  See  on  this  crater,  Auderson's  Geol.  *  See  above,  p.  432.

Report,  p.  128.    Dr  Anderson  found  two  '  Mr  Thomson's  Report,  Miss.  Herald

other  similar  craters  near  Teitebch  and  1.  c.  p.  435. — West  of  el-Jish  Nt  T.  seems

Delata  ;  ibid.  p.  129.  to  have  followed  another  road.

Vol.  II.— 38  ui.  367-369

446  '  FROM  SAFED  TO  TTEE,  [Sec.  XYL

The  name  el-Jish  enables  us  to  recognise  here  the  Giscala
of  Josephus,  a  place  several  times  mentioned  by  this  writer,  and
fortified  by  his  orders.  It  was  the  last  fortress  in  Gahlee  to
hold  out  against  the  Romans  ;  but  finally  made  terms  with
Titus,  and  surrendered  itself,  contraiy  to  the  will  of  John,  a
native  leader,  who  retired  to  Jerusalem  and  became  one  of  the
defenders  of  that  city  against  Titus.  ^  Jerome  relates,  as  a
fable,  the  story,  that  the  parents  of  the  apostle  Paul  were  from
Giscala.^  It  is  the  same  place  spoken  of  in  the  Talmud  under
the  name  of  Gush  Halab,  situated  not  far  from  Meiron,  and
celebrated  for  its  oil.^ — Benjamin  of  Tudela  mentions  it  as
containing  a  score  of  Jews  in  his  time,  and  lying  a  day's  journey
from  Tibnin  ;  in  the  following  centuries,  the  tombs  of  several
Jewish  Kabbis  are  enumerated  here,  and  there  is  said  also  to
have  been  a  synagogvie.^

From  the  foot  of  the  hill  of  Jish,  Sa'sa'  bore  N.  77°  W.
distant  about  an  hour.  This  place  is  also  mentioned  in  the
fourteenth  century  and  later,  as  containing  the  tombs  of  several
Jewish  Rabbis.^    It  is  now  a  Muhammedan  village.

Instead  of  entering  the  village  of  Jish,  we  passed  below  it,
around  the  right  side  of  the  hill,  along  the  brink  of  the  deep
valley  above  mentioned,  into  which  we  gradually  descended.
We  came  to  the  bottom  at  2.55,  where  was  a  very  small  stream-
let of  water. — Further  down  were  two  or  three  small  fountains,
where  shepherds  were  watering  their  flocks.  This  valley  is
called  Wady  el-Mu'addamiyeh  ;  the  banks  are  very  steep  and
high,  so  that  we  could  for  a  time  see  nothing  of  the  country.
After  half  an  hour  we  reached  its  junction  with  another  larger
Wady  coming  from  the  southwest.  We  followed  down  tliis
valley  towards  the  north  for  fifteen  minutes  ;  here  it  turns  again
northeast  and  goes  to  join  another  Wady  called  Hendaj,  which
descends  into  the  Ard  el-Khait,  and  enters  the  lake  el-Hiileh  at
its  southern  extremity.

Leaving  this  valley,  we  ascended  by  a  steep  lateral  Wady
towards  the  N.  N.  W.  and  came  out  at  4^  o'clock  upon  high
undulating  table  land,  arable  and  everywhere  tilled,  with  swell-
ing hdls  in  view  all  around,  covered  with  shrubs  and  trees.
The  stones  had  mostly  disappeared.    Here  too  we  had  a  view

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  2.  20.  6.    ib.  4.  1.  1.  ^bn  CS,  of  which  the  Arabic  retains

ib.  4.  2.  1-5.  ib.  c.  .3.  Vita  §  38.    Comp.  ^^jy  ^he  first  word.

§§  10,  13.    Reland  Pal.  p.  812.  4  gg^j       rYud.  I.  p.  82.    Cantioly,  pp.

Hiernn.  Comm.  in  riiilem.  23,  "Ta-  ]33,  181,  262,  380,452.  Hottingcr'Cippi

lem  fabulam  accepimus :  Aiunt  parentes  Hcbraici  Ed.  2.  p.  70.    The  writer  of  this

ApostoliPaulideGysualisregione  Judiea;,"  hitter  Itinerary  speaks  of  the  synagogue,

etc.  Rehmd  p.  813.  and  refers  it"  back  to  R.  Simeon  Ben

^  See  the  Talmudic  passages,  Lightfoot  Joohai

Opera  II.  p.  503.    Reland  Pal.  p.  817;  "  Carmoly,  pp.  2G2,  380,  451.  Hottin-

comp.    813.     The    Rabbinic    form    is  ger  Cippi  Heb.  p.  68.
iii.  3G9.  370

Jnira:  22.]

EL-JISH,  GISCALA.  TARON.

447

of  a  fine  tract  of  open  cultivated  country  towards  the  Huleh,
with  several  villages  upon  it.'  Passing  on  over  a  tract  of  high
ground,  covered  with  small  oaks,  we  descended  a  httle  along  a
fine  shallow  hasin  on  our  left,  in  which  the  reapers  were  gather-
ing an  abundant  harvest.  Its  waters  are  drained  off  towards
the  southwest,  and  become  tributary,  we  were  told,  to  a  Wady
called  el-'Ayun,  which  runs  to  the  western  sea  just  north  of
Kas  el-Abyad,  the  Promontorium  album.  As  we  rode  along
the  northeastern  border  of  the  basin,  we  had  on  our  right  the
open  country  around  Farah,  as  already  mentioned  ;  the  waters
of  which  descend  to  the  Htileh.

We  came  now  upon  still  higher  ground,  and  had  soon  upon
our  left  a  large  village,  about  half  an  hour  distant,  named
Yaron  while  another  called  Maron  was  on  a  higher  hill  at
about  the  same  distance  on  our  right.  Just  beyond  these,  at
4f  o'clock,  we  saw  on  our  left,  near  the  road,  a  very  large  sarco-
phagus, lying  here  in  utter  loneliness.  It  is  of  hmestone,  plainly
hewn,  and  measures  eight  feet  in  length  by  four  and  a  half  feet  in
breadth  and  height.  The  lid  is  thrown  off,  and  measures  two  feet
thick  ;  the  upper  side  is  slanted  off  like  a  double  roof ;  the  ends
resemble  a  pediment.  Scattered  around  it  are  columns  and
fragments  of  columns  of  moderate  size.  It  would  seem  as  if
the  sarcophagus  had  stood  originally  on  or  near  this  spot,  with  a
small  temple  over  it ;  forming  a  solitary  tomb,  not  unlike  that
of  Hiram  nearer  Tyre.

The  way  now  led  us  along  an  almost  level  ridge,  on  the  water-
summit  between  the  Huleh  and  the  Mediterranean.  It  was  a
fine  and  fertile  strip  of  land,  and  patches  of  it  were  occupied  by
a  species  of  vetch,  called  in  Arabic  Hummus.  At  4.55  we
crossed  a  small  shallow  Wady  running  west,  §,nd  ascended  a
ridge  wooded  with  small  oak  trees,  on  a  course  northwest.  The
whole  country  was  now  a  succession  of  swelling  wooded  hills
and  valleys,  a  soft  and  pleasing  landscape,  especially  towards  the
southwest.  The  prickly  oak  is  very  abundant.  Half  an  hour
later,  we  reached  the  top  of  the  ridge,  and  our  course  became
north.  This  soon  brought  us  to  a  broad  shallow  arable  valley,
called  Wady  Eumeish,  running  off  towards  the  south  to  the
village  of  that  name  to  join  Wady  el-'Ayun.  We  passed  up
along  its  eastern  side,  and  came  at  6.10  to  Bint  JebeU,  a  large

'  Among  others,  Farah  bore  N.  85°  E.  These  are  probably  the  "  ruins  of  n  church

RAs  el-Ahmar  S.  45°  E.  el-Jish  S.  10°  E.  of  white  marble  "  spoken  of  by  Monro  ;  who

^  In  A.  D.  1674,  Nau  und  his  party  appears  also  to  have  seen  the  sarcophagus

spent  a  night  at  Yaron ;  he  describes  there  mentioned  in  the  text,  though  I  am  unable

the  remains  of  a  monastery  and  church  on  to  recognise  it  in  his  description  ;  Vol.  II.

an  eminence  near  by,  with  the  bases  and  p.  17.  AVest  of  this  point,  his  route  seems  to

fragments  of  many  columns;  pp.  551,  552.  have  been  different  from  ours.

iii.  370-372

448

FROM  SAFED  TO  TYRE.

[Sec.  XVI

Yillage,  surrounded  by  many  vineyards,  where  we  proposed  to
halt  for  the  night.

We  were  about  to  pitch  our  tent  outside  of  the  village,  near
the  threshing-floors,  where  the  people  were  still  at  work,  when
the  Sheikh  and  head  men  of  the  village  came  to  us,  saying  they
were  exposed  to  an  attack  from  the  rebel  Druzes  now  in  arms  in
and  around  Hasbeiya.  A  village  in  the  north,  not  far  o&,  had
been  robbed  the  night  before  ;  and  to  night  their  village  might
be  plundered  ;  they  therefore  advised  us  to  go  on  further.  We
at  first  regarded  all  this  as  a  mere  pretext ;  and  our  muleteers
also  declined  to  go  on,  as  it  was  now  late  and  no  other  village
near.  The  men  then  proposed  that  we  should  lodge  within  the
village  in  a  Medafeh,  where  we  should  be  more  secure  ;  since
our  tent  would  naturally  at  once  attract  the  notice,  and  excite  the
cupidity  of  plunderers.  This  ad\dce  also  we  were  not  disposed
to  follow,  well  knowing  the  torments  to  which  we  shoiJd  thus  IJie
subjected.  Meanwhile,  one  of  the  chief  men  invited  us  to  lodge
in  his  ov.'n  house  ;  and  as  this  very  unusual  step  testified  at  least
their  sincerity,  we  at  length,  though  unwillingly,  accepted  his
proposal.  The  whole  house  was  given  up  to  us  ;  the  women
and  children  being  removed  out  of  it  for  the  night.  Our  mule-
teers were  lodged  at  a  Medafeh.

The  inhabitants  of  Bint  Jebeil  are  all,  or  nearly  all,  Meta-
wileh,  (Sing.  Mutawaly,)  a  Muhammedan  sect  here  regarded  as
heretical,  though  their  tenets  accord  for  the  most  part  with  those
of  the  sect  of  'Aly,  or  the  Shiites  (Shi'ah)  of  Persia.'  Their
chief  practical  characteristic,  which  forces  itself  upon  the  notice
of  a  stranger,  is  the  custom_^  neither  to  eat  nor  drink  with  those
of  another  religion  ;  to  which  they  rigidly  adhere.  They  use  no
vessel,  for  instaqpe,  out  of  which  a  Christian  has  eaten  or  drank,
until  it  has  been  thoroughly  cleansed  ;  and  if  a  Christian  chance
to  drink  out  of  one  of  their  earthen  vessels,  they  break  it  in
pieces.  They  are  said  even  to  regard  themselves  as  unclean,
should  a  stranger  touch  their  clothes.  All  these  circumstances
in  their  character  went  to  show  the  sincerity  of  our  host,  when-
he  gave  up  his  house  for  our  use.  We  were  treated  in  all  re-
spects with  great  civility  ;  yet  both  our  host  and  his  friends
absolutely  refused  to  partake  of  our  evening  meal ;  and  those
who  came  to  visit  us,  would  not  touch  our  cotlce. — In  this  mani-
festation of  kindness,  they  did  not  profess  to  be  wholly  disinter-
ested ;  for  if  any  thing  happened  to  us,  the  government,  they
said,  would  hold  them  responsible.  It  only  showed  the  reality
of  their  alarm  ;  wliich,  however,  for  tliis  time  proved  groundless.

The  house  to  which  we  were  thus  introduced,  was  one  of  the

'  See  Sale's  Koran,  Prelim.  Disc.  c.  viii.    Nicbulir  Reisebeschr.  11.  p.  426  sq.  Volney
Voyage  II.  p.  77  sq.
iii.  372. 373

Jcrre  23.]

BI^"T  JEBEIL.     PRIVATE  HOUSI!.

449

best  in  the  village,  and  marked  a  man  of  some  wealtL  It  stood
with  its  north  end  on  one  of  the  lanes  ;  on  the  west  side  was  a
very  small  court  adjoining  the  lane  ;  and  in  the  comer  of  it  a
small  shed  serving  as  a  kitchen.  The  door  entered  from  this
court  ;  and  one  trod  within  first  upon  the  groimd,  and  then  upon
the  floor,  raised  like  a  low  platform  on  two  sides  of  the  interior,
leaving  an  unfloored  space  of  about  one  third  of  the  whole  inte-
rior to  serve  as  a  stable.  Here  a  donkey  was  already  enjoying  his
night-quarters  ;  while  we  spread  our  beds  upon  the  adjacent
floor.  The  room  and  floor  might  be  termed  neat  for  a  Syrian
village  ;  and  the  walls  were  even  not  destitute  of  ornament.  In
one  comer  was  a  small  fireplace,  having  little  cupboards  over  it
decorated  with  carved  work  ;  rudely  done  indeed,  but  yet  oma-
mentaL  Our  host  and  several  people  of  the  village  sat  with  us
till  late  at  night.

We  were  now  in  the  province  called  Belad  Besharah  ;  this
includes  also  the  two  vOlages  Yaron  and  Maron  which  we  had
passed,  and  extends  to  the  plain  of  Sur.  On  the  north  it  is
bordered  bv  the  Litany,  and  embraces  the  district  of  Merj  'Ayiin.
It  is  a  large  province,  having  a  governor  of  its  own,  who  was  now
residing  in  Siir  v.Tyre)  ;  though  the  proper  capital  of  the  province
Ls  Tibnin.  It  contains  many  thrifty  villages,  inhabited  mostly
bv  Metawileh  :  with  only  a  few  Christians,  chiefly  of  the  Ma-
ronite  sect.  One  characteristic  of  the  region  is,  that  it  cultivates
few  oHve  trees  and  makes  little  oil.  On  the  other  hand,  butter
is  abundant ;  and  our  lamp  to-night  was  fiUed  with  butter
instead  of  oU.  The  part  of  the  district  which  we  traversed,  is
a  beautiful  country  ;  and  was  to  us  not  the  less  interesting,  for
being  weU  wooded.  Here,  for  the  first  time  in  Palestine,  we  saw
the  bills  thickly  clothed  with  trees.

S<3uth  of  Belad  Besharah,  between  Safed  and  'Akka,  is  the
smaller  district  called  el-Jebel,  in  which,  although  inhabited
chiefly  by  Muhammedans,  the  Druzes  are  very  frequent.  Be-
tween this  district  and  Nazareth,  is  another  called  esh-Shaghur,
which  has  likewise  a  few  Drazes.'

Saturday,  J une  23d.  VTe  prepared  for  a  very  early  start  ;
but  a  new  hindrance  arose,  which  delayed  us  for  a  time.  Our
younger  muleteer  had  been  Ul  more  or  less  all  the  way  from
Jerusalem,  so  that  he  was  often  unable  to  help  load  the  animals.
Yet  he  had  gradually  been  gaining  in  health  ;  and  as  we  ap-
proached Safed,  his  native  place,  his  minute  acquaintance  with
the  country,  and  his  obliging  disposition,  had  rendered  his  ser-
vices quite  valuable.  Indeed,  he  had  never  appeared  in  better
spirits,  nor  had  we  ever  estimated  his  intelligence  and  good-
nature more  highly,  than  on  our  little  excursion  from  Safed  to

'  See  above,  p.  371.  a  2.
Vol.  II.— 35*  iii.  373-375

450

FROM  SAFED  TO  TYRE.

[Sec.  XVI.

Benit.  But  during  the  night  in  Safed,  he  had  probably  been
guilty  of  excesses,  which  had  yesterday  made  him  again  quite
all,  and  now  rendered  him  unable  to  proceed.  He  was  therefore
left  at  Bint  J ebeil  ;  and  his  partner  hired  a  young  man  to  go  on
with  us,  as  his  servant.  The  latter  was  a  Mutawaly  ;  but  made
no  scruple  to  eat  and  drink  with  our  Muhammedan  servants.

We  set  off  at  length  without  breakfast  at  4^  o'clock,  on  a
course  at  first  N.  N.  W.  crossing  Wady  Rumeish  ;  on  the  east
side  of  which  Bint  Jebeil  is  situated.  The  country  continued
as  before,  undulating,  cultivated,  wooded,  and  beautiful ;  a  suc-
cession of  hiU  and  dale,  -with,  more  distant  hills  still  higher  and
more  thickly  w^ooded.  Indeed,  from  this  whole  region,  consider-
able quantities  of  wood  for  fuel  are  carried  to  the  coast,  for
transportation  by  sea.  The  chief  supply  for  Beirut  comes  from
this  quarter.  The  little  vUlage  of  Tireh  we  saw  a  few  minutes
distant  on  our  left,  at  5.20  ;  the  ground  declining  in  that  direc-
tion. At  6  o'clock  we  came  out  upon  an  elevated  ridge,  where
there  was  a  distant  glimpse  of  the  western  sea.  Here  we  had
our  last  view  of  the  country  behind  us  ;  Sa'sa'  bore  S.  5°  W.
showing  the  general  direction  of  our  course  ;  and  Tershihah  S.
45°  W.  Both  are  Muhammedan  villages  in  the  district  el-
Jebel.

The  way  now  led  us  for  some  time  down  a  densely  wooded
hill  side.  After  ten  minutes,  the  view  opened  before  us  over  an
open  tract,  with  the  village  Haddata  in  front ;  while  more  on
the  right  was  an  extensive,  undulating,  cultivated  region,  of
great  beaiity,  with  the  castle  of  Tibnin  on  an  isolated  hill  in  the
midst.  Around  the  base  of  the  castle  hill  is  the  town  of  the
same  name,  regarded  as  the  chief  place  of  the  district  Belad
Besharah.  The  waters  of  all  this  tract  run  northwestwards  to
the  Litany.  At  6^  o'clock  we  passed  Haddata,  a  large  village
close  on  our  left.  Here  Tibnin  bore  N.  30°  E.  about  half  an  hour
distant.  The  castle  appeared  large,  and  the  walls  not  greatly
impaired,  though  dilapidated.  It  is  obviously  of  the  time  of
the  crusades.  In  it  resides  a  family  of  Sheikhs,  which  is  regard-
ed as  the  head  of  all  the  Metawileh  of  this  region  ;  called  the
house  of  'Aly  es-Sughir.  They  boast  of  high  antiquity  ; .  and
are  exclusive  in  their  marriages,  like  the  Sheikhs  of  the  Drazes.
— A  small  village  called  'Aithah  was  also  on  our  right,  at  the  dis-
tance of  about  fifteen  minutes.  The  valley  on  our  right  passed
off  N.  N.  W.  towards  the  Litanj^

Five  minutes  further  on,  at  G.35,  the  great  castle  Kul'at  esh-
Shukif  opened  on  our  view,  bearing  N.  40°  E.  at  the  distance
of  several  liours.  This  fortress  stands  on  a  precipice,  which
overhangs  the  western  bank  of  the  Litany,  near  the  bridge
northwest  of  Merj  'Ayfln.     It  is  in  liigh  renown  among  the

iii.  375,  376

JnsE  23.]

CASTLE  OF  TIBNIN.

451

natives,  as  a  place  of  wonderful  structure  and  vast  strength.  It
gives  name  to  the  adjacent  district,  called  Belad  esh-Shukif ;
lying  between  the  Litany  on  the  south,  and  the  territory  of  the
Emir  Beshir  of  Mount  Lebanon  on  the  north,  and  extending
west  to  the  plain  along  the  coast.

These  two  great  fortresses  of  Tibnin  and  esh-Shuldf  figure
not  unfrequently  in  the  history  of  the  crusades  ;  but  l}'ing  in  the
mountains  at  a  distance  from  the  common  routes,  they  have
subsequently  escaped  the  observation  of  almost  all  travellers.  A
few  further  notices  of  them,  may  therefore  be  here  not  out  of
place.

The  fortress  of  Tibnin,  as  we  are  informed  by  William  of
Tyre,  was  erected  in  A.  D.  1107  by  Hugh  of  St.  Omer,  then
lord  of  Tiberias.  This  chieftain  was  in  the  habit  of  making  in-
cursions upon  the  city  and  territory  of  Tyre,  which  had  not  yet
been  subdued  by  the  Franks  ;  and  buUt  this  castle  as  a  strong
hold,  in  furtherance  of  his  plans,  on  the  way  beween  the  two
cities  ;  selecting  for  its  site  a  conspicuous  height,  in  the  midst
of  a  rich  and  cultivated  tract  upon  the  mountains,  abounding  in
vineyards,  fruits,  and  forests.  To  this  new  fortress,  built  up  most
probably  on  earlier  foundations,  the  founder  gave  the  name  of
Toron,  by  which  it  is  usually  mentioned  among  the  Franks  ;
Arabian  writers  know  it  only  as  Tibnin.'  It  became  an  impor-
tant fortress,  and  gave  name  to  the  family  of  its  possessors.  In
A.  D.  1551,  Honfroy  of  Toron  was  appointed  as  the  constable
of  king  Baldwin  III  ;  he  is  described  as  having  large  possessions
in  Phenicia,  and  in  the  mountains  around  Tyre  ;  and  after
having  acted  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  transactions  of  the
succeeding  years,  was  at  last  mortally  wounded  in  the  battle
near  Banias  in  A.  D.  1179. His  grandson  of  the  same  name,
married  the  younger  sister  of  Baldwin  IV  ;  and  was  afterwards
offered  the  crown  of  Jerusalem,  by  the  barons  assembled  at
Nabulus,  in  opposition  to  Guy  of  Lusignan.  This  he  was  wise
enough  to  decHne  ;  and  having  joined  the  banner  of  Guy,  was
taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Hattin.^  Immediately  after  this
battle,  in  the  same  year,  A.  D.  1187,  the  fortress  was  invested
by  Saladin  himself,  and  captured  after  an  assault  of  six  days.*

'  Will  Tyr.  11.5,  "  In  montibus  .  .  .  ture  of  Tyre  in  A.  D.  112-t ;  Gesch.  der

ab  eadem  urbe  Tyrensi  quasi  per  decern  Kr.  V.  p.  -12.  n.

distantibus  miliaria,  in  locum  cui  nomen  *  Will  T\t.  17.  14.  ib.  21.  27.  Wilken

priscum  Tibenin,  castrum  jedificare,  cui  1.  c.  III.  ii.  pp.  13, 191.  See  above,  p.  -1-12.

,  .  .  nomen  indidit  Toronum."    Jacob  de  ^  Will.  Tyr.  22.  5.  Jac.  de  Vitr.  c.  93.

Vitry  copies  the  language  of  William  of  p.  1117.    Wilken  L  c.  pp.  201,  25,5,  287.

Tyre,  omitting  tlie  date  ;  c.  43,  p.  1072.  Comp.  above,  p.  376.

Wilken  quotes  the  latter  author,  and  ap-  *  Bohaed.  Vit.  Salad,  pp.  71,  72.  Rei-

pears  to  have  overlooked  the  original  ac-  naud  tstr.  p.  202.    Wilken  L  c.  III.  ii.  p.

count  of  the  former ;   hence  he  remarks  295.
only,  that  Toron  was  built  before  the  cap-

iii.  376-378

452

FROM  SAFED  TO  TYRE.

[Sec.  XVI

The  original  relations  of  Tibnin  and  Tyre  were  now  reversed  ;
and  the  Saracens  in  possession  of  the  formerj  henceforth  harassed
from  it  the  Christians  as  masters  of  the  latter.  To  do  away  this
evil,  the  new  host  of  pilgrims  and  crusaders,  chiefly  from  Ger-
many, which  arrived  in  the  Holy  Land  in  A.  D.  1197,  undertook
among  other  enterprises  the  reduction  of  the  castle  of  Tibnin.
The  Christian  host  sat  down  before  the  fortress  on  the  11th  of
December,  under  the  command  of  the  Duke  of  Brabant  ;  not
indeed  with  unanimity  and  confidence  ;  for  distmst  already  existed
between  the  Syrian  Franks  and  the  new  comers,  who  longed  to
press  forward  against  Jerusalem.  Yet  the  siege  was  urged  with
vigour  ;  and  as  the  steepness  of  the  hill  on  which  the  castle
stood,  prevented  the  approach  of  the  usual  machines,  mines
were  driven  under  the  hill  beneath  the  walls.  In  this  labour,
the  many  pilgrims  from  Goslar  in  Germany,  who  were  practically
acquainted  with  mining  for  metals,  rendered  great  service.  At
length  after  four  weeks  the  mines  were  sprung,  and  breaches
formed  in  the  waUs  in  many  places.

Tlie  Muslim  garrison  now  desired  to  capitulate,  and  sent
seven  of  their  leaders  to  the  Christian  camp  to  propose  terms.
Their  proposals  were  favourably  received  by  the  princes  ;  but
the  voice  of  discontent  broke  out  in  the  host,  and  especially
among  the  Syrian  Franks,  that  the  now  defenceless  fortress
should  not  be  carried  by  storm,  and  an  example  be  made  which
should  strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  their  enemies.  Yet  after
long  wavering,  the  terms  proposed  were  accepted  ;  and  a  portion
of  the  delegates  remained  as  hostages  in  the  camp,  while  the
rest  returned  to  the  fortress.  But  such  was  their  report  of  the
disunion  prevailing  among  the  Christian  warriors,  that  the  garri-
son resolved  to  maintain  their  post  ;  and  continued  the  defence
with  obstinacy,  leaving  the  hostages  to  their  fate.

The  besiegers  now  renewed  their  assaults  ;  with  the  more
energy  perhaps,  because  they  had  reason  to  dread  the  approach
of  Melek  el-Adil  with  a  Saracen  army.  On  the  last  day  of
January  a  council  of  war  was  held,  and  a  general  storm  of  the
fortress  determined  upon  for  the  next  day.  The  announcement
of  this  measure  was  received  with  joy  ;  and  all  parties  united  in
mutual  resolves  and  exhortations,  either  to  conquer  or  die.
Meantime  it  was  reported  through  the  host,  that  the  servants
of  the  princes,  with  their  baggage,  had  left  the  camp  on  their
way  to  Tyre.  The  pilgrims  instantly  followed  the  example  ;
loaded  up  their  baggage,  and  hurried  off  in  the  same  direction,
on  horseback  and  on  foot  ;  abandoning  the  camp  in  such  haste
and  confusion,  that  many  lost  all  their  effects,  and  the  sick  and
wounded  were  left  behind.  To  heighten  the  confusion  and  dis-
may, a  \'iolent  storm  of  rain  and  hail  burst  upon  the  heads  of

iii.  378,  379

JuxK  23.]

CASTLE  ESB-SHUKIF.

453

the  Christians  during  their  disgraceful  flight.  Thus  shamefully
ended  this  memorahle  siege  ;  after  having  twice  been  on  the  point
of  being  brought  to  a  successful  conclusion.'

We  hear  little  more  of  Tibnin.  In  A.  D.  1219  it  was  dis-
mantled, like  other  fortresses,  by  the  Sultan  Mu'adh-dhem,  in
order  that  it  might  not  again  become  a  strong  hold  of  the
Christians.'^  Yet  it  appears  once  more  to  have  come  into  their
hands  ;  for  in  A.  D.  1266  we  find  Sultan  Bibars  taking  possession
of  it,  after  the  siege  and  capture  of  Safed.'  The  place  is  spoken
of  by  Benjamin  of  Tudela,  and  also  by  Brocardus  ;  but  appears
ever  since  to  have  remained  uuAasited  and  unknown,  except  the
slight  mention  of  the  name  by  Nau,  who  passed  here  in  A.  D.
1674.^

The  castle  esh-Sliuhif  bears  among  the  Frank  historians  of
the  crusades  the  name  of  Behbrt  or  Beaufort.'  The  date  of  its
erection  is  not  given,  nor  are  we  informed  whether  it  was  erected
by  Christians  or  Saracens  ;  though  not  improbably  it  was  built
up  by  the  Christians,  like  the  neighbouring  fortresses  of  Tibnin,
Safed,  Kaukab  or  Belvoir,  and  others.  It  is  mentioned  by
"WUliam  of  Tyre,  in  A.  D  1179,  as  a  castle  of  the  Franks  ;  he
relates  that  after  the  partial  defeat  of  the  Christians  in  that  year
by  Saladin  near  Banias,  many  of  the  knights  and  troops  took
refuge  in  the  neighbouiing  fortress  of  Belfort.'  In  A.  D.  1189,
nearly  two  years  after  the  battle  of  Hattin,  Saladin  with  his
army  sat  down  on  the  last  day  of  April  before  esh-Shukif.  The
siege  was  prolonged  by  the  artifices  of  Eaynald  of  Sidon,  the
commander  of  the  castle ;  who  came  into  Saladin's  camp  and  of-
fered to  dehver  up  the  fortress,  provided  the  Sultan  would  grant
him  three  months'  time,  in  order  to  remove  his  family  and  efiects
from  Tyre  to  a  place  of  security.  The  conditions  were  accept-
ed ;  but  when  the  time  expired,  Raynald  still  sought  by  various
pretexts  to  obtain  further  delay.  Meantime  the  investment  of
'Akka  by  a  new  host  of  crusaders,  called  ofi"  the  attention  of
Saladin  ;  and  tired  of  the  subterfuges  of  Eaynald,  he  sent  him
in  chains  to  Damascus,  and  broke  off  for  a  time  the  siege  of
esh-Shukif,  in  order  to  watch  the  army  of  the  Franks.  Yet  the
fortress  was  again  invested,  and  was  surrendered  to  him  in  April

'  The  particulars  of  tbis  siege  are  *  Benj.  of  Tnd.  I.  p.  108  ;  comp.  Hot-
given  by  Arnold  of  Lnbeck  lib.  Y.  c.  4  sq.  tinger  Cippi  Hebr.  Ed.  2.  p.  66. — Brocar-
in  Leibnitz  Scriptor  Rerum  Bruns\-ic.  Tom.  dus  c.  3.  p.  172.  Kau  Voyage  etc.  p.  5.52.
n.  p.  706  sq.  Oliver.  Scholast.  in  Eccardi  '  See  the  third  following  note.  Among
Corp.  Hist.  Med.  .■Evi,  Tom.  XL  p.  1391  Arabian  w-riters  its  common  appellation  is
sq.  Comp.  Ibn  el-Athir  in  Reinaud  Extr.  esh-Sh:.kif  Amun,  to  distinguish  it  from
pp.  380,  381.  See  Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kr.  several  other  fortresses  of  less  note  also
V.  p.  -42-53.  caUed  esh-Shukif.    Abulf  Tab.  S\-r.  p.

•'  Wilken  ib.  \T.  p.  236,  and  Abu  Sha-  98.    Schnltens  Index  in  Vito  Salad,  art

meh  as  there  cited.  Sjakvfunu

»  Reinaud  L  c.  p.  -498.    Wilken  ib.  \Tl.  «  Will.  Tyr.  21.  29.    Wilken  ib.  HI.  iL

p.  493.  p.  193.

iii.  380.  381

454

FROM  SAFED  TO  TYRE.

[Sec.  XVI.

of  the  next  year  ;  on  condition  of  tlie  liberation  of  Eaynald,  and
the  unmolested  retirement  of  the  garrison.'

The  castle  esh-Shukif  was  restored  to  the  Franks  in  A.  D.
1240,  along  with  Safed,  in  consequence  of  a  treaty  with  Isma'il,
Sultan  of  Damascus.^  The  garrison,  however,  refused  to  deliv-
er it  up  to  the  Christians,  and  surrendered  it  at  last  only  to
Isma'il  himself,  lea^dng  him  to  do  with  it  what  he  pleased.'
Twenty  years  later,  in  A.  D.  1260,  the  Templars  acquired  Sidon
and  the  fortress  of  Belfort  by  purchase  ;*  and  they  still  held
possession  of  it,  when  Bibars,  in  April  A.  D.  1268,  suddenly
appeared  before  it,  and  began  a  vehement  assault.  A  portion
of  the  garrison  had  been  withdrawn  the  preceding  day  ;  and
there  remained  not  enough  to  hold  out  against  the  vigorous
attacks  of  the  enemy.  After  a  few  days  of  vain  resistance,  the
Christians  surrendered  at  discretion  ;  the  men  were  distributed
as  slaves  among  the  attendants  of  the  conqueror,  while  the
women  and  children  were  sent  to  Tyre.  The  fortress  was  again
built  up,  and  furnished  with  a  garrison,  a  Kady,  and  Imans  for
the  mosk.'  It  is  mentioned  not  long  after  by  Abulfeda,  and
again  by  edh-Dhahiry  ;^  but  from  that  time  until  the  present
century,  esh-Shukif  appears  to  have  been  lost  sight  of  by  all
travellers.''

Our  course  as  we  descended  towards  Haddata  had  become
about  northwest  and  continued  in  this  general  direction,  or  rather
N.  W.  ^W.  quite  to  Tyre.  Twenty  minutes  from  Haddata,  at
6.50,  we  passed  a  village  on  the  left,  called  el-Haris  f  and  five
minutes  beyond,  came  out  upon  the  brow  of  a  steep  and  long  de-
scent, leading  down  from  the  high  broad  region  of  mountainous
country,  over  which  we  had  hitherto  been  travelling,  to  a  lower
tract  of  hiUs  and  valleys  lying  intermediate  between  this  upper
region  and  the  plain  of  Tyre  ;  not  unlike  that  which  skirts  the
mountains  of  Jerusalem  on  the  west.    These  hills  extend  for

■  Bohaeddin  Vit.  Salad,  p.  89  sq.  95  sq.
113.  Reiuaud  Extr.  pp.  237,  239,  240.
Wilken  ib.  IV.  pp.  247,  255,  259,  274.

'  See  above,  p.  427.  In  recording  this
transaction,  the  Arabian  historians  speak
of  esh-Shukif  and  Safed,  while  the  Chris-
tian writers  have  Belfort  and  Safed.  Rei-
naud  p.  440.  Abulf  Annal.  A.  H.  G38.
Tom.  IV.  p.  462.  Hugo  Plagon  p.  723.
Marin.  Sanut.  p.  215.  Comp.  Wilken  ib.
VI.  p.  (jOO. — Marin.  Sanutus  further  de-
scribes the  river  el-Kasiniiyeh  (Litiny)  as
flowing  close  under  Belfort ;  p.  245.

'  Reinaud  p.  441.    Wilken  1.  c.  p.  603.

*  Hugo  Plagon  p.  73G.  Marin.  Sanut.  p.
221.    Wilken  ib.  VII.  p.  400.

'  Miikrizi  in  Reinaud  p.  504.  Marin.
Sanut.  p.  223.    Wilken  ib.  pp.  518,  519.
iii.  381,  382

«  Abulf.  Tab.  Syr.  p.  98.  Rosenmiiller
Analect.  Arab.  IH.  p.  20  Arab.  p.  41
Lat.

'  Unless  perhaps  it  be  the  "  Elkiffe "
of  Sandys,  whioh  he  says  was  strongly
fortified  by  Fakhr  ed-Din  ;  p.  165.  Burck-
hardt  lieard  of  e.sIi-Shukif  in  A.  D.  1810,
in  passing  from  Hdsbeiya  to  B.Uiijs  :  p.  36.
Buckingham  passed  near  it  in  1816  on  his
way  from  Biini.ls  to  Sidon  ;  but  merely
mentions  the  name ;  Travels  among  the
Arab  Tribes  4to.  p.  407.  In  18:15  tho
route  of  Mr  Smith  through  the  Iluleh  and
Merj  'Ayun  to  Jezzin,  led  him  very  near  it;
see  above,  pp.  430,  438  sq. — We  visited
esh-Shukif  in  1852  ;  see  Vol.  III.  Sect.  II,
under  Apr.  9th.

°  Not  Hadith,  as  in  the  former  edition.

June  23.]

VIEW  TOWAKDS  TYRE.

455

some  distance  nortli  of  tlie  Litany,  here  called  el-Kasimiych,
The  point  where  we  stood,  may  have  been  from  twelve  to  fifteen
hundred  feet  above  the  sea.

Here  was  a  most  extensive  and  magnificent  view  of  the  hills
and  plains,  the  coast  and  sparkling  waters  of  the  Mediterra-
nean ;  on  which  last  we  could  distinguish  several  vessels  under
sail,  like  white  specks  in  the  distance.  Directly  before  us,  and
the  only  object  to  break  the  monotony  of  the  flat  coast  itself,
was  Sixr  and  its  peninsula  ;  while  its  plain,  and  the  lower  region
of  hills,  teeming  with  villages,  and  variegated  with  cultivated
fields  and  wooded  heights,  were  spread  out  before  us  in  great
distinctness  and  beauty.  It  ranked  high  among  the  many
beautiful  prospects  w^e  had  seen. — Sur  bears  from  this  spot
N.  57°  W.  My  companion  took  here  the  bearings  of  ten  villages  ;
but  afterwards  found  reason  to  doubt  whether  our  Mutawaly
guide  had  given  him  the  name  of  a  single  one  correctly  ;  and
therefore  did  not  record  them.  We  greatly  regretted  the  loss  of
our  more  trusty  muleteer.'

The  path  now  led  us  down,  after  a  great  descent,  into  the
head  of  a  deep  and  narrow  Wady,  which  we  followed  for  a  long
distance  directly  on  our  course.  It  is  called  Wady  'Ashur,  and
was  now  without  water  :  but  the  steep  sides  are  thickly  wooded
with  prickly  oak,  maple,  arbutus,  sumac,  and  other  trees  and
bushes,  reaching  quite  down  to  the  bottom  ;  so  that  we  often
travelled  among  the  trees.  It  reminded  me  strongly,  of  some
of  the  more  romantic  valleys  among  the  Green  mountains  in  Ver-
mont. Beneath  the  fine  shades  of  this  sequestered  dell,  we
stopped  at  8|-  o'clock  for  breakfast.  The  morning  was  serene
and  beautiful ;  and  as  the  journey  of  the  day  was  to  be  short,
we  gave  ourselves  up  for  a  time  to  the  luxury  of  rest.

At  five  minutes  past  10  o'clock  we  proceeded  down  the  val-
ley, still  in  a  northwest  direction.  The  bed  of  the  Wady  began
now  to  be  studded  with  oleanders  in  blossom.  After  half  an
hour,  the  liills  became  lower,  the  valley  wider  and  cultivated.
At  10|  o'clock,  there  was  a  village  on  the  hill  at  our  left,  called
el-Beyad  ;  and  another  high  up  on  the  right,  named  el-Mezra'ah.
Further  on,  the  valley  turns  north,  and  runs  to  the  Litany.
We  ascended  the  cultivated  ridge  which  here  skirts  it  on  the
west  ;  and  reaching  the  top  at  11  o'clock,  began  to  descend  im-
mediately into  another  broad  fertile  valley,  also  running  towards
the  north.  We  crossed  its  water-bed  at  11.20  ;  and  ascending
again  gradually  to  an  undulating  region  of  cultivated  country,
passed  at  11.40  the  large  village  of  Kana,  on  the  brow  of  the
valley  ;  and  close  by  it  another  called  Mukhshikeh,

'  "\^'e  came  to  this  point  again  in  1852 ;  that  the  view  was  less  extensive  than  now.
but  the  weatherwas  misty  and  showery,  so    See  Vol  III.  Sect.  II,  under  Apr.  12th.

iii.  382-38-1

456

FROM  SAFED  TO  TYRE.

TSec.  XVI.

In  tMs  Kana  we  may  doubtless  recognise  the  Kanah  of  the
book  of  Joshua,  described  as  one  of  the  towns  in  the  northern
part  of  the  tribe  of  Asher,  whose  border  extended  unto  Sidon.'
The  name  is  recorded  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  ;  but  I  am  not
aware  that  the  place  has  been  noticed  by  any  pilgrim  or  travel-
ler, from  that  time  until  the  present  day.^

The  hill  country,  as  we  here  approached  Stir,  is  fully  tilled  ;
and  a  pecuhar  characteristic  of  it,  is  the  production  of  great
quantities  of  tobacco.  Throughout  all  Palestine,  this  plant  is
cultivated  more  or  less  for  home  consumption,  in  small  patches
around  most  of  the  villages  where  the  soil  permits  ;  but  here  it
is  largely  raised  for  exportation,  and  actually  forms  one  of  the
main  exports  of  Sur,  if  not  the  chief ;  being  carried  mostly  to
Damietta.

Proceeding  over  the  hilly  tract  with  a  gradual  descent,  we
had  a  village  above  us  on  our  left  at  12.25,  called  Hanaweih.^
Ten  minutes  further  on,  we  came  to  one  of  the  most  remarkable
monuments  of  antiquity,  yet  remaining  in  the  Holy  Land.  It
is  an  immense  sarcophagus  of  Hmestone,  resting  upon  a  lofty
pedestal  of  large  hewn  stones  ;  a  conspicuous  ancient  tomb,  bear-
ing among  the  common  people  the  name  of  Kabr  Hairan,  "  Sep-
ulchre of  Hiram."  The  sarcophagus  measures  twelve  feet  long
by  six  feet  in  height  and  breadth  ;  the  lid  is  three  feet  thick,
and  remains  in  its  original  position  ;  but  a  hole  has  been  broken
through  the  sarcophagus  at  one  end.*  The  pedestal  consists  of
three  layers  of  the  like  species  of  stone,  each  three  feet  thick,
the  upper  layer  projecting  over  the  others  ;  the  stones  are  large,
and  one  of  them  measures  nine  feet  in  length.  This  gray  weather-
beaten  monument  stands  here  alone  and  solitary,  bearing  the
marks  of  high  antiquity  ;  but  the  name  and  the  record  of  him  by
whom  or  for  whom  it  was  erected,  have  perished,  like  his  ashes,
for  ever.  It  is  indeed  possible,  that  the  present  name  may  have
come  down  by  tradition  ;  and  that  this  sepulchre  once  held  the
dust  of  the  friend  and  ally  of  Solomon  ;  more  probably,  however,
it  is  merely  of  Muhammedan  application,  like  so  many  other
names  of  Hebrew  renown,  attached  to  their  Welys  and  monu-
ments in  every  part  of  Palestine.    I  know  of  no  historical  trace

'  Josli.  19,  28.    By  w.ay  of  distinction,  '  A  mile  east  of  this  village,  Monro

probnbly,  the  Cana  of  the  New  Testament  describes  various  Egyptian  figures  sculp-

is  called  Cana  of  Galilee,  now  Kiuia  el-Jelil.  tiircd  on  tablets  cut  in  the  rocks;  II.  p.

'  Onomast.  art.  Crtwa.  The  text  of  Jcromo  2.3-25.    See  in  Vol.  III.  Sect.  II,  under

is  here  exceedingly  confused,  and  probably  Apr.  10th,  penult.

corrupted.    Eusebius  seems  not  to  distiii-  ■*  Such  tombs,  composed  of  a  single

gni.sb  this  Caua  from  that  of  (ialiiee. — Mr  soros  or  sarcophagus,  of  immense  size,  are

Thomson  lodged  at  Kana  on  his  way  from  not  uncommon  in  Asia  Minor;  see  Fel-

Tyre  to  Saled  in  1837;  Miss.  Herald  fir  low's  .Journal  in  Asia  Minor,  Loud.  1839,

Nov.  1837,  p.  431.   Pococke  hoard  of  the  pp.  4S,  219,  248.
same,  as  he  passed  along  the  coast,
iii  384.  385

Juire  23.]

hiram's  tomb,    ras  el-'ain.

457

having  reference  to  this  tomb  ;  and  it  had  first  been  mentioned
by  a  Frank  traveller  only  five  years  before.'  .

Still  descending  gradually  along  a  Wady,  we  turned  off  at  a
quarter  before  one  from  the  main  road  to  Silr  ;  talcing  a  path
more  to  the  left  in  order  to  visit  Eis  el-'Ain.  We  kept  along
down  the  same  Wady  ;  and  ha^dng  passed  the  villages  of  Beit
Uha  and  Dar  Kanon  at  a  little  distance  on  our  left,  entered  the
plain  and  reached  Eas  el-'Ain  at  If  o'clock.  Here  we  made
our  mid-day  halt  of  nearly  two  and  a  half  hours,  for  rest,  and
in  order  to  examine  those  remarkable  works  of  ancient  days.

Eas  el-'Ain  has  its  name  as  being  the  '  fountain-head '  of  the
aqueducts,  by  which  Tyre  was  anciently  supplied  with  water.
The  place  lies  in  the  plain,  hardly  a  quarter  of  an  hour  from  the
sea  shore,  and  one  hour  from  Tyre  on  the  direct  road.  It  is  a
collection  of  large  fountains  ;  where  the  water  gushes  up  in  sev-
eral places  with  great  force,  and  in  very  large  quantities.  These
sources  in  themselves  are  not  unhke  those  at  Tabighah  and  else-
where along  the  lakes  of  Tiberias  and  the  Huleh,  as  to  quantity
and  force  of  ebulhtion  ;  but  the  water  is  here  clear  and  fine.  In
order  to  raise  them  to  a  head  sufficient  to  carry  ofi"  the  water  by
aqueducts,  the  ancients  built  around  them  elevated  reservoirs,
with  walls  of  large  stones,  immensely  thick  and  fifteen  or  twenty
feet  high.  There  are  four  of  these  reservoirs  in  all,  at  this  place.
Two  on  the  east  are  adjacent  and  connected  together  ;  these  are
of  an  irregular  form,  and  have  steps  to  ascend  to  the  top,  where
is  a  broad  space  or  walk  forming  the  border  around  the  basins.*
We  measured  the  depth  of  water  in  one  of  these,  and  found  it
fourteen  feet.

Directly  from  these  two  reservoirs,  an  ancient  aqueduct  goes
off  N.  N.  E.  through  the  plain,  exhibiting  strong  and  excellent
masonry,  with  round  arches  and  a  continuous  cornice  above  them,
evidently  of  Eoman  architecture.  The  channel  is  about  four
feet  in  breadth,  and  two  or  three  in  depth,  and  remains  for  some
distance  ten  or  fifteen  feet  above  the  ground  ;  afterward,  the
surface  of  the  land  rises  nearly  to  its  level.  The  water  must
contain  large  quantities  of  lime  in  solution  ;  for,  wherever  it  has
flowed  over  the  aqueduct,  or  percolated  through,  large  stalactites
have  been  formed,  which  in  some  places  fill  up  the  arches. — On
the  other  side  too  of  the  fountains,  towards  the  south,  an  aque-
duct with  pointed  arches,  runs  off,  carrying  water  to  some  gar-
dens.   This  is  obviously  a  more  modern  Saracenic  work.

The  third  and  principal  source  and  reservoir,  is  some  rods

'  By  Moni-o  in  1833,  whose  road  had       "  Maundrell  describes  these  basins,  one

again  fallen  into  ours ;  Vol  II.  p.  25.  The  as  twelve,  the  other  as   twenty  yards

tomb  is  also  described  by  Mr  Thomson  in  square  ;  Journal  March  21
1837  ;  1.  c.  p.  435.

Vol.  II.— 39  iii.  385-387

458

FROM  SAFED  TO  TYRE.

[Sec.  XVL

west  of  those  now  described.  It  is  octagonal,  and  somewhat
higher  ahove  the  ground  ;  with  a  very  wide  border,  and  a  broad
way  leading  to  the  top,  so  that  one  might  ride  up.  The  water
rises  in  it,  and  rushes  from  it,  with  more  ^'iolence  and  in  greater
quantity,  than  from  all  the  others  together.  This  basin  was
anciently  connected  by  an  aqueduct  with  the  two  former  ;  or
rather,  the  main  aqueduct  began  here,  and  was  first  carried
eastwards  to  the  other  two  ;  but  this  part  has  been  broken
av^•ay,  and  only  some  very  large  masses  of  stalactites  stUl  remain
to  show  its  place.'  The  water  in  this  resen^oir  is  in  constant
ebullition,  and  must  be  difficult  to  sound  ;  the  people  said  it
was  sixty  feet  deep  ;  but  Maundrell  found  it  only  thirty  feet,
and  this  is  probably  too  great.  The  water  of  this  fountain  is  now
used  only  to  turn  a  single  mill,  which  stands  immediately  under
the  north  side  of  the  basin,  having  tub  wheels,  hke  most  mills
in  Syria.  Several  other  mills  formerly  stood  here,  to  which  the
water  was  distributed  ;  but  it  now  runs  in  a  single  rapid  brook
to  the  adjacent  sea.'^  In  the  same  du-ection  is  an  isolated  hiU
of  a  considerable  elevation.

There  is  still  a  fourth  fountain  and  reservoir,  but  much
smaller,  with  an  aqueduct  of  modern  construction.

Around  these  fountains  there  is  much  verdure  and  many
trees.  We  made  our  noon-day  halt  in  an  orchard  of  fig  trees  ;  and
the  whole  scene  was  rural  and  refreshing.^  There  is  also  some-
thing of  a  village.  A  few  years  ago,  the  Pasha  of  Egypt  began
to  erect  here  several  factories  for  cloth  ;  and  for  tliis  purpose
removed  two  or  three  miUs.  But  after  a  while,  the  expenses
were  found  to  be  so  great,  that  the  project  was  abandoned.  The
foimdations  of  two  buildings  yet  remained,  as  they  were  then
left  ;  and  the  materials  collected,  still  lay  upon  the  ground.

The  opinion  has  long  prevailed,  that  these  fountains  must
be  brought,  by  an  artificial  subterranean  channel,  from  some

'  This  aqneduct  appears  to  have  heen  Upon  the  brink  of  it  von  have  a  walk

standing  in  Volney's  day  ;  A'oyage  II.  p.  •  round,  eight  feet  broad  ;  from  which,  de-

199.  Maundrell  and  Pococke  also  mention  scending  by  one  step  on  the  south  side  and

it  expressly  ;  and  the  latter  even  S;iys  there  by  two  on  the  north,  you  have  another

were  two;  Vol.  II.  i.  p.  81.    Pococke's  walk,  twenty-one  foet   broad.  .  .  .  The

plan  h:is  little  resemblance  to  the  spot.  aqueduct,  how  dry,  is  carried  eastwards

■  Maundrell,  under  JIarch  21st,  gives  a  about  120  paces,  and  then  approaches  the

fiill  and  perhaps  accurate  description  of  this  two  other  basins."    As  to  the  materials,

reser\oir,  as  being  "of  an  octagonal  figure,  our  notes  speak  also  of  lai^e  stones,  many

22  yards  in  diameter.  It  is  elevated  above  of  which  are  decayed :  and  Niebuhr  says

the  ground  niue  yards  on  the  south  side,  exprcs-^ly,  that  this  basin  is  built  up  with

and  six  on  the  north  ;  and  within  is  said  large  squared  stones ;  Reisebeschr.  III.  p.

to  be  of  unfathomable  deepuess,  but  ten  78. — In  the  days  of  Brocardus  there  were

yards  of  line  confuted  that  opinion.    Its  here  six  mills;  c.  2.  p.  170.
wall  is  of  no  better  a  material  than  gravel       '  Hasselquist  notes  as  growing  here  :

and  small  pebbles;  but  consoliihited  with  Salix  (Sufs-if),  Vitcx  agnus  castns  (Ri^h-

EO  strong  and  tenacious  a  cement,  that  it  rash),  Palnia  Chrisri  in  abundance,  Sola-

socms  to  be  all  one  entire  vessel  of  rock,  num,  etc.    Reise  pp.  187,  536.
iii.  387-389

Jdnb  23.]

RAS  EL-'aIN.

459

part  of  the  adjacent  mountains.'  But  there  is  nothing  to
limit  such  a  supposition  to  these  sources  alone  ;  and  if  it  be
adopted  here,  it  may  with  the  same  reason  be  applied  to  all  the
other  fountains  along  the  coast,  and  also  to  those  north  of  Ti-
berias and  in  the  Huleh.  They  are  merely  very  copious  natural
springs,  gathering  their  waters  doubtless  beneath  inchned  strata
at  the  foot  of  the  hills  ;  and  tlnis  issuing  with  such  force,  as  to
admit  of  being  raised  to  so  great  an  elevation.

The  piety  of  the  middle  ages  referred  these  remarkable  foun-
tains and  works  to  Solomon  ;  or  at  least  regarded  them  as  the
spot  alluded  to  in  the  Canticles  :  "  A  fountain  of  gardens,  a
well  of  living  waters,  and  streams  from  Lebanon."^  This,  how-
ever, is  merely  fanciful.  Yet  in  aU  probability,  ancient  Tyre
was  supplied  by  aqueducts  from  these  sources,  long  before  the
present  Koman  works  were  erected  ;  and  to  them  apparently  the
language  of  Menander  is  to  be  applied,  who  relates  from  the
Tyrian  archives,  that  when  Shalmaneser  retired  from  the  siege
of  insular  Tyre,  he  left  guards  behind  to  cut  off  the  Tyrians
from  the  stream  and  the  aqueducts  ;  so  that  for  five  years,  they
drank  water  only  from  the  wells  they  dug.^

The  first  distinct  notice  we  have  of  these  fountains  in  their
present  state,  is  in  the  historical  work  of  the  venerable  archbi-
shop of  Tyre,  near  the  close  of  the  twelfth  century.  He  describes
them  as  they  still  exist ;  and  speaks  particularly  of  the  easy  and
solid  steps  leading  to  the  top  of  the  resei-voirs,  by  which  horse-
men could  ascend  without  difficulty.  In  that  age,  the  abundant
waters  were  applied  to  the  irrigation  of  the  adjacent  plain  ;
which  was  full  of  gardens  and  orchards  of  fruit  trees  ;  and  where
particularly  the  sugar  cane  was  cultivated  to  a  great  extent ;
since  sugar,  although  new  to  the  first  crusaders,  now  began  to  be
regarded  as  a  necessary  of  life.''  It  was  not  improbably  in  con-
nection with  the  previous  culture  of  this  plant  by  the  Muham-
medans,  that  the  Saracenic  aqueducts  were  built,  which  cany
the  waters  over  the  plain  south  of  the  fountains  ;  being  coeval
perhaps  with  those  around  Jericho,  erected  apparently  for  a  like
object.'

We  set  off"  from  Kas  el-'Ain  at  4.25  for  Sur,  taking  a  road
on  the  right  of  the  usual  one,  and  more  inland,  in  order  to

Even  Maundrell  adopts  this  view;  *  Will.  Tyr.  1 3.  3,  "  et  canamellas,  unde

ibid.  preciosissima  usibus  et  saluti  moi-talium

'  Cant.  4,  15.  The  Vulgate  corresponds  necessaria  maxime,  conficitur  Zachara  :

still  better  :    "  Fons  hortorum,   puteus  unde  per  institores  ad  ultimas  orbis  partes

aquarum  viventium,  qua  fluit  impctti  de  deportatur."     Such  is  the  close  of  this

Libano."    So  Will.  Tyr.  13.  3.  Jac.  de  writer's  description  of  Ris  el-'Ain.  Corap.

Vitr.  0.  43.  p.  1071.    Brocardus  c.  2.  p.  also  7.  22.  Jac.  de  Vitr.  c.  43.  p.  1071.

170.    Quaresmius  Elucidat.  Tom.  II.  p.  Brocardus,  c.  2.  p.  170.     Marin.  Sanut

904,  etc.  etc.  pp.  160,  245.

'  Menander  in  Joseph.  Antiq.  9.  14.  2.  '  See  above,  Vol  I.  p.  561.

iii.  389,  390

460

FROM  SAFED  TO  TYRE.

[SecXVL

follow  for  a  time  the  ancient  aqueduct.  Twenty  minutes
brought  us  to  two  other  fountains  and  reservoirs,  similar  to  those
of  Kas  el-'Ain,  hut  not  so  large  nor  abundant.  Their  waters
are  now  used  merely  to  irrigate  adjacent  gardens  and  meadows
towards  the  sea.  As  we  advanced,  the  great  aqueduct  could
be  seen  running  off  through  the  plain  in  a  N.  N.  E.  direction
towards  el-Ma' shuk,  a  round  rocky  isolated  hill  in  the  plain  on
the  east  of  Sur,  nearly  half  an  hour  distant  from  the  city,  and
crowned  by  a  white  Wely  or  tomb  of  a  Muhammedan  saint.
For  a  considerable  portion  of  the  way,  the  channel  is  nearly  or
quite  on  a  level  with  the  ground  ;  in  other  parts  it  rests  on  low
round  arches.  We  were  told  in  Tyre,  that  this  aqueduct  had
been  cleared  out,  and  in  some  parts  repaired,  not  many  years
ago,  by  a  governor  of  the  j^lace  ;  so  that  the  water  is  now
carried  through  it  nearly  or  quite  to  el-Ma'shuk,  and  used  for
irrigating  the  meadows,  gardens,  and  cotton-fields,  in  the  plain
east  of  the  city.

From  el-Ma'shuk  again,  a  range  of  arches  in  ruins,  belong-
ing to  an  ancient  aqi^educt,  runs  directly  towards  Tyre  ;  but
the  greater  part  are  broken  away.  Those  remaining  have  the
appearance  of  being  much  higher  than  the  aqueduct  from  the
south  ;  and  our  first  thought  was,  that  the  water  of  the  latter
might  in  some  way  have  been  raised  to  a  higher  level  at  Ma'shuk,
in  order  to  be  carried  to  the  city.  But  the  height  of  the  arches
was  probably  occasioned  by  the  declivity  of  the  ground  ;  the
aqueduct  having  doubtless  been  carried  along  on  the  same  high
level  as  before,  and  thus  brought  into  the  city,  ia  part  at  least,
at  a  considerable  elevation.  We  were  assured,  that  there  are
no  traces  of  reservoirs  or  of  masonry  of  any  kind,  on  or  around
the  hill  of  Ma'shiik.'  But  why  the  aqueduct  for  conveying
water  from  Kas  el-'Ain  to  Tyre,  should  thus  have  been  carried
first  to  el-Ma'shuk,  so  far  out  of  the  direct  line,  it  is  difficult  to
perceive.  It  may  have  been  on  account  of  the  low  and  perhaps
marshy  nature  of  the  ground  on  a  straight  course  ;  which  would
have  required  a  long  range  of  lofty  arches  on  an  uncertain  foun-
dation ;  while,  as  at  present  constructed,  it  rises  little  above  the
ground,  and  high  arches  were  required  only  along  the  short  dis-
tance between  Ma'shiik  and  the  city.  Another,  and  perhaps
promi'nent  object  of  this  circuitous  course,  may  have  been  the
irrigation  of  the  higher  parts  of  the  plain,  as  at  the  present
day.

We  now  passed  down  obliquely  through  the  plain,  crossing

'  The    Arabian    writer  edh-Dh;'iliiry,  village.     Rosenmucllcr's  Analect.  Arab,

about  the  middle  of  the  IHth  century,  Pars  III.  p.  19  Ar.  p.  41  Lat.  Siiudysalso

mentions  cl-Ma'shilk  along  with  Tyre,  as  mentions  a  village  here  in  A.  D.  1611;

a  tity  so  desolated  as  to  be  then  a  mere  Travels  p.  166.
iii.  390-392

JiWE  23.]

AQUEDUCT.     COKSULAR  AGENT.

461

in  several  places  moist  and  marshy  ground,  and  reached  the
beach  of  soft  sand  just  at  the  south  side  of  the  isthmus.  Fol-
lowing for  a  few  minutes  the  beach  as  washed  bv  the  waves,  we
then  struck  diagonally  across  the  sandy  isthmus,  near  a  large
solitarj"  tower  of  no  great  antiquity,  and  reached  at  5.35  the
only  gate  of  the  city,  situated  close  by  the  water  on  the  north-
em  side.  A  quarantine  guard  stopped  us,  as  coming  from
Jerusalem,  where  the  plague  was  known  to  exist ;  but  the
proper  officer  being  called,  a  shabby  looking  Italian,  and  our
biU  of  health  being  pronounced  regular,  we  were  admitted  with-
out further  delay.  With  indescribable  emotion,  I  found  myself
within  the  circuit  of  the  ancient  mistress  of  the  commerce  of
the  east  ;  alas,  how  fallen  !

We  had  hesitated,  whether  to  go  at  once  to  the  house  of  the
American  consular  agent ;  or  to  seek  for  a  place  where  we  might
pitch  our  tent  within  the  walls.  We  greatly  preferred  the  latter
course  in  itself ;  as  we  expected  to  remain  the  next  day  in  Sur,
and  should  be  in  our  tent  far  more  masters  of  our  time  and  of
our  own  movements  and  convenience,  than  iu  the  house  of  anoth-
er. We  therefore  passed  through  the  city  to  the  western  shore
of  the  ancient  island,  now  the  peninsula,  hoping  to  find  there  a
fitting  spot  for  the  tent,  in  the  open  space  between  the  houses
and  the  sea.  But,  to  our  disappointment,  this  was  now  wholly
occupied  as  a  tobacco  plantation  ;  and  after  searching  for  some
time,  we  reluctantly  turned  our  steps  backward  into  the  streets
of  the  city.  Yet,  had  we  looked  a  few  rods  further,  we  should
have  found  a  very  tolerable  spot  by  a  threshing-floor,  where  we
might  have  pitched  close  upon  the  bank,  and  enjoyed,  in  all  its
luxury,  the  cool  sea  breeze  and  the  dashing  of  the  surge  upon
the  rocky  shore.

The  American  consular  agents  in  the  Syrian  cities  are  ap-
pointed by,  and  dependent  on,  the  American  consul  in  Beirut.
They  are  usually  native  Christians  of  wealth  and  influence,  for
whom  it  is  a  privilege  to  obtain  the  appointment  ;  inasmuch  as
it  secures  to  them  protection  and  exemption  from  many  of  the
ordinary  exactions  of  their  own  government.  In  return,  they
regard  the  few  Americans  who  may  happen  to  visit  their  places
of  residence,  as  peculiarly  entitled  to  enjoy  their  hospitality  ;
and  consider  it  a  duty  and  pri^nlege  to  entertain  them  at  their
own  houses.  The  agent  at  Sur  was  now  Ya'kob  'Akkad,  a  Greek
Catholic,  with  whom  my  companion  was  already  acquainted  ;  a
man  of  wealth,  between  thirty  and  forty  years  of  age,  occupying
a  large  house  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  along  with  his  mother
and  one  or  two  brothers  ;  aU  Hving  with  their  wives  and
children  together  in  one  family.  We  were  received  by  him  with
great  hospitality  and  kindness  ;  and  were  at  once  quartered  in

Vol.  n.— 39*  iii.  392, 393

462

TYRE.

[SecXVL

the  largest  and  best  parlour,  which  we  were  to  occupy  by  day  and
by  night.  But  it  is  a  part  of  oriental  hospitahty,  by  day  never
to  leave  a  guest  alone  ;  so  that  we  were  really  incommoded,  by
what  was  meant  as  kindness  and  respect.  "We  were  hungry,
and  would  have  eaten  ;  weary,  and  would  have  rested  ;  I  felt
myself  unwell,  and  woidd  gladly  have  lain  down  for  repose  ;  but
every  thing  of  this  kind  was  out  of  the  question.  Our  host  could
not  think  of  leaving  us  ;  his  neighbours  and  friends  came  in  to
sit  with  him  and  pay  their  respects  to  his  visitors  from  a  remote
world  ;  his  mother  also  made  us  a  regular  visit,  and  sat  with  us
for  some  time,  an  elderly  lady  of  intelligence  and  dignified  appear-
ance. She  came  once  more  to  us  in  like  manner  the  next  day ;
but  we  saw  none  of  the  other  females  of  the  family,  except  at  a
distance.  Our  servants,  as  being  Muhammedans,  were  not  ad-
mitted to  the  house  ;  but  were  lodged  in  another  house  belonging
to  our  host  not  far  distant,  which  was  imdergoing  repairs,  and
was  therefore  unoccupied.

Thus  passed  away  the  remainder  of  the  afternoon,  greatly  to
our  dissatisfaction,  without  repose,  and  without  our  being  able
to  take  any  step  for  ourselves  or  see  any  part  of  Tyre.  Notwith-
standing too  all  the  well  meant  kindness,  we  missed  here  the
prompt  attention  and  arrangement,  which  we  had  found  under
similar  circumstances  at  Eamleh.  We  were  tired  and  hungry  ;
and  as  dinner  had  been  early  announced,  we  waited  with  some
impatience  for  its  appearance.  But  we  waited  long  in  vain  ;  and
not  until  9  o'clock  at  evening  were  we  summoned  to  partake  of
it.  Here  too  a  shabby  imitation  of  the  Frank  style  was  any
thing  but  welcome.  As  having  often  to  do  with  Franks,  our
host  had  procured  a  long  clumsy  table,  and  several  coarse  chairs
to  be  used  with  it.  This  was  set  in  an  adjacent  room,  with
plates  and  rusty  knives  and  forks.  The  dishes  and  cookery  were
Syrian,  with  a  miserable  red  wine,  the  poorest  we  tasted  in  the
coimtry.  The  agent  and  his  brother  partook  with  us  ;  but  wait-
ing and  weariness  prevented  enjoyment ;  and  we  were  glad  to
break  up  as  speedily  as  possible.  We  spread  our  own  beds  upon
the  carpet  of  our  parlour  ;  and  I  wished  myself  most  heartily  back
l^in  upon  the  ground  beneath  our  tent.

Sunday,  June  24th.  The  progress  of  our  journey  had  now
brought  us  to  the  sea  coast  of  Phenicia,  and  into  the  midst  of
one  of  its  mighty  emporiums.  Hitherto  along  our  route,  I  have
everywhere  entered  into  the  historical  questions  connected  with
the  different  places  ;  and  have  thus  endeavoured  to  make  the
reader  acquainted  with  the  outlines  both  of  their  past  and  pres-
ent state.  In  respect  to  Tyre  and  Sidon  also,  there  are  several
such  questions  of  great  difficulty  and  grave  import  ;  the  due
consideration  of  which,  combined  with  historic  sketches,  might

iii.  393-395

JcjiE  24.]

HOSPITALITY.     THE  CITY.

463

easily  fill  out  an  interesting  volume.  But  they  have  been  often
discussed  ;  and  they  present  besides  a  field  too  extensive  for
a  work  of  this  nature.  These  considerations  are  sufficient,  I
trust,  to  excuse  me  henceforth  from  entering  into  such  investi-
gations ;  and  also  from  giving  any  further  historical  notices,
except  such  as  may  arise  incidentally,  in  close  connection  with
the  subject  in  hand.

"We  spent  this  day,  the  Christian  Sabbath,  at  Tyre  ;  but
with  less  enjoyment  and  profit  to  ourselves,  than  we  had  often
done  in  the  midst  of  the  desert.  The  continual  presence  of  our
host  was  a  burden  ;  in  the  house  we  could  neither  read  nor
write,  nor  indeed  do  any  thing  by  or  for  ourselves.  After  break-
fast, I  wandered  out  alone  towards  the  south  end  of  the  penin-
sula, beyond  the  city,  where  aU  is  now  forsaken  and  lonely  like
the  desert  ;  and  there  bathed  in  the  limpid  waters  of  the  sea,  as
they  rolled  into  a  small  and  beautifid  sandy  cove  among  the  rocks.
I  continued  my  walk  along  the  whole  western  and  northern  shore
of  the  peninsula,  musing  upon  the  pomp  and  glory,  the  pride
and  faU,  of  ancient  Tyre.  Here  was  the  little  isle,  once  covered
by  her  palaces  and  surrounded  by  her  fleets  ;  where  the  build-
ers perfected  her  beauty  in  the  midst  of  the  seas  ;  where  her
merchants  were  princes,  and  her  traffickers  the  honourable  of
the  earth  ;  but  alas  !  "  thy  riches,  and  thy  fairs,  thy  merchandise,
thy  mariners,  and  thy  pilots,  thy  calkers,  and  the  occupiei-s  of
thy  merchandise,  and  aU  thy  men  of  war,  that  were  in  thee  and
in  all  thy  company," — where  are  they  ?  Tyre  has  indeed  become
"  like  the  top  of  a  rock,  a  place  to  spread  nets  upon  ! "  The  sole
remaining  tokens  of  her  more  ancient  splendour,  lie  strewed  be-
neath the  waves  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  ;  and  the  hovels  which
now  nestle  upon  a  portion  of  her  site,  present  no  contradiction
of  the  dread  decree  :  "  Thou  shalt  be  built  no  more  !"'

We  afterwards  went  together  to  the  same  and  other  points
of  interest  in  the  city  ;  and  among  them  to  the  ancient  cathe-
dral. The  amount  of  our  hasty  survey  of  the  site  of  Tyre,  is
contained  in  the  following  sketch.  In  the  afternoon  I  found
myself  again  unwell ;  and  retiring  to  the  house  where  our  ser-
vants were  lodged,  and  spreading  my  carpet  in  an  empty  room,
I  rejoiced  in  being  alone,  and  slept  long  in  quietness.

The  peninsula  on  which  Tyre,  now  Sur,  is  built,  was  origi-
nally a  long  narrow  island,  parallel  to  the  shore,  and  distant  from
it  less  than  half  a  mile.  It  was  perhaps  at  first  a  mere  ledge
of  rocks  ;  and  inside  of  this,  the  island  was  formed  by  the  sand
washed  up  from  the  sea.  The  isthmus  was  first  created  by  the
fcimous  causeway  of  Alexander ;  which  was  enlarged  and  ren-
dered permanent  by  the  action  of  the  waters,  in  throwing  the

'  Is.  23,  8.   Ez.  26,  4,  5.  12.  14.    27,  4.  27.

iiL  395,  396

464

TTRE.

[Sec.  XYL

sand  over  it  broadly  and  deeply.  At  present,  the  isthmus  can-
not be  much  less  than  half  a  mile  in  width  ;  and  although
consisting  of  loose  sand,  yet  it  is  covered  with  traces  of  the
foundations  of  buildings,  probably  out  of  the  middle  ages.  It
lies  between  the  shore  and  the  more  northern  part  of  the  island  ;
so  that  the  latter,  as  seen  from  the  shore,  seems  to  project  fur-
ther towards  the  south  of  the  isthmus  than  towards  the  north,
and  forms  here  a  larger  bay  ;  although  the  harbour,  or  rather
road,  in  which  vessels  lie,  is  that  on  the  north.  The  island,  as
such,  is  not  far  from  a  mile  in  length.  The  part  which  projects
on  the  south  beyond  the  isthmus,  is  perhaps  a  quarter  of  a  mile
broad,  and  is  rocky  and  uneven  ;  it  is  now  unoccupied  except  by
fishermen  as  "a  place  to  spread  nets  upon."  The  southern  wall
of  the  city  runs  across  the  island,  nearly  on  a  line  with  the  south
side  of  the  isthmus.  The  present  city  stands  upon  the  junction
of  the  island  and  isthmus  ;  and  the  eastern  wall  includes  a  por-
tion of  the  latter.  On  the  north  and  west,  towards  the  sea,  are
no  walls  ;  or  at  least  they  are  so  far  broken  away  and  neglected,
as  to  be  like  none.

The  inner  port  or  basin  on  the  north,  was  formerly  enclosed
by  a  wall,  running  from  the  north  end  of  the  island  in  a  curve
towards  the  main  land.  Various  pieces  and  fragments  of  this
wall  yet  remain,  sufficient  to  mark  its  course  ;  but  the  port  it-
self is  continually  filling  up  more  and  more  with  sand,  and  now-
a-days  only  boats  can  enter  it.  Indeed,  our  host  informed  us,
that  even  within  his  own  recollection,  the  water  covered  the  open
place  before  his  house,  which  at  present  is  ten  or  twelve  rods  from
the  sea  and  surrounded  with  buildings  ;  while  older  men  remem-
ber, that  vessels  formerly  anchored  where  the  shore  now  is.

The  western  coast  of  the  island  is  wholly  a  ledge  of  ragged,
picturesque  rocks,  in  some  parts  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  high  ;  upon
which  the  waves  of  the  Mediterranean  dash  in  ceaseless  surges.
The  city  lies  only  upon  the  eastern  part  of  the  island  ;  between
the  houses  and  the  western  shore  is  a  broad  strip  of  open  land,
now  given  up  to  tillage.  This  shore  is  strewed  ti'om  one  end  to
the  other,  along  the  edge  of  the  water  and  in  the  water,  with
columns  of  red  and  gray  granite  of  various  sizes,  the  only  re-
maining monuments  of  the  splendour  of  ancient  Tyre.'  At  the
northwest  point  of  the  island,  forty  or  fifty  such  columns  are
thrown  together  in  one  heap  beneath  the  waves.  Along  this
coast,  too,  it  is  apparent,  that  the  continual  washing  of  the
waves  has  in  many  places  had  the  efiect  to  form  layers  of  new
rock  ;  in  which  stones,  bones,  and  fragments  of  pottery  are  ce-
mented as  constituent  parts.

*  I  mean  here,  of  course.  Tyre  before  the  Christian  era ;  or  at  least  before  it  fell
under  the  Muhammedan  domiuion.
iu.  390-308

JrsE  24.]

THE  PESIXSULA.     AXCIEKT  CHUBCH.

465

There  are  also  occasional  columns  along  the  northern  shore.  I
examined  here  verv  particularly  the  old  waU  of  the  port,  at  its
■western  extremity  ;  where  its  abutments  are  at  first  built  up
along  the  shore,  before  it  strikes  off  into  the  "water.  It  is  here
constructed  of  large  hewn  stones  ;  and  at  first  I  took  it  to  be  of
very  ancient  date.  But  on  looking  further,  I  perceived  that  the
foundations  rest  on  marble  columns  laid  beneath  ;  a  proof  that
these  portions  of  the  walls  at  least,  if  not  the  whole  port  in  its
present  form,  cannot  probably  be  much  older  than  the  middle
ages.

The  remains  of  the  ancient  cathedral  church  of  Tyre,  are
quite  in  the  southeastern  comer  of  the  present  city.  It  was  in
the  Greek  style,  and  must  have  been  originally  a  large  and
splendid  edifice  ;  but  is  now  in  utter  ruin.  The  eastern  end  is
partially  standing  ;  the  middle  part  is  wholly  broken  away;  but
portions  are  again  seen  around  its  western  extremity, — The  di-
mensions of  the  church  were  two  hundred  and  sixteen  feet  long,
by  one  hundred  and  thirty-six  feet  broad.'  The  area  is  now
whoUy  filled  up  by  the  mean  hovels  of  the  city  ;  many  of  which
are  attached,  like  swallows'  nests,  to  its  walls  and  buttresses.
In  the  yard  of  one  of  these  huts,  lies  an  immense  double  column
of  red  Syenite  granite,  consisting  of  two  parallel  connected  shafts
of  great  size  and  beauty,  once  doubtless  a  main  support  and
ornament  of  the  cathedraL-  •  Volney  relates,  that  Jezzar  Pasha,
in  the  beginning  of  his  career,  attempted  to  remove  this  column
to  'Akka,  to  ornament  a  mosk  ;  but  his  engineers  were  unable
to  stir  it  from  the  spot.'  Other  columns  of  gray  granite  are
strewed  in  the  vicinity,  and  are  seen  along  the  streets.  The
earthquake  of  1837  did  great  injury  to  these  noble  ruins  ;  throw-
ing down  a  lofty  arch  and  several  other  portions,  which  had  been
spared  tUl  then.

There  is  nothing  which  can  serve  to  connect  these  ruins
directly  with  any  known  ancient  church.  Yet  the  supposition
of  Maundrell  is  not  improbable,  that  this  may  have  been  the
same  edifice  erected  by  Paulinus,  bishop  of  Tyre  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  fourth  century,  for  which  Eusebius  wrote  a  conse-
cration sermoiL  The  circumstances  related  by  Eusebius,  show
that  it  was  a  cathedral  church  ;  he  describes  it  as  the  most
splendid  of  all  the  temples  of  Phenicia.*  The  writers  of  the
times  of  the  crusades  make  no  mention  of  the  cathedral  ;
although  Tyre  was  then  erected  into  a  Latin  archbishopric

■  These  are  Capt.  Newbolfs  measure-  '  Volney  Tojage,  Tom,  H  p.  196.

ment*  in  l  ?-r5.    Joarn.  of  the  E.  Asiat.  *  The  account  of  Ensebhis,  and  his

Soc.  Xn.  p.  35.5.  sermon  as  preserved  by  himself^  are  found

'  Snch  double  columns  we  had  before  in  his  Hist.  Ecc.  10.  i.  Comp.  MaundreD,

Been  only  at  Tell  Hum ;  where,  however,  March  20.
they  were  much  smaller.  See  above,  p.  407.

iii.  398,399

466  TYRE.  [Sec.  XVL

under  tlie  patriarch  of  Jerusalem.  William  of  Tyre,  the  vener-
able historian  of  the  crusades,  became  archbishop  in  A.  D.
1174  ;  and  wrote  here  his  history,  extending  to  the  commence-
ment of  A.  D.  1184.  •  It  was  probably  in  this  cathedral,  that
the  bones  of  the  emperor  Frederick  Barbarossa  were  entombed.  '

The  present  Sur  is  nothing  more  than  a  market  town,  a
small  sea  port,  hardly  deserving  the  name  of  city.  Its  chief
export  is  the  tobacco  raised  upon  the  neighbouring  hills  f  with
some  cotton,  and  also  charcoal  and  wood  trom  the  more  distant
mountains.  The  houses  are  for  the  most  part  mere  hovels  ;
very  few  being  more  than  one  story  high,  with  flat  roofs.  The
streets  are  narrow  lanes,  crooked,  and  filthy.  Yet  the  many
scattered  palm  trees  throw  over  the  place  an  oriental  charm ;
and  the  numerous  Pride  of  India  trees  interspersed  among  the
houses  and  gardens,  with  their  beautiful  foliage,  give  it  a
pleasing  aspect.^ — The  taxable  men  at  this  time  were  reckoned
at  four  hundred  Muhammedans  and  three  hundred  Christians  ;
implying  a  population  of  less  than  three  thousand  souls.  Of
the  Christians,  very  few  are  of  the  Greek  rite  ;  the  great  body
being  Greek  Catholics.  The  latter  have  a  resident  bishop  ;
while  the  bishop  of  the  former,  who  is  under  the  patriarch  of
Antioch,  resides  at  Hasbeiya.'  We  heard  here  of  no  Jews  ;
though  in  J erusalem  we  were  informed,  that  two  years  before,  a
considerable  number  had  taken  up  their  residence  in  Tyre.

The  earthquake  of  1837  was  felt  here  to  a  very  considerable
extent.  A  large  part  of  the  eastern  wall  was  thrown  down,  and
had  just  been  rebuilt ;  the  southern  wall  also  had  been  greatly
shattered,  and  still  remained  with  many  breaches,  over  which.

'  Will.  Tyr.  21.  9.  William  of  Tyre  is
sometimes  spoken  of  as  an  Englishman ;
others  have  claimed  him  as  of  French  or
German  birth ;  see  Bongars'  Prsef.  in
Gesta  Dei  per  Francos  No.  xi.  His  French
continuator  says  expressly,  that  he  was
horn  in  Jerusalem  ;  ibid.  Le  Quien  Oriens
Chr.  III.  col.  1314.  Comp.  Bibliographic
Univer.selle  art.  Guillaume,  etc.

"  The  emperor  Frederic  I.  (Barbarossa)
was  dro\viie(i  in  the  Calycadnus  (some  say
the  Cydnus)  in  Cilicia,  on  his  march  to
the  Holy  Land,  June  10th,  1190.  His
body  was  first  carried  to  Antioch,  and  de-
posited in  tlie  cathedral  before  the  altar  of
St.  Peter ;  Wilkcu  Gesch.  der  Kr.  IV,  pp.
139,  143.  Raumer  Gesch.  der  Hohenstau-
fen  II.  pp.  43G,  437.  I'nglish  chroniclers
relate,  tliat  only  bis  flesh  and  bowels  were
ultimately  left  at  Antioch  :  "  Viscera  et
cerebrum  ct  carucni  suarn  aqua  coctam  et
ab  ossibiw  separatara  in  civitate  Anti-
ocbiie Roger  Hoved.  in  Savile  Scriptor.

ill.  399,400

Remm  Anglicar.  p.  651.  Brompton  in
Seldcn  Script.  Hist.  Anglic,  p.  1 1  Co.  His
bones  only  are  said  to  have  been  entombed
at  Tyre  ;  Sicard.  Chron.  in  Muratori  Tom.
VII.  p.  (512.  Dandolo  in  Muratori  Tom.
XII.  p.  314. — By  some  strange  poi-version,
there  prevails  a  legend,  apparently  of  the
sixteenth  century,  but  related  by  many
travellers,  that  Barbarossa  was  drowned
in  the  Kasimiyeh,  just  north  of  Tyre ;  see
Sandys'  Travels,  p.  166.  Moncouys  I.  p.
331.  '  Pococke  II.  i.  p.  84.  Hogg's  Visit
to  Damascus,  etc.  II.  p.  148.

'  See  above,  p.  456.

*  Mdia  Azrdarach  o(  Linna^us  ;  called
also  Pride  of  China  ;  said  to  be  a  native  of
Syria.

Seetzen,  in  1806,  lodged  at  Ilisbeiys
with  "  the  learned  bishop  of  Sur  or  Saida ;  "
Zach's  Monafl.  Corr.  XVIII.  p.  341.
Reisen  I.  pp.  323,  327.  Burckliaidt  also
had  letters  to  him  in  1810  ;  Travels  p.  33.

Jdme  24.  J

POPULATION.     SUPPLY  OF  WATER.

467

one  could  pass  in  and  out  at  pleasure.  Several  houses  were
destroyed,  and  many  injured  ;  so  that  the  inhabitants,  at  the
time,  forsook  their  dwellings  and  lodged  in  tents,  regarding  the
place  as  ruined.  Twelve  persons  were  killed  outright,  and  thir-
ty wounded. '

Siir  at  the  present  day  is  supplied  with  water,  almost  whol-
ly, from  two  deep  fountains  with  buildings  over  them,  a  few
paces  outside  of  the  gate  on  the  north  side  of  the  peninsula  ;
the  one  nearest  the  gate  being  the  largest  and  chiefly  used.
This  is  a  singular  place  for  fresh  water  to  spring  up  ;  and  the
conjecture  is  not  unnatural,  that  they  stand  in  some  unknown
connection  with  the  ancient  fountains  of  Ras  el-'Ain.  Such
was  the  belief  of  our  host  and  of  others  in  Tyre.  He  related,
that  some  two  or  three  years  ago,  the  governor  of  Sur,  having
been  ordered  to  furnish  a  certain  number  of  recruits  as  soldiers,
collected  all  the  peasantry  of  the  district  under  the  pretence  of
clearing  out  the  ancient  aqueduct,  which  was  supposed  to  have
come  to  the  city.  They  actually  dug  for  a  day  or  two  along  the
isthmus,  not  far  from  the  gate,  and  found  traces  of  an  aqueduct
at  some  depth  under  groimd,  consisting  of  veiy  large  and  thick
tubes  of  pottery.  The  governor  now  seized  his  recruits  ;  and
his  object  being  thus  accomplished,  the  matter  was  dropped.

Tyre  is  said  to  have  been  founded  by  a  colony  from  Sidon,
two  hundred  and  forty  years  before  the  building  of  Solomon's
temple.  The  original  city  is  usually  held  to  have  stood  upon
the  main  land  ;  and  Tyre  is  already  mentioned,  in  the  division
of  the  land  by  Joshua,  as  a  strong  city,  and  afterwards  under
David,  as  a  strong  hold.*  In  the  letter  of  Hiram  to  Solomon,
as  given  by  Josephus,  the  Tyrians  are  described  as  already  occu-
pying the  island.'  In  the  days  of  Shalmaneser,  king  of  As-
syria, about  720  B.  C.  the  chief  city  was  upon  the  island,  and
the  city  on  the  land  already  bore  the  name  of  Palastyrus,  "  Old
Tyre  the  latter  submitted  to  that  monarch,  while  the  former
was  blockaded  by  him  for  five  years  in  vain.^  Nebuchadnezzar,
also,  at  a  later  period,  laid  siege  to  Tyre  for  thirteen  years ;
whether  it  was  at  last  captured  by  him,  we  are  not  expressly
informed.*  Then  came  the  celebrated  siege  by  Alexander  the
Great,  about  332  B.  C.  who  succeeded  after  seven  months  in
taking  the  island  city,  after  having  with  great  labour  and  diffi-
culty built  up  a  causeway  or  mole,  from  the  main  land  to  the
walls.    For  this  purpose,  Palsetyrus  was  razed,  and  the  stones

'  See  Mr  Thomson's  Report,  so  often  re-  *  So  ^  vdKat  Tvpos  or  UaXalrvpos  Diod.

ferred  to,  Miss.  Herald  Nov.  1837,  pp.  434,  Sic.  17.  40.    Jos.  Ant.  9.  14.  2.  Vetus

441.  Ti/rus.  Q  Curt.  4.2,  18.  Juftin  11.  10,  11.

"  Josh.  19,  29.  2  Sam.  24,  7.  Jos.  Ant.  '  Menaiider  in  Joseph.  Ant.  9.  14.  2.

8.  3.  1.    Justin.  Hist.  18.  3.  «  Joseph,  c.  Apion.  1.  21.    Auriq.  10.

'  Jos.  Ant.  8.  2.  7.  ib.  8.  5.  3.  11.  1.

iii.  401,  402

468

TTRE,

[SecXVL

employed  for  the  mole  and  other  works  of  the  besiegers.*  Tyre
continued  to  be  a  strong  fortress  ;  after  Alexander's  death  it  fell
under  the  dominion  of  the  Seleucidfe,  having  been  besieged  for
fourteen  months  by  Antigonus.  At  a  later  period,  it  came
under  that  of  the  Eomans.  The  mole  of  Alexander  having
remained,  had  now  divided  the  strait  into  two  harbours  ;  and
thus  Tvre  is  described  bv  Strabo,  as  a  flourishing  trading  citv,
with  two  ports.*  Such  it  was  in  the  times  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, when  it  was  visited  by  our  Lord  and  his  apostles,  and
afterwards  by  Paul.^  It  early  became  a  Christian  bishopric  ;
and  in  the  fourth  century,  Jerome  speaks  of  Tyre  as  the  most
noble  and  beautiful  city  of  Phenicia.  and  as  stiU  trading  with
all  the  world.*  Thus  it  continued  apparently,  under  the  Mus-
lim rule,  and  imtil  the  time  of  the  crusades.^

Not  until  after  they  had  been  for  twenty-five  years  in  possession
of  the  Holy  City,  were  the  crusaders  able  to  lay  siege  successfully
to  Tyre,  at  that  time  a  flourishing  city  and  strong  hold  of  the
Muslim  power.'  "William  of  Tyre,  writing  upon  the  spot  de-
scribes the  city  at  the  time  as  very  strongly  Icrtified  ;  being
enclosed  towards  the  sea,  in  most  parts,  by  a  double  wall  with
towers  ;  on  the  north,  within  the  city,  was  the  wa.Ued  port,  with
an  entrance  between  double  towers  ;  and  on  the  east,  where  it
was  accessible  by  land,  it  was  protected  by  a  triple  wall  with
lofty  towers  close  together,  and  a  broad  ditch,  which  might  be
filled  from  the  sea  on  both  sides."  On  the  11th  of  February,  A.
D.  1124,  the  Christian  host  sat  down  before  Tyre  ;  and  on  the
27th  of  the  following  June,  the  city  was  delivered  into  their
hands.  On  entering  the  wealthy  emporium,  the  pilgrims  were
surprised  at  the  strength  of  its  fortifications,  the  size  and  splen-
dour of  the  houses,  the  loftiness  of  the  towers,  the  sohdity  of
the  waUs,  and  the  beauty  of  the  port,  with  its  difficult  entrance.'

For  more  than  a  century  and  a  half.  Tyre  appears  to  have

•  Jos.  Ant.  11.  8.  3.  Diod.  Sic.  17.  40  nobOisfimam  et  pnlcherimam  civitatem."
sq.  Ka^aipur  rrj"  TaXaiay  Keyofihrir  lb.  xxrii  2,  "  usqne  hodie  perseverat:  nt
Tvpov,  (cal  iroKKuv  uvpiaSuy  KOfu(ou-k25.]  quarantine.     GATE  OF  SIDON.  477

Pertinax,  lying  by  the  wayside.  The  inscription  has  been
several  times  copied  ;  among  others  by  Monconys  and  Maun-
drell.'  The  path  led  for  a  time  along  an  avenue  of  large
acacias  and  still  larger  tamarisks  (Turfa),  which  are  common  in
this  region  ;  and  we  rode  for  the  whole  way  among  gardens  and
country  seats,  until  at  5.50  we  reached  the  southern  part  of  the
city.  Wishing  to  encamp  outside,  we  kept  along  the  eastern
wall,  passing  by  one  gate,  and  seeking  for  a  convenient  spot  to
pitch  our  tent  in  the  open  ground  adjacent.  This  has  many
trees,  and  at  a  distance  seemed  im-iting  ;  but  on  approaching
nearer,  it  turned  out  to  be  occupied  in  great  part  as  a  cemetery  ;
while  in  the  open  places  were  many  soldiers,  and  the  whole  was
so  public,  that  we  concluded  to  enter  the  town  and  find  a  lodg-
ing there.

We  came  therefore  to  the  gate  near  the  northeast  comer ;
but  were  again  stopped  by  a  quarantine  guard,  who  would  Usten
to  nothing  until  the  head  of  the  quarantine  was  called.  Mean-
time, leaving  Mr  Smith  to  adjust  this  matter,  we  looked  fur-
ther, and  found  at  last  a  place  for  the  tent,  near  the  shore,  at
the  distance  of  fifty  or  sixty  rods  northeast  from  the  city.  The
chief  health  officer  having  been  sent  for,  came  himself  to  the
gate,  and  proved  to  be  a  personal  friend  of  Mr  Smith,  a  Chris-
tian of  some  education,  who  had  formerly  been  employed  in  the
schools  of  Beirut.  He  was  greatly  rejoiced  at  thus  meeting  his
friend  ;  and  gave  at  once  the  necessary  orders  to  the  guard,  to
let  us  pass  in  and  out  at  oui  pleasure.

The  delay  to  which  we  had  been  subjected,  was  the  more  to
be  regretted  j  because  the  day  was  now  far  spent,  and  it  was
already  too  late  to  see  much  of  this  ancient  place.  I  can  give
therefore  only  the  impression  received  from  a  hasty  view.  We
called  upon  our  friend  in  his  office  ;  and  found  him  busily  en-
gaged in  making  out  bills  of  health  for  several  small  vessels,
which  were  about  to  leave  the  port  for  Beirut  and  Egypt.  He
sent  with  us  his  father-in-law,  to  show  us  the  port  and  the  chief
buildings  of  the  city.  We  afterwards  called  upon  the  American
consular  agent,  Ibrahim  Nukhly,  a  wealthy  Greek  Catholic,  to
whom  we  desired  to  pay  our  respects.  His  house  was  a  large
one,  bmlt  upon  the  eastern  wall  of  the  city ;  the  rooms  were
spacious,  and  furnished  with  more  appearance  of  wealth,  than
any  I  saw  in  the  covmtry.  An  upper  parlour  with  many  win-
dows, on  the  roof  of  the  proper  house,  resembled  a  summer  pal-
ace ;  and  commanded  a  deUghtful  view  over  the  country  towards
the  east,  full  of  trees  and  gardens,  and  country  houses,  quite  to
the  foot  of  the  mountains.  Ibrahim  was  a  man  of  middle  age,
of  dignified  appearance  and  manners  ;  and  gave  us  the  usual

>  Monconys'  Voyages  Tom.  n.  p.  332.    Maundrell  under  JIarch  20.

ui.  415-417

478

SIDON,

[Sec.  XVJ.

pressing  invitation  to  lodge  at  his  house  ;  but  we  were  already
provided  for.  Several  of  his  neighbours  were  present  or  came
in  ;  and  quite  a  divan  assembled  around  us.

In  one  of  the  rooms,  open  to  all  comers,  a  daughter  five  or
six  years  old,  lay  dangerously  ill.  The  little  creature  was  evi-
dently wasting  away  under  a  slow  fever,  and  was  indulged  in
eating  everything  it  chose  to  call  for  ;  indeed  all  sorts  of  delica-
cies were  proposed,  in  order  to  excite  its  appetite.  The  father
was  in  great  alarm,  and  evidently  much  affected  ;  there  was  no
physician  in  all  the  place  in  whom  he  could  pitt  confidence  ;  and
he  besought  us  pressingly  to  examine  and  prescribe  for  his  child.
Never  did  I  more  long  for  the  possession  of  some  degree  of  medi-
cal knowledge  ;  for  the  poor  child  was  evidently  going  down  to
the  grave,  in  the  absence  of  all  judicious  treatment.

It  was  late  when  we  left  the  house  to  return  to  our  tent.
The  gate  of  the  city  was  already  closed,  and  could  not  be  opened
without  an  order  from  the  military  commandant ;  but  he  was
near,  and  in  five  minutes  we  were  enabled  to  pass  out.

Saida,  the  ancient  Sidon,  lies  on  the  northwest  slope  of  a
small  promontory,  which  here  juts  out  for  a  short  distance
obliquely  into  the  sea,  towards  the  southwest.  The  highest
ground  is  on  the  south,  where  the  citadel,  a  large  square  tower,
is  situated  ;  an  old  structure,  said  by  some  to  have  been  built
by  Louis  IX.,  in  A.  D.  1253.'  A  wall  encloses  the  city  on  the
land  side,  running  across  the  promontory  from  sea  to  sea  ;  it  is
kept  in  tolerable  repair.  The  ancient  harbour  was  formed  by  a
long  low  ridge  of  rocks,  parallel  to  the  shore  in  front  of  the  city.
Before  the  time  of  Fakhr  ed-Din,  there  was  here  a  port  capable
of  receiving  fifty  galleys  ;  but  that  chieftain,  in  order  to  protect
himself  against  the  Turks,  caused  it  to  be  partly  filled  up  with
stones  and  earth  ;  so  that  ever  since  his  day  only  boats  can
enter  it.**  Larger  vessels  lie  without  the  entrance,  on  the  north
of  the  ledge  of  rocks,  where  they  are  protected  from  the  south-
west winds,  but  exposed  to  those  from  the  northern  quarter.
Here,  on  a  rock  in  the  sea,  is  another  castle  of  the  time  of  the
crusades,  the  form  of  which  is  in  part  adapted  to  that  of  the
rock  ;  it  is  connected  with  the  shore  at  the  northern  end  of  the
city,  by  a  stone  causeway  with  nine  arches,  lying  between  the
inner  and  outer  port.'

The  streets  of  Saida  are  narrow,  crooked,  and  dirty,  like
those  of  most  oriental  cities.  The  houses  are  many  of  them  large
and  well  built  of  stone  ;  and  the  town,  in  this  respect,  presents

■  This  Bcems  to  be  the  story  of  the  vieux  5ii  KifiS  makes  no  mention  of  the

French  residents,  and  may  perhaps  be  well  report.;  Mem.  I.  p.  29G.
founded ;  Nan  p.  535     Pococke  II.  i.  p.       ^  D'Arvieux  M6m.  I.  p.  298.
87.    Turner's  Tour  II.  p.  87.    Yet  D'Ar-       '  Niebulir  Reisebeschr.  III.  p.  79.
iii.  417,  418

Junk  25.]  THE  CITT.     POPULATION.  COMMERCE.

479

a  strong  contrast  to  modern  Tyre.  Those  especially  along  tlie
eastern  wall,  are  distinguished  for  their  size  and  height  ;  they
are  buUt  directly  on  the  wall,  so  as  to  constitute  a  part  of  it ;
and  enjoy  a  pure  air  and  a  pleasing  prospect  of  the  fields  and
country.  Within  the  city  are  six  Khans,  called  by  the  Arabs
Wekaleh,  for  the  use  of  merchants  and  travellers.'  The  largest
of  these  is  the  Wekaleh  formerly  belonging  to  the  French  fac-
tory and  consulate,  and  still  called  the  French  Khan  ;  a  large
quadrangle  of  abovit  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  on  a  side,  with
a  fountain  and  basin  in  the  middle,  and  covered  galleries  all
around.  It  was  erected  by  Fakhr  ed-Din  early  in  the  seven-
teenth century  ;  and  is  minutely  described  by  D'Arvieux,  who
resided  here  for  several  years  as  a  merchant,  soon  after  the  middle
of  the  same  century.

The  taxable  males  of  Saida,  as  we  were  told,  amount  as
registered  to  seventeen  hundred  ;  which,  according  to  the  usual
proportion,  would  indicate  a  population  of  nearly  seven  thousand
souls.  Yet  Ibrahim,  who  certainly  had  the  best  opportunities
of  information,  estimated  the  whole  number  of  inhabitants  at
not  over  five  thousand.  About  two  thirds  of  the  whole  are
Muslims  ;  one  eighth  part  Jews  ;  and  the  remainder  Greek
Catholics  and  Maronites  in  about  equal  proportions,^  with  a  very
few  Arab  Grreeks.

The  commerce  of  Saida,  which  five  and  twenty  years  ago  was
stiU  considerable,  has  of  late  years  fallen  off,  in  consequence  of
the  prosperity  of  Beirut ;  the  lu,tter  having  become  exclusively
the  port  of  Damascus.  The  chief  exports  from  Saida  are  silk,
cotton,  and  nutgalls.*  Indeed,  we  had  now  begun  to  enter  upon
the  region,  in  which  silk  is  extensively  cultivated  ;  as  is  indica-
ted by  the  orchards  of  mulberry  trees  around  the  villages.  The
earthquake  of  1837  threw  down  several  houses  in  Saida  and
injured  many  others  ;  but  only  a  few  persons  were  killed.'

The  beauty  of  Saida  consists  in  its  gardens  and  orchards  of
fruit  trees,  which  fiU  the  plain  and  extend  to  the  foot  of  the  ad-
jacent hills.  The  city  and  the  tract  around,  are  abundantly
supplied  with  water,  by  aqueducts  and  channels  which  conduct
it  from  the  Auwaly  and  other  smaller  streams,  as  they  issue  from
the  mountains.*  The  environs  exhibit  everywhere  a  luxuriant
verdure  ;  and  the  fruits  of  Saida  are  reckoned  among  the  finest
of  the  country.    Hasselquist  enumerates  pomegranates,  apricots,

*  Turner  ib.  p.  87.    For  the  Wekaleh,  *  Berggren  Reisen  II.  p.  217.  Hassel-

see  Lane's  Mod.  Egyptians,  II.  p.  8  sq.  quist  describes  the  ancient  aqueduct  which

This  name  is  sometimes  falsely  written  still  supplies  the  city,  as  bringing  the  wa-

Okella.  ter  from  the  mountahis,  a  distance  of  two

'  Turner  ib.  p.  88.  Gorman  or  Swedish  miles,  i.  e.  some  four

'  Mr  Thomson's  Report  in  the  Mission-  or  five  hours :  Reise  p  192
aty  Herald  for  Nov.  1837,  p.  434.

iii.  418-420

480

8ID01T.

[Sec.  XVL

figs,  almonds,  oranges,  lemons,  and  plums,  as  growing  here  in  such
abundance  as  to  fumisli  annually  several  ship  loads  for  export ;
to  which  D'Arvieux  adds  also  pears,  peaches,  cherries,  and  ba-
nanas, as  at  the  present  day.^  At  the  foot  of  the  hills,  are  many
ancient  excavated  sepulchres.^

Saida  was  at  this  time  the  point,  from  which  travellers  were
accustomed  to  make  an  excursion  to  the  residence  of  Lady  Hester
Stanhope,  about  three  hours  distant  in  the  mountains.  We  had
letters  to  her  ;  but  pressed  as  we  were  for  time,  in  the  hope  of
still  being  able  t-o  visit  Ba'albek,  we  felt  no  disposition  to  avail
ourselves  of  the  introduction.  Her  career  was  at  least  an  ex-
traordinary one  ;  and  whether  she  acted  from  the  promptings  of
a  noble  or  a  wayward  spirit,  death  has  now  closed  the  scene,  and
cast  his  pall  over  her  virtues  and  her  follies.

Sidon  was  the  most  ancient  of  all  the  Phenician  cities  ;  and
is  mentioned  both  in  the  Pentateuch  and  in  the  poems  of
Homer  ;  which  Tyre  is  not.^  In  the  division  of  the  Promised
Land  by  Joshua,  Sidon  is  spoken  of  as  a  great  city,  and  was
assigned  to  Asher ;  but  the  Israehtes  never  subdued  it.^  In
later  ages,  the  yoimger  Tyre  outstripped  Sidon  in  the  career  of
prosperity  and  power  ;  but  both  were  equally  renowned  for  their
commerce,  their  manufactures,  and  the  cultivation  of  the  fine
arts,  as  weU  as  for  the  luxury  and  vices  usually  attendant  upon
commercial  prosperity.'  When  the  Assyrian  Shalmaneser  en-
tered Phenicia,  about  720  B.  C.  Sidon  and  the  rest  of  Phenicia,
except  insular  Tyre,  submitted  to  the  conqueror,  and  remained
long  under  the  dominion  of  the  Assyrians  and  Persians.*  Under
Artaxerxes  Ochus,  about  350  B.  C.  Phenicia  revolted  from  the
Persian  yoke  ;  and  Sidon  was  captured  and  destroyed  by  that
monarch.'.  Yet  it  was  soon  built  up  again  ;  and  in  332  B.  C.
opened,  its  gates  to  Alexander  the  Great,  on  his  approach.'

'  D'Arvieux  Mem.  I.  p.  332.    H.issel-  But  Josephus  derives  it  from  Sidon  the

quist  Reise  p.  1S8.    Besides  these  fruits,  eldest  son  of  Caoaao,  Gen.  10,  15.  Joseph.

Hasselquist  mentions  also  the  numerous  Ant.  1.  6.  2.

mulberry  trees,  the  Corrffa  &6<«.  i.  1,  in  ■Kpoy6ywv  eK€vb(pa.
ported,  and  sumac  (Rhus).    He  says  the       '  Is.  23,  2.    Ez.  27,  8.     See  too  the

vine  was  not  cultivated  around  Saida ;  yet  Homeric  passages  cited  in  note  3.  Virg.

D'Arvieux,  who  resided  here  a  century  £n.  4.  75.    Diod.  Sic.  16.  41,  4.5.  Strabo

earlier,  describes  the  vine  as  verj- abundant,  16.  2.  24.  p.  757.  Plin.  H.  N.  36.  66.  The

yielding  grapes  of  great  perfection,  and  a  Sidonian  architects  were  also  in  request ;

strong  though  delicate  white  wine ;  Mem.  1  Kings  5,  6.    1  Chr.  22,  4.    Ezra  3,  7.

L  p.  328.  Strabo  (1.  c.)  attributes  to  the  Sidoniana

'  Described  by  Maundrell,  April  22d.  great  skill  in  philosophy,  astronomy,  ge-

Hasselquist  Keise  p.  189.    Pococke  II.  i.  p.  ometry,  arithmetic,  navigation,  and  all  the

87.  liberal  arts.

'  Gen.  10,  19.  49,  13.    Horn.  Iliiis  6.       *  Menander  in  Joseph.  Ant.  9.  14.  2.
289.  ib.  23.  743.    Odyss.  15.  415.  ib.  17.       '  Diod  Sic.  16.  42  sq.  45.
424.— The  Heb.  name  signifies  "a       •  Jos.  Ant  11.  8.  3.    Arrian.  Alex.  2.

fishing,  fisherj-;"  and  such  is  the  ancient  15.    Q.  Curt.  4.  1,  15.
etymology  pruscived  by  Justin;    18.  3.

iii.  420,  421

Jdne  25.]

HISTORICAL  NOTICES.

481

After  Alexander's  death,  Sidon  continued  alternatelj-  in  the
possession  of  the  Syrian  and  Egyi^tian  monarchs,  until  it  came
at  last  under  the  Roman  power ;  at  this  time  it  was  stUl  an
opulent  city.'  This  was  during  the  times  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, when  our  Lord  visited  tlie  territories  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  ;
and  Paul  afterwards  found  here  Christian  friends  on  his  passage
to  Rome.*  There  douhtless  was  early  a  Christian  church  and
bishop  at  Sidon  ;  though  the  first  bishop,  whose  name  is  pre-
served, was  Theodoras,  who  was  present  at  the  council  of  Nicea,
in  A.  D.  325.'  In  the  same  centurj',  Eusebius  and  Jerome  still
speak  of  Sidon  as  an  important  city  but  we  know  little  more
of  it  until  the  time  of  the  crasades.^

The  original  host  of  the  crusaders,  in  their  progress  from
Antioch  towards  Jerusalem,  in  A.  D.  1099,  marched  along  the
whole  Phenician  coast,  leaving  the  strong  cities  of  Beirut,  Sidon,
Tyre,  'Akka,  and  others,  unmolested,  so  far  as  the  latter  suffered
them  to  pass  by  without  hindrance.  Their  first  and  grand  object
was  the  Holy  City.  The  Muslim  commander  of  Sidon,  however,
then  subject  to  the  Khalif  of  Egypt,  at  first  opposed  himself  to
their  progress  ;  but  his  troops  were  driven  back  into  the  city  by
the  pilgrims  ;  and  the  latter  then  rested  for  several  days  in  the
rich  environs,  where  their  light  troops  brought  in  much  booty
from  the  vicinity.*  Not  until  A.  D.  1107,  were  the  crusaders
able  to  undertake  in  earnest  the  reduction  of  Sidon  ;  and  even
then,  at  first,  the  inhabitants  succeeded  in  purchasing  from  king
Baldwin  I.  a  reprieve,  with  gold.  Yet  they  themselves  proved
Mthless  ;  and  in  the  next  year  (1108)  Baldwin  formally  laid
siege  to  Sidon  ;  but,  after  great  efforts,  was  obliged  to  abandon
the  enterprise.  In  A.  D.  1111,  the  siege  was  again  renewed,
with  better  success  ;  and  after  six  weeks,  king  Baldwin  had  the
satisfaction  of  seeing  the  city  surrendered  into  liis  hands,  on  the
tenth  day  of  December.  It  was  bestowed  as  a  fief  on  the  knight
Eustache  Grenier.^

Sidon  remained  in  the  possession  of  tlie  Christians  until  A.  D.
1187,  when  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  Saiadin,  without  resistance,
immediately  after  the  battle  of  Hattin.'    The  Sultan  appears  to

^  Pompon.  Mela  1. 12,  "  adhuc  bpnlenta
Sidon,  antequam  a  Persis  capta,  maritima-
rum  urbiuin  maxima."

>  Matt.  15,21.  Mark  7,24.  Acts  27,  3.

'  See  the  list  of  bishops,  Reland  Pal.  p.
104.    Le  Quien  Oriens  Chr.  II.  p.  811  sq.

^  Ouomast.  art.  Sidon,  "  urbs  Phoeniees
insignis."

'  See  generally  Reland  Patest  p.  1010
sq.  Cellarius  XotiL  Oi*.  11-  P-  379  sq.
A\'iner  Bibl.  liealworterb.  art.  Sidon.  Ro-
semnuUer  BibL  Geogr.  II.  i.  p.  20  sq.

Vol.  II.— 41

'  Will.  Tyr.  7.  22.  Wilken  Gesch.  der
Kr.  I.  p.  267. — In  some  of  the  writers  of
that  age,  Sidon  appe-irs  as  'Sagitta;'  Alb.
Aquens.  10.  3,  8,  "urbs  Sagitta,  quae  est
Sidon."    Marin.  Sanut.  pp.  155,  245.

'  Albert.  Aquens.  10.  3,  4,  8.  45-50.  ib.
11.  31-34.  Win.  Tyr.  II.  14.  Wilken  ib.
IL  pp.  213,  216  sq.  221  sq.

'  Bobaed.  Vit.  Sal.  p.  72.  Abtdf.  An-
nal.  A.  H.  5S3.  Reinaud  E.xtr.  p.  202.
Wilken  ib.  IIL  ii.  p.  295.

iii.  421-423

482  •  SIDON.  [SEaXVL

have  dismantled  tlie  fortifications,  and  partially  destroyed  the
city  ;  for  when  in  A.  D.  1197,  after  the  hard-fought  general
battle  with  Melek  el-'Adil  in  the  vicinity,  the  Christians  entered
Sidon,  they  found  it  desolated.  The  pilgrims  stabled  their  horses
in  mansions  ornamented  with  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  ;  and  cooked
their  food  at  fires  fragrant  with  the  odours  of  the  same  precious
wood,  collected  from  the  ruins.'  The  crusaders  proceeded  to
Beirut,  of  which  they  took  possession  ;  while  Melek  el-'AdU.
again  appeared  in  their  rear,  and  completed  the  destruction  of
Sidon.^

The  Christians,  however,  rebuilt  and  occupied  the  city ;
which,  after  half  a  century,  was  once  more  taken  and  dismantled
by  the  Saracen  forces  in  A.  D.  1249,  during  the  siege  of  Dami-
etta  by  Louis  IX.  of  France.'  Four  years  later,  in  A.  D.  1253,
when  an  officer  of  the  French  king  with  a  small  party  of  troops
had  begun  to  restore  the  city,  a  Muslim  host  again  approached,
and  took  possession  of  the  place.  The  garrison,  with  a  few  of
the  inhabitants,  withdrew  to  the  castle  upon  the  rock  ;  which
being  entirely  surrounded  by  water,  afforded  them  security  ;  but
of  the  remaining  inhabitants,  two  thousand  were  slain,  and  four
hundred  carried  ofi"  as  prisoners  to  Damascus,  after  the  city  had
been  laid  waste.^  In  July  of  the  same  year,  only  a  few  weeks
afterwards,  king  Louis  himself  repaired  to  Sidon,  and  caused  the
city  to  be  rebuilt  with  high  walls  and  massive  towers.'  The
Templars  in  A.  D.  1260  purchased  Sidon  from  Julian  its  tem-
poral lord  ;  and,  with  the  exception  of  its  being  plundered  by
the  Mogols  in  the  same  year,  they  retained  possession  of  it  for
thirty  years.'  In  A.  D.  1291,  after  the  atrocious  and  terrible
overthrow  of  'Akka  by  the  Sultan  el-Ashraf,  and  the  abandon-
ment of  Tyre,  the  Templars  also  left  Sidon  to  its  fate,  and
withdrew  'first  to  Tortosa  and  afterwards  to  Cyprus.  Sidon  was
taken  possession  of  by  the  Muhammedans,  and  once  more  dis-
mantled.^

Eight  or  ten  years  before  this  event,  Brocardus  describes
Sidon  as  a  large  place  ;  altbougli  a  great  jjart  of  it  already  lay
in  ruins.  On  the  north  waa  a  fortress  in  the  sea,  built  originally
by  crusaders  from  Germany  ;  and  on  the  hUl  upon  the  south
another,  then  occupied  by  the  Templars.*  After  its  abandon-
ment by  the  Franks,  Sidon  appears  not  to  have  been,  like  Tyre,

'  Wilken  ib.  V.  pp.  3.V35,  and  the  au-
thorities there  citei  Rciiiaud  Ex.tr.  p.
380.

"  Wilken  ib.  V.  p.  41.

'  Roinaud  E.xtr.  p.  45.'5.  Wilken  ib.
VII.  p.  323.

*  Wilken  ib.  VII.  p.  323,  etc.  etc.
Marin.  Sanut  p.  220. — ^This  was  of  course
iii.  423.  424

the  prt^ent  castle  in  the  sea  connected  with
the  shore  by  n  causeway.

'  Wilken  ibid.  p.  333.

"  Hugo  I'Ugon  p.  736.  Marin.  Sanut.
p.  221.    Wilken  ib.  pp.  400,  415.

'  Wilken  ib.  pp.  771,  772.  Reiuaud  p.
670.    Comp.  above,  p.  46U.

"  Brocardus  c.  2.  p.  171.

JojfK  25.]

LATER  HISTORY.

483

entirely  forsaken  by  its  inhabitants.  Abulfeda  speaks  of  it  not
long  after  as  a  small  town,  having  a  citadel ;  and  according  to
edh-Dhahiry  in  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  centurj'  it  was  a
place  of  some  importance,  constituting  one  of  the  ports  of
Damascus,  and  visited  by  ships.'  At  the  beginning  of  the
seventeenth  century,  Frank  travellers  describe  it  as  still  for  the
most  part  in  ruins,  with  few  inhabitants  and  a  single  Khan.*

But  about  this  time,  Sidon  received  a  new  impulse  from  the
genius  and  acti\'ity  of  the  celebrated  Fakhr  ed-Din.  This  Emir
of  the  Druzes,  having  got  possession  of  aU  the  towns  along  the
coast,  gave  way  to  his  propensity  for  building,  not  only  at
Beirut  and  Tyre,  but  also  at  Sidon.  Here  he  erected  a  vast
seraglio  or  palace  for  himself ;  and  also  the  large  Khan  after-
wards occupied  by  the  French,  besides  other  structures.^  His
policy  was  to  encourage  commerce  ;  and  although  he  filled  up
the  port  of  Sidon,  yet  in  consequence  of  his  measures  and  pro-
tection, the  trade  of  that  city  revived  to  some  extent,  and  a
greater  activity  was  awakened  along  the  whole  coast.  Professing
to  be  himself  descended  from  French  ancestors,  he  treated  the
Christians  in  his  dominions  with  great  equity,  especially  the
Franks  ;  granting  privileges  and  immunities  to  the  Latin  con-
vents, and  encouraging  the  commerce  of  the  French,  which  had
now  extended  itself  to  these  shores.*  The  consul  and  merchants
of  this  nation  at  Sidon,  managed  also  to  keep  on  good  terms
with  the  Emirs  and  Pashas  who  were  his  successors  ;  although
in  consequence  of  a  temporary  quarrel,  the  consulate  was  for  two
or  three  years  removed  to  'Akka  ;  from  which  place  it  returned
to  Sidon  in  the  spring  of  A.  D.  1658.'

At  this  time,  on  the  establishment  of  a  new  house  at  Mar-
seilles for  trading  to  Saida,  one  of  its  partners  was  appointed
consul  at  the  latter  place  ;  and  D'Arvieux,  a  relative,  who  had
already  been  five  years  in  Smyrna,  also  repaired  thither,  where
he  continued  chiefly  to  reside  until  A.  D.  1655.  To  him  we  are
indebted  for  a  minute  account  of  the  city  as  it  then  was,  and  of
the  state  of  the  French  trade.*

'  Abnlf.  Tab.  Syr.  p.  93.  Edh-Dhahiry
in  Rosenm.  Analect  Arab.  ni.  p.  22.
Lat.  p.  47.

'  Cotovic.  p.  116.  Sandys'  Travels  p.
164,  "  But  this  once  ample  city,  still
suffering  with  the  often  changes  of  those
coantries,  is  at  this  day  contracted  into
narrow  limits,  and  oidy  shows  the  founda-
tions of  her  greatness,"  etc.  etc.

'  D'Arvieux  Mem.  I.  pp.  303,  312.

*  D'Arvieux  Mem.  I.  pp.  362,  363.— For
notices  of  the  life  and  character  of  Fakhr-
ed-Din,  see  Sandys'  Travels  pp.  164-166.
D'Arvieux  Mem.  Tom.   I.   p.   357  sq.

Volney  Voyage  EL  pp.  38-45.  The  Emir
was  strangled  at  Constantinople  in  A.  D.
1633,  at  the  age  of  70  years.  The  ac-
count which  honest  Sandys  (his  cotem-
porary)  gives  of  him,  is  not  very  favoura-
ble ;  at  least  in  respect  to  his  moral
character.

°  D'Arvieux  M6m.  I.  pp.  380,  397  sq.
404. — The  occasion  and  progress  of  the
quarrel  are  detailed  ib.  pp.  261,  262  sq.

«  Mem.  Tom.  I.  pp.  294  sq.  331  sq.
463  sq.  Tom.  III.  pp.  341-374.— At  that
time  there  were  many  Jews  in  Sidon,
dwelling  in  a  quarter  by  themselves ;  the
iii.  424-426

484

SIDON.

[SecXVL

At  that  period  the  French  were  the  only  nation,  who  took
part  in  the  commerce  of  Sidon,  and  the  vicinity.'  Their  trade
had  become  so  extensive  and  firmly  established,  as  to  bring
annually  two  hundred  thousand  crowns  into  the  coffers  of  the
Grand  Seignor  ;  and  was  so  beneficial  to  the  inhabitants,  ac-
cording to  D'Arvieux,  that  had  the  Franks  removed  to  another
place,*the  city  would  have  been  immediately  abandoned  and  left
desert.^  Saida  was  the  central  point,  and  traded  directly  with
the  Druzes  ;  but  the  merchants  established  there  had  likewise
fectors  in  Eamleh,  'Akka,  Beirut,  Tripolis,  and  sometimes  Tyre,
who  purchased  up  the  products  of  the  country  and  transmitted
them  to  Saida,  whence  they  were  shipped  to  Marseilles.^  A  di-
rect and  secure  road  led  from  Saida  to  Damascus  in  two  and  a
half  days,  over  Lebanon  and  Anti-Lebanon  ;  crossing  the  Buka'a
obliquely,  and  passing  by  the  villages  Meshghurah  and  Jubb
Jenln.*  Saida  was  at  this  time  regarded  as  the  j)ort  of  Damas-
cus ;  but  the  trade  of  the  latter  city  as  yet  went  more  to  Aleppo,
and  turned  westwards  only  at  a  later  period.

The  articles  purchased  and  exported  by  the  French  from
Saida,  were  cotton  both  raw  and  spun,  silk,  rice,  nutgalls,  ashes
from  the  desert,  bird  lime,  senna,  and  a  few  other  drugs.  Hith-
erto these  had  been  paid  for  in  money  ;  but  about  this  time  the
French  began  to  import  various  articles  in  return  ;  among  which
the  chief  were  cloth,  spices,  dye  stuffs,  and  some  jewelry.^

The  French  consul  at  Saida  enjoyed  great  consideration
throughout  the  country.  His  jurisdiction  and  title  included  also
Jerusalem  ;  and  it  was  a  part  of  his  duty  to  visit  the  Holy  City
every  year  at  Easter,  in  order  to  afford  protection  to  the  sacred
places  and  to  the  Latin  monks.*

Such,  with  occasional  alterations,  though  with  a  gradual  ex-
tension, continued  to  be  the  state  of  the  French  trade  at  Saida
down  to  near  the  close  of  the  last  century.'  In  Pococke's  day,
the  merchants  all  resided  in  the  great  Khan,  and  exported  cliiefly
raw  silk,  cotton,  and  grain.'  Hasselquist  in  A.  D.  1751  gives
a  more  particular  notice  of  their  trade.  More  than  twenty  ships
were  every  year  freighted  for  France,  laden  chiefly  with  spun

keya  of  wliioh  were  carried  every  night  to  '  Mnnndrell  accompanied  him  on  this

the  Kady  or  the  governor ;  ibid.  I.  p.  301.  journey  in  A.  D.  1697;  see  his  Journal,

Nau  Voyage  p.  537.  March  19th.

'  D'Arvieux  ib.  p.  464.  '  In  A.  D.  1665  and  for  some  years

*  Ibid.  1.  p.  464  gq.  II.  p.  465  sq.  Mnnn-  and  for  this,  among  other  reasons,  D'Ar-
drell  also  travelled  tlus  road  ;  Apr.  25th,    vieux  returned  to  France ;  Mom.  Tom.

»  D'Arvieux  M6m.  1  p.  334  sq.  465  sq.  542  sq.
— The  French  consul  and  merchants  had       '  Pococke  Descript.  of  the  East,  IL  i.

originally  resided  at  Damascus,  and  re-  p.  87.
Moved  tlieiice  to  Saida ;  ib.  IL  p.  464.

»  Ibid.  p.  311.

'  Ibid.  p.  334.  Comp.  p.  247  sq.

afterwards,  the  Frank  trade  was  greatly
depressed  by  the  exactions  of  the  Turks  ;

etc.

III.  pp.  341-374.    Comp.  Nau  Voyage  p.

ill.  42G,  427

June  26.]  FRENCH  TRAOE.     RIVER  AUWALY.

485

cotton  and  raw  silk  ;  but  carrying  also  the  beautiful  silken  and
half  silken  stuffs  of  Damascus  to  Italy,  and  likewise  nutgalls,
oil,  and  ashes  to  France.  The  imports  were  cloth,  spices,  Span-
ish iron,  and  dye  stutfs  ;  all  of  which  were  mostly  sent  to
Damascus,  which  now  furnished  great  part  of  the  trade  both  of
Saida  and  Beirtit.'

In  Volney's  time  the  French  continued  to  be  the  sole  European
traders  at  Saida  ;  and  had  there  a  consul  and  six  commercial
houses.  Cotton,  both  raw  and  spun,  and  silk,  were  still  the
chief  commodities.  The  same  traveller  gives  a  general  account
and  estimate  of  the  French  commerce  in  Syria  at  that  period.*
But  in  A.  D.  1791,  Jezzir  Pasha  drove  the  French  out  of  all  his
territories,  including  Saida  and  since  then  its  little  trade  has
been  carried  on  chiefly  by  the  natives.  At  the  present  day,  the
tide  of  European  commerce  has  turned  to  Beirtit  ;  and  Sidon  is
rarely  visited  by  foreign  vessels.

Tuesday,  June  2Qth.  The  sun  rose  upon  what  proved  to  be
our  last  day  of  travelling  in  Syria.  Our  journey  lay  along  the
coast  from  Saida  to  Beiriit,  usually  reckoned  a  distance  of  nine
hours.  But  the  road  is  difficult ;  leading  most  of  the  way  over
heavy  sands  or  across  rocky  promontories  ;  and  presents  com-
paratively little  of  interest.

We  set  off  at  5.10,  keeping  along  the  sandy  beach ;  and
after  a  few  minutes,  passed  the  Lazaretto  of  Saida  in  a  pleasant
shady  spot  on  our  right.*  An  attendant  of  duke  Maximilian
of  Bavaria,  a  mulatto,  had  been  left  here  by  his  master  ill  of  the
plague  ;  he  now  lay  at  the  point  of  death  ;  and  in  Beirut  we
heard  of  his  decease.'

We  came  to  the  Nahr  el-Auwaly  at  8|  o'clock,  and  in  order
to  cross  it,  turned  for  some  distance  up  along  its  southern  bank,
to  a  fine  old  bridge  of  hewn  stone  of  one  arch,  with  mills  and  a
KhSn  upon  the  northern  side.  This  bridge  is  the  work  of  Fakhr
ed-Din.*  The  stream  rises  in  Mount  Lebanon,  northeast  of  Deir
el-Kamr  and  Bteddin,'^  from  fountains  an  hour  and  a  half  beyond
the  village  of  el-Baruk  ;  it  is  at  first  a  wild  torrent,  and  its

'  Hasselqnist  Reise  p.  190.    Niebnhi's  '  See  Vol.  I.  p.  250.

account  is  similar  in  A,  D.  1766;  at  that  "  D'Arvieux  says  it  was  erected  by  an

time  there  were  here   fourteen  French  Italian   architect  brought  home  by  the

merchants,  all  living  in  the  Khan.    Reise-  Emir ;  Mem.  I.  p.  327.

bescbr.  III.  p.  79.  '  Bteddin,  vulg.  for  Beit  ed-Din.  This

'  Volney  Voyage  en  Syrie  II.  pp.  192,  singular  contraction,  or  rather  hurried  pro-

391  sq.  nnuciation  of  Beit,  which  thus  assumes

'  BroWs  Travels  4to.  p.  369.  Olivier  the  form  of  a  simple  6,  is  very  frequent  in

Voyages,  etc.  Tom.  IL  p.  231.  Mount  Lebanon;  e.g.  Bsherreb,  Bhannis,

*  This  appears  to  be  the  spot  mentioned  Bzummar,  etc.    Something  of  the  same

by  D'Arvieux  as  the  site  of  a  Khan  built  kind  is  found  in  Beis;in  for  the  Heb.  Beth-

by  Fakhr  ed-Din.  on  the  shore  north  of  Shean.     See  Gesenius  Notes  on  Btirck-

the  city,  just  beyond  a  rivulet ;  Mem.  I.  p.  hardt  p.  491.
326.

Vol.  n.— 41*  iii.  427-429

486

FROM  SIDON  TO  BEIRUT.

[Sec.  XVL

course  about  south.  It  afterwards  turns  west ;  and  where  it  issues
from  the  mountains,  its  waters  are  taken  out  to  supply  the  city
of  Saida,  and  to  irrigate  the  surrounding  plain.  Yet  it  here
was  still  a  fine  broad  stream,  flowing  rapidly  in  a  deep  channel
through  a  verdant  region.  Maundrell  remarks,  that  before  his
time  this  river  had  been  mentioned  by  no  geographer  ;  since
then  it  has  been  noticed  by  all.  Yet  all  appear  to  have  over-
looked the  fact,  that  this  can  be  no  other  than  the  ancient
Bostrtnus,  described  by  Dionysius  Periegetes  as  the  ''graceful"
river,  upon  whose  waters  Sidon  was  situated.'

The  whole  region  of  the  Auwaly  is  full  of  fig  and  mulberry
orchards,  intermingled  with  Pride  of  India  and  other  ornamen-
tal trees.  The  loftier  peaks  of  Lebanon  here  began  to  appear  ;
the  hills  became  higher  and  more  romantic.  Just  beyond  this
spot,  indeed,  the  tract  of  mountains  on  the  west  of  the  upper
part  of  the  Auwaly  approach  the  sea,  and  send  out  their  roots
quite  to  the  shore.  Here  the  fine  plain  of  Sidon,  as  also  the
great  Phenician  plain,  terminates  ;  and  for  many  hours  forther
north,  the  rocky  and  uncultivated  coast  along  the  foot  of  the
mountains,  is  interrupted  only  by  a  succession  of  sandy  coves.
The  ancients  sometimes  reckoned  this  as  the  beginning  of  Leba-
non on  the  south.''  The  Auwaly  is  still,  in  this  part,  the  south-
ern boundary  of  the  territories  of  the  Emir  Beshir  of  Mount
Lebanon,  extending  from  Belad  esh-Skukif  to  some  distance
north  of  the  cedars,  and  iucluding  the  whole  mountain,  from
the  shore  of  the  sea  to  the  Buka'a,  as  well  as  part  of  the  latter.
Only  the  town  of  Beirut,  and  its  immediate  environs,  are  ex-
cepted.

At  6.10,  in  crossing  the  first  promontory  beyond  the  Auwa-
ly, there  was  a  charming  back  view  of  Saida  and  its  groves  and
gardens.  The  way  was  now  uneven  and  rough,  for  nearly  two
hours,  across  the  rocky  tract,  with  an  intervening  sandy  cove,

'  Dionys.  Perieget.  Orbis  Terr.  Descr.  905  :

Kol  tvpov  ^ Slyvyir)v,  Br]pvTOv  r'  aiav  ipavy^p,
Bv0\.oy  T  ayx'iO'^oy,  koX  SiSJva  a.i/bifi6((T(Tav,
Nato/xfvrjv  x^-P'^"'''''^  ^'P' ■'^^'^'^^  ^o.  20.  Comp.  Pococke  II.

mins  de  chaque  costc  rclevcs  ou  marclieiit  i.  p.  91.  fol. — There  seems  to  be  not  the

les  hommes."    The  same  form  of  narrow  slightest  foundation  for  regardiii!!  the  name

street  is  seen  also  in  Jerusalem.  Magoras  as  a  corruption  I'or  Tamyras,  as

'  Maundrell  March  17th.    Pococke  II.  supposed  by  Maimert ;  Geogr.  von  PaList.

i.  p.  92.    Burckhiirdt  p.  100.    The  Latin  etc.  1831.  p.  293.

inscriptions  are  given  by  Maundrell  .md  ^  Ma\mdrell   1.  c.  Pococke  ib.  p.  91.

Burckhardt.  Turner's  Tour.  etc.  II.  p.  Gl. — The  legend
iii.  4m  -43S

Skc.  XVI.]  VIEW  OF  LEBANON.     TEMPLES,  493

Yet  what  interested  me  most  of  all,  perhaps,  was  the  view
of  the  towering  heights  of  Lebanon,  so  rich  in  delightful  associ-
ations drawn  from  scriptural  history.  As  its  ridges  here  present
themselves  to  the  eye,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  accounting  for
the  name  Lebanon,  signifying  in  Hebrew  the  "  White  Moun-
tain." The  whole  mass  of  the  moixntain  consists  of  whitish
limestone  ;  or  at  least,  the  rocky  surface,  as  it  reflects  the  light,
exhibits  everywhere  a  whitish  aspect.'  The  mountain  teems  with
villages  ;  and  is  cultivated  more  or  less  almost  to  the  very  top.
Yet  so  steep  and  rocky  is  the  surface,  that  the  tillage  is  carried
on  chiefly  by  means  of  terraces,  built  up  with  great  labour  and
covered  above  with  soil.  When  one  looks  upwards  from  below,
the  vegetation  on  these  terraces  is  not  seen  ;  so  that  the  whole
mountain  side  appears  as  if  composed  only  of  immense  rugged
masses  of  naked  whitish  rock,  severed  by  deep  wild  ravines  run-
ning down  precipitously  to  the  plain.  No  one  would  suspect,
among  these  rocks,  the  existence  of  a  xamt  multitude  of  thrifty
villages,  and  a  numerous  population  of  mountaineers,  harily,  in-
dustrious, and  brave.  The  great  number  of  convents  scattered
over  Lebanon,  will  be  noticed  in  the  next  section.

The  celebrated  cedar  grove  of  Lebanon  is  some  thi-ee  days'
journey  from  Beirtit,  near  the  northern  and  perhaps  liighest
summit  of  the  mountain,  six  or  eight  hours  north  of  Jebel
Sunnin.  As  I  was  able  to  visit  the  spot  during  a  subsequent
journey,  a  description  of  it  belongs  rather  to  another  volume.^

To  say  nothing  of  the  rich  mines  of  discovery  in  physical
science,  still  to  be  explored  in  Mount  Lebanon,  the  mountain
well  deserves  further  examination  in  a  matter  of  historical  im-
port. I  refer  to  the  various  ancient  temples  found  in  several
parts  of  Lebanon,  on  both  sides  ;  some  of  them  high  up,  in
places  where  it  must  have  been  difficult  to  build  ;  and  exhiljiting
a  style  of  architecture  similar  to  the  wonderful  structures  of  Ba-
'albek.  The  site  of  one  of  these  temples  was  visible  from  our
windows,  near  the  village  Beit  Miry,  half  way  up  the  mountain,
at  the  distance  of  three  hours  from  Beirftt.  It  is  called  Deir  el-
Kul'ah  ;  and  was  described  as  built  of  immense  hewn  stones
without  cement,  with  large  columns  in  front ;  which,  as  well  as
the  walls,  are  now  mostly  overthrown.  Burckhardt  visited  not
less  than  four  other  like  temples  in  different  parts  of  the  moun-
tain ;  and  a  sixth  is  marked  by  Mr  Bird  at  Husn  es-Suf  iry,  in

has  been  attached  to  this  spot  at  least  ever  come  from  the  perennial  snow  upon  the

since  the  crusades,  and  is  often  mentioned  mountain ;  but  this  does  not  exi^t  in  suf-

by  travellers ;  see  de  Suchem  Itin.  p.  102.  ficient  quantity,  to  present  any  permanently

Reissb.  p.  828.    Breydenbach  in  Ueissb.  p.  marked  appearance.

124.    Quaresmlus  II.  p.  909.  Monconys  I.  See  in  Vol.  IIL  Sect.  XIII,  imder  June

p.  334,  etc.  etc.  16th,  1852.
*  The  name  is  sometimes  said  to  have

Vol.  II.— 42  iii.  439-441

494

BEIRUT.

[Sec.  XVI.

the  district  of  ed-Dunniyeh,  northeast  of  Tripoly.  Not  improba-
bly more  exist  in  various  other  places.'

Beirut  is  the  ancient  Berytus  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,
and  by  some  is  supposed  to  be  also  the  Berothai  or  Berothah  of
the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  The  notices,  however,  respecting  the
latter,  are  such,  that  the  name  alone  suggests  an  identity. As
Berj'tus  it  is  mentioned  by  the  Greek  and  Latiu  geographers.^
Under  Augustus  it  became  a  Roman  mditaiy  colony  by  the  name
of  Felix  Julia  ;  and  was  aftcra'ards  endowed  with  the  Jus  Itali-
cum'  It  was  at  Berytus,  that  Herod  the  Great  procured  the
flagitious  mock  trial  to  be  held  over  his  two  sons.^  The  elder
Agrippa  greatly  favoured  the  city,  and  adorned  it  ^\ith  a  splendid
theatre  and  amphitheatre,  besides  baths  and  porticos  ;  inaugu-
rating them  with  games  and  spectacles  of  every  kind,  including
shows  of  gladiators.^  Here  too,  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusa-
lem, Titus  celebrated  the  bii'th  day  of  his  father  Vespasian,  by
the  exhibition  of  similar  spectacles,  in  which  many  of  the  captive
Jews  perished."

In  the  next  succeeding  centuries,  Berytus  became  renowned
as  a  school  of  Greek  learning,  particularly  of  law  ;  and  was  visit-
ed by  scholars  from  a  distance,  like  Athens  and  Alexandria.
Eusebius  relates,  that  the  martyr  Appian  resided  here  for  a  time
to  pursue  Greek  secular  learning  ;  and  the  celebrated  Gregory
Thaumaturgus,  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century,  after  hav-
ing frequented  the  schools  of  Alexandria  and  Athens,  repaired
to  Berytus,  to  perfect  himself  in  the  ci^'il  law.'  A  later  Greek
poet  describes  Berytus  in  this  respect  as  "  the  nurse  of  tranquil
life."'    It  was  early  likewise  made  a  Christian  bishopric,  under

■  For  Deir  el-Kul'ah,  see  Vol.  III.  Sect.
I. — Of  the  four  temples  seen  by  Bnrck-
hanlt,  one  is  not  far  from  Zableh,  and  the
rest  in  the  vicinity  of  the  convent  Deir
Dimitry  in  the  district  el-Kurah  southeast
of  Tar  ibulus  or  Tripoly.  Travels  pp.  29,
173,  17.5 — In  1852  I  was  able  to  visit  a
large  number  of  similar  temples  iu  Leba-
non and  Anti-Lebanon,  and  in  the  Bu-
ka'a.    See  in  Vol.  \W,  passim.

»  2  Sam.  8,  8.  Ez.  47,  IG.  In  the  former
passage  Berothai  is  spoken  of  as  belonging
to  the  kingdom  of  Zobah,  (comp.  vs.  .5,)
■which  appears  to  have  included  Ilamath  ;
comp.  vs.  9.  10.  2  Chr.  8,  3.  In  the
latter  passage  (Ez.  47,  15.  10),  the  border
of  Israel  is  drawn  iu  prophetic  vision,  ap-
parently from  the  Mediterraneati  by  Ha-
math  and  Berotliiih  towards  Damascus
and  Hauran.  The  Berothah  here  meant,
would  therefore  more  naturally  seem  to
have  be«;n  au  inland  city,
iii.  441-443

'  Strabo  16.  2. 18,  19.  p.  755  ;  where  he
relates  that  Berytus  was  taken  by  the  Ro-
mans after  having  been  destroyed  bv  Try
phon.    Ptolem.  15.  4.  Plin.  H.  N.  5.  20.

*  Plin.  ib  "  Berytus  colonia  quse  Felix
Julia  adpellabatur."  Joseph.  B.  J.  7.  3. 1.
Leg.  7,  Dig.  de  Censibus  :  "  Juris  Italic!
sunt  Troas,  Berytus,  Dyrrachium."

'  Joseph.  Antiq.  16.  11.  1-6.

«  Ibid.  19.  7.  5.

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  7.  3.  1 ;  comp.  7.  5.  1.

'  Euseb.  de  Martyrib.  Pala;st.  c.  4,  de
Apphiiino :  Tvjj  "£.}Jj]vwv  iraiSilas  iyexa
Ko  ot  8€  vaprjlisa.  Herald,  ibid.  pp.  354,
aeimon.  acceding  to  the  judgment  of  mj  355.

oaaqnnions,  was  wefl  ordeied,  logical,  fnU  *  See  also  Bnrckhaidt's  Travels  pt  22.

YoL.  IL— i3  in.  437  453

506

RELIGIOUS  SECTS.

[Sec.  XVn.

pope.  They  are  disposed  to  be  exclusive,  and  also  conceited
in  the  idea  of  their  unparalleled  orthodoxy  ;  and  are  not  much
liked  by  their  neighbours,  even  of  the  papal  church  ;  being
generally  accused  of  narrow-mindedness.

The  Maronites  are  characterized  by  an  almost  unequalled
devotedness  to  the  see  of  Rome,  and  the  most  implicit  obedi-
ence to  their  priests.  It  may  be  doubted,  whether  there  is  to
be  found,  anywhere,  a  peojile  who  have  so  sincere  and  deep  a
reverence  for  the  pope,  as  the  Maronites  of  Syria.  Yet  they
have  thair  own  distinct  church  establishment  ;  and  also  some
usages  which  are  not  tolerated  in  the  papal  church  in  Europe.
They  follow  indeed  the  occidental  calendar ;  observe  the  same
rules  of  fasting  as  the  European  papists;  and  celebrate  in  the
same  manner  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper.  But  they
have  some  saints  of  their  own,  and  especially  their  patron  saint,
Mar  Maron,  not  elsewhere  acknowledged  in  the  papal  church.
And  every  candidate  for  the  priesthood,  who  is  not  already
under  the  vow  of  celibacy,  is  allowed  to  marry  before  ordina-
tion ;  so  that  most  of  their  parish  clergy  are  actually  married
men.  They  have  nine  dioceses  and  more  bishops  ;  and  at  their
head  a  patriarch,  who  styles  himself  "  Patriarch  of  Antioch."
His  usual  residence  is  the  convent  of  KanObin,  on  Mount  Leba-
non, back  of  Tripoly ;  though  during  the  summer  months  his
head  quarters  are  at  the  convent  Bkerky,  in  Kesrawan.  They
have  in  all  more  than  fifty  convents.

The  Maronites  are  found  in  cities  and  large  towns,  as  far
north  as  Aleppo,  and  as  far  south  as  Nazareth.  But  they  are
at  home,  as  cultivators  of  the  soil,  only  in  Mount  Lebanon  ;
unless  with  very  few  exceptions.  This  mountain  they  inhabit,
more  or  less,  throughout  its  whole  range,  from  its  northern  end
above  Tripoly  to  the  region  of  Safed.  But  their  strong  hold  is
Kesrawan,  a  district  separated  from  that  of  Metn  on  the  south
by  Nahr  el-Kelb,  and  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  district  of
Jebeil.  Of  this  tract  they  are  almost  the  only  inhabitants.
Throughout  the  whole  of  the  country  governed  by  the  Emir
Beshir,  they  are  more  numerous  than  any  other  sect.  The
balance  of  power,  which  was  formerly  kept  up  between  them
and  the  Druzes,  is  now  entirely  destroyed  ;  the  latter  having
become  far  inferior  in  numbers  and  strength.  This  is  the  result
of  the  conversion  of  the  ruling  family  of  Emirs,  the  house  of
Shehab,  who  were  formerly  Muslims,  to  the  Maronite  faith.
Their  example  had  great  influence  ;  and  has  been  followed  by
the  two  largest  branches  of  another  family  of  Emirs  of  Druze
origin  ;  so  that  now  almost  aU  the  highest  nobility  of  the  moun-
tain are  Maronites.'

'  For  the  history  and  churaotcr  of  the    pp.  1-100.   Nicl)iihr  Reiseb.  II.  pp.  42.5  sq.
Maronites,  see  Le  (iuicn  Oriens  Chr.  III.    455  sq.    Volney  Voyage  IL  p.  8  sq.  Par-
iii.  458-460

Sec.  XVn.]

MARONITES.  JACOBITES.

507

In  the  elementary  instruction  of  the  common  people,  the
Maronites  are  quite  as  deficient  as  the  other  Christian  sects  in
the  country.  But  for  a  select  number,  and  especially  for  clerical
candidates,  the  patriarch  has  established  a  college  at  'Ain
Warkah  in  Kesrawan,  which  takes  a  higher  stand  than  any
other  similar  establishment  in  Syria.  It  deserves  great  praise,
for  the  thorough  manner  in  which  it  initiates  at  least  some  of
its  pupils  into  the  knowledge  of  their  native  Arabic  tongue.
They  also  study  Syriac,  Latin,  and  Italian.'

SYRIANS  OR  JAt!OBITES.

The  same  evidence  of  a  Syriac  origin,  which  exists  in  the
case  of  the  Maronites,  is  found  also  among  the  Jacobites.
Though  they  now  speak  in  Syria  only  Arabic,  yet  their  church
service  is  in  Syriac.  Indeed,  the  common  name,  by  which  they
are  known  in  the  country,  is  simply  Suridn,  that  is,  Syrians.
The  epithet  Jacobite  it  is  not  customary  to  add  ;  as  there  are
in  the  country  no  Syrians  of  the  orthodox  Greek  rite  from
whom  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  them  ;  (though  at  Ma'ltila
and  in  its  vicinity  there  probably  existed  such  a  community  not
many  generations  ago  ; )  and  the  seceders  to  the  papal  church,
are  sufficiently  designated  by  the  term  Catholics.

The  number  of  the  Jacobites  in  Syria  is  very  small.  A  few
families  in  Damascus  and  in  Nebk,  the  village  of  Sudud,^  and  a
part^of  the  village  of  Kuryetein,  a  small  community  in  Hums,
with  a  few  scattered  individuals  m  two  or  three  neighbouring
villages,  and  a  similar  community  in  Hamah,  constitute  nearly
or  quite  the  whole  amount  of  the  sect.

They  are  subject  to  the  tfacobite  patriarch,  who  resides  in
Mesopotamia  ;  and  from  him  they  receive  their  bishops.  One
of  these  latter  has  his  residence  at  the  convent  of  Mar  Mtisa

is  1787.  Schnurrer  de  Ecclesia  Maron-
itica,  2  Progr.  Tubing.  1800  ;  also  Ger-
man in  Stiiudlin  and  Tzschimer's  Ar-
chiv  fur  Kirchengesch.  I.  1.  Schuurrer
Bibl.  Arab.  p.  309  sq.  Gesenius'  Notes  on
Burcldiardt  p.  492.

'  See  more  on  this  school  in  Burck-
hardt'.-*  Travels  p.  185.  —  Seetzen  and
Burckhardt  mention  also  the  Maronite
printing-press  at  the  convent  of  Kuzheiya
three  h()\irs  from  Kanobln,  where  their
church  books  in  the  Syriac  language  were
priiited.  It  was  established  in  A.  D.  1802.
Seet/en  in  Zach's  Mon.  Con-.  XHI.  p  533.
Bnrcklmrdt  p.  22.  Miss.  Herald,  184.5,  p.
319. — I  'or  a  more  complete  account  of  the
Maronites,  see  Miss.  Herald,  ib.  pp.  314-
319.

"  The  large  village  of  Sudud  lies  in  the
desert  east  of  the  road  from  Damascus  to
Hums.  To  reach  it  my  companion  left  the
great  road  at  Deir  'Atiyeh  north  of  en-
Nebk,  from  which  Sildud  is  a  short  day's
journey ;  and  then  fell  into  the  same  road
again  at  Hasya.  In  the  name  S..dud  we
may  recognise  the  Zalad  i^l^)  of  the
Old  Testament,  on  the  northern  extremity
of  the  Promised  Land  ;  Nnm.  34,  8.  Ez.
47,  15. — The  ancient  Riblah  mentioned  in
the  same  connection  and  elsewhere,  ia
found  again  in  the  present  Ribleh,  a  ■vil-
lage  several  hours  S  S.  W.  of  Hums  on
the  river  el-'Asy  (Oi'ontes),  in  the  northern
part  of  the  great  valley  el-Buka'a.  Num.
34,  11.  2  K  23,  33.  25,  6.  etc.

ui.  4C0,  461

508  KELIGIOUS  SECTS,  [Sec.  Xm

near  Nebk,  The  Jacobites  are  looked  upon  by  all  otlier  sects  in
the  country  as  heretics  ;  and  as  such,  and  because  they  are  few
and  poor,  they  are  generally  despised.

SYRIAN  CATHOLICS.

The  Syrian  Catholics  bear  the  same  relation  to  the  Jaco-
bites, as  the  Greek  Catholics  do  to  the  Greek  church.  They
are  Komish  converts,  who  still  retain  the  oriental  rite  and  the
use  of  Syriac  in  their  churches.

The  community  in  Aleppo  has  long  existed  in  its  present
relation  to  the  pope.  But  the  Syrian  Catholics  of  Damascus
and  of  Rasheiya  in  Jebel  esh-Sheikh,  are  recent  converts.
Except  in  these  places,  there  are  not  known  to  be  any  other
communities  of  tlus  sect  among  the  people  of  Syria.  In  Mount
Lebanon,  however,  there  are  two  or  three  small  convents  in-
habited by  Syrian  Catholic  monks.

ARMENIANS.

The  Armenians  in  Syria  are  properly  to  be  regarded  aa
foreigners.  Yet  they  have  been  there  so  long,  that  the  country
has  become  their  home  ;  and  they  must  not  be  overlooked  in
speaking  of  the  native  Christian  sects.  They  are  found  only  as
merchants  and  mechanics  in  cities  and  large  towns  ;  and  no-
where as  cultivators  of  the  soil.  Their  character,  religious,
intellectual,  and  national,  is  the  same  as  elsewhere,  and  need
not  be  described.    Their  number  is  very  small.

Their  ecclesiastical  estabhshm^nt  is  distinct  from  that  of
Constantinople.  At  their  head  is  a  patriarch,  who  is  styled
"  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,"  and  whose  diocese  embraces  also
Egypt.'

ARMENIAN  CATHOLICS.

These  are  seceders  from  the  Armenian  to  the  papal  church  ;
as  the  Greek  Cathohcs  are  from  the  Greek  church.  Like  them,
too,  the  Armenian  Catholics  still  adhere  to  the  oriental  rite,
and  have  changed  few  of  their  original  ceremonies  or  dogmas.
They  are  few  in  number  ;  but  have  their  patriarch,  who  resides
in  a  convent  at  Bzummar,  on  Mount  Lebanon."  It  is  worthy
of  remark,  that  this  patriarchate  existed  here  under  the  protection

'  See  more  respecting  this  patriarch  in       *  See  Bnrckhardt's  Travels  in  Syria,  eta
Smith  and  Dwight's  Researches  in  Arme-    p.  186.
nia,  I.  pp.  iO,  62.
ill.  461.  4G2

Skc.  xvn.]

AEMENIANS,  ETC.  CONVENTS.

509

of  the  government  of  this  mountain,  long  before  the  sect  was
acknowledged  and  had  its  patriarch  at  Constantinople.

LATINS.

Native  Koman  Catholics  of  the  occidental  rite,  are  very  few
in  Syria.  They  exist  only  in  connection  with  the  convents  of
the  Terra  Santa  at  Jerusalem,  Bethlehem,  St.  John  in  the
Desert,  Nazareth,  and  perhaps  a  few  other  places.  They  are
ecclesiastically  dependent  on  the  convents,  and  form  parishes
under  the  immediate  charge  of  the  monks  ;  but  amount  in
all  to  a  few  hundred  in  number.  Their  language  is  Arabic,  like
that  of  all  the  other  native  inhabitants  of  the  country.

There  are  also  Latins  at  Aleppo  ;  but  whether  of  native  or
foreign  descent,  was  not  known.

CONVENTS.

Convents  of  native  monks  are  very  rare  in  Syria,  except  in
the  district  of  Mount  Lebanon.  Besides  the  Jacobite  convent
at  Mar  Musa  near  Nebk,  and  the  Greek  convents  of  Saidanaya,
and  of  Mar  Jirjis  northeast  of  Tripoly,  there  is  hardly  another
known  to  be  inhabited  by  natives.  All  the  convents  in  and
around  Jerusalem,  Bethlehem,  Ramleh,  Yafa,  and  in  other
cities,  whether  Greek,  Armenian,  or  Latin,  belong  entirely  to
foreigners,  and  are  occupied  by  them.

But  whUe  such  is  the  case  with  the  other  parts  of  Syria,  one
of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  Mount  Lebanon,  is  its
multitude  of  convents.  They  are  seen  perched  upon  its  rocks
and  scattered  over  its  sides  in  every  direction  ;  even  a  glance  at
the  map  is  sufficient  to  excite  astonishment.  WhUe  monasti-
cism  has  declined,  and  almost  gone  out  of  date,  in  so  many  other
countries  ;  it  continues  here  to  flourish  in  its  pristine  vigour,  if
not  in  its  pristine  spirit.  I'he  numerous  convents  are  many  of
t  them  small  establishments ;  but  they  are  well  filled  with
monks,  and  abundantly  endowed.  There  are  also  convents  of
nuns.  The  greatest  number  belong  to  the  Maronites  but  aU
the  other  sects  above  mentioned,  excepting  the  Jacobites,  have
each  at  least  one  convent,  and  most  of  them  several.

,  ■    PROTESTANTS.  .

At  the  time  of  our  former  journey,  Protestants  did  not  exist
in  Syria  as  a  native  sect,  nor  in  any  other  part  of  the  Turkish

'  The  Maronite  convent  of  Kanobin  is   triarch  before  A.  D.  1445.    See  Le  Quien
said  to  have  been  built  by  Theodosius  the    Oriens  Chr.  III.  p.  63.
Great,  and  was  already  the  seat  of  the  pa-

VoL.  II.— 43*  iii.  4G3,  4G4

510

RELIGIOUS  SECTS.

[Sec.  XVn.

empire  ;  nor  were  they,  as  such,  tolerated.  The  government
has  ever  recognised  and  tolerated  certain  known  sects  of  Chris-
tians ;  and  the  members  of  these  were  allowed  to  transfer  their
relations  from  one  sect  to  another,  whenever  they  might  choose.
But  Protestants  were  not  among  these  sects  ;  and  therefore  no
one  was  legally  allowed  to  profess  Protestantism.  It  was  by  the
operation  of  this  principle  of  the  Turkish  government,  and  by
this  alone,  that  the  rise  of  Protestantism  in  Syria  was  checked.
Very  many  persons,  from  time  to  time,  show  a  strong  disposition
to  throw  off  the  domination  of  their  priests,  and  claim  their
right  to  the  liberty  of  the  Gospel.  Probably  at  one  time,  (A.
D.  1839,)  nearly  the  whole  nation  of  the  Druzes  would  have
declared  themselves  Protestants,  and  put  themselves  under
Protestant  instruction,  could  they  have  had  secured  to  them,  in
that  profession,  the  same  rights  as  are  enjoyed  by  the  other
Christian  sects.

That  England,  while  she  had  so  deep  a  political  interest  in
all  that  concerns  the  Turkish  empire,  should  remain  indifferent
to  mch  a  state  of  things  in  Syria,  was  a  matter  of  sui-prise.'
France  has  long  been  the  acknowledged  protector  of  the  Roman
Catholic  religion,  in  the  same  empire  ;  and  the  followers  of  that
faith  find  in  her  a  watchful  and  efficient  patron  ;  quite  as
efficient  since  the  revolution  of  July,  as  before.  The  conse-
quence is,  that  wKerever  there  are  Roman  Catholics,  France  has
interested  partisans ;  and  were  she  to  land  troops  in  Syria
to  morrow,  every  Roman  Catholic  would  receive  them  with  open
arms,  including  the  whole  Maronite  nation,  now  armed  and
powerful.  In  the  members  of  the  Greek  church,  still  more
numerous,  the  Russians  have  even  warmer  partisans.  In  Syria,
the  famed  power  of  Russia  is  their  boast ;  and  though  this
feehng  is  carefully  concealed  from  the  Muslims,  and  would  not
be  expressed  to  an  Englishman,  it  often  amounts  almost  to
enthusiasm.  Hence,  wherever  Russia  sends  her  agents,  they
find  confidential  friends  and  informants ;  and  were  she  to  invade
the  country,  thousands  would  give  her  troops  a  hearty  welcome.

But  where  were  England's  partisans  in  any  part  of  Turkey  ?
Not  a  single  sect,  be  it  ever  so  small,  looked  to  her  as  its
natural  guardian.  Her  wealth  and  her  power  are  indeed  ad-
mired ;  her  citizens,  wherever  they  travel,  are  respected  ;  and
the  native  Christians  of  eveiy  sect,  when  groaning  under  oppres-
sion, would  welcome  her  interference  as  a  rehef  Yet,  of  course,
none  but  Protestants  would  look  to  her  for  permanent  protec-
tion.   There  is,  too,  no  other  Protestant  power  to  whom  such  a

'  The    following  remarks  were   first    Syria  to  the  immediate  authority  of  the
penned  in  A.  I).  1 839 ;  but  I  do  not  perceive    Sultan,  detract  at  all  from  their  force,
that  tlie  later  revolution  and  reversion  of

iii.  404-406

Sec  XVn.]  PROTESTANTS.  MUHAMMEDANS.

511

sect  could  look  for  such  protection,  nor  would  they  wish  to  look
elsewhere  ;  for  England's  protection,  whenever  granted,  is  known
to  he  more  efficient  than  any  other.  To  secure  the  existence  of
such  a  sect,  the  English  government  needed  to  take  but  a  single
step,  and  that  unattended  by  difficulty  or  danger.  It  needed
simply  to  obtain,  for  native  Protestants,  the  same  acknowledg-
ment and  rights,  that  are  granted  to  other  acknowledged  Chris-
tian sects.  Such  a  stand  England  has  since  taken  ;  and  now
(since  1853)  Protestant  communities  in  the  Turkish  empire  are
placed  upon  the  same  footing  with  those  of  other  Christian
sects.'

II.  MuHAMMEDANS  AND  OTHER  SeCTS.

I  add  here  merely  the  names  of  the  other  religious  sects  in
Palestine  and  Western  Syria,  not  Christians.

The  Muhammedans  who  constitute  the  lords  of  the  country,
and  the  mass  of  the  population,  are  Sunnites  of  the  orthodox
faith,  and  require  no  description.

The  Metawileli  (Sing.  Mutaw^ly)  have  their  chief  seat  in  the
district  Belad  Besharah,  and  the  vicinity,  and  have  been  already
noticed.  They  are  of  the  sect  of  'Aly,  and  their  faith  is  kindred
to  that  of  the  Shiites  (Shi'ah),  the  Muhammedans  of  Persia  ;
but  they  are  here  regarded  as  heretics.*

The  Druzes  (ed-Deruz,  Sing.  ed-Derazy)  are  at  home  upon
Mount  Lebanon  ;  but  dwell  also  as  far  south  as  the  district
el-Jebel  west  of  Safed,  in  some  parts  of  Hauran,  and  around
Damascus.  They  were  formerly  masters  of  the  country  of
Mount  Lebanon  and  the  adjacent  coast  ;  but  are  now  surpassed
in  numbers  and  influence  by  the  Maronites,  as  already  described.
The  Drazes  appear  to  have  sprung  up  out  of  some  one  of  the
many  Muhammedan  sects  of  the  centuries  before  the  crusades  ;
and  the  insane  Hakim,  Khalif  of  Egypt,  is  regarded  as  their
deity. ^  The  Druzes  keep  their  religious  tenets  and  practices
secret ;  though  they  have  often  professed  themselves  to  be
Muhammedans.  Not  a  few  of  their  books,  however,  containing
the  dogmas  of  their  religion,  have  found  their  way  by  the
fortune  of  war,  or  other  chances,  to  the  hbraries  of  Europe,
particularly  to  Kome  and  Paris  ;  and  from  these  De  Sacy
compiled  his  work  upon  this  people,  the  last  published  produc-
tion of  his  long  and  learned  career.  In  the  course  of  the
insurrection  of  1838,  many  of  their  books  were  also  seized  by  the
Egyj)tians  ;  one  or  two  of  which  were  purchased  by  the  mis-

'  See  the  account  of  Protestantism  in  Volney  Voyage  11.  p.  77  sq.  Paris  1787.
Turkey  in  Vol.  III.  Sect.  I.  See  above,  pp?448,  449,  450.

'  Sale's  Koran,  Prelim.  Disc.  c.  8.    Nie-       »  See  Vol.  I.  p.  395.
bulir  Reisebeschr.  II.  p.  270  sq.  426  sq.

iii.  46G.  467

512

RELIGIOUS  SECTS.

[Sec.  XVn.

sionaries  at  Beirut,  and  others  are  said  to  have  reached  Europe.
After  the  return  of  peace,  the  Druzes  came  in  throngs  to  put
themselves  under  Christian  instruction  ;  and  although  the  mo-
tive at  the  moment  was  perhaps  political,  yet  had  it  been
possible  to  take  proper  advantage  of  the  movement,  it  might
probably  have  resulted  in  an  extensive  and  beneficial  change  in
their  relations.'

The  Nusarnyeli"^  are  also  regarded  as  the  offspring  of  one  of
the  early  Muhammedan  sects,  the  Karmathians.  They  too
keep  their  religion  a  secret  ;  and  often  conform  externally  to
the  faith  of  those  by  whom  they  are  surrounded,  whether
Mussulmans  or  Christians.  Their  chief  seat  is  the  range  of
mountains  extending  on  the  north  of  Mount  Lebanon  towards
Antioch  ;  which  takes  from  them  the  name  of  Jebel  en-Nusai-
riyeh  ;  but  they  are  found  scattered  in  villages,  as  far  south  as
the  vicinity  of  Banias.  The  accounts  respecting  them  are  as
yet  very  imperfect.'

The  Ismaelites  (Isma'iliyeh)  were  originally  a  religious
political  subdivision  of  the  Shiites  (Shi'ah)  ;  and  are  now  the
comparatively  feeble  remains  of  the  people,  who  became  too
well  known  in  the  time  of  the  crusades,  vmder  the  name  of  the
Assassins.  They  likewise  possess  a  secret  mystical  religion  ;
and  stiU  have  their  chief  seat,  as  formerly,  in  the  castle  of
Masyad  or  Masyaf,  on  the  mountains  west  of  Hamah.*

'  On  the  Drnzes,  see  especially :  De  AVll.   pp.  975-995.    This  people  was

Sacv  Expose  de  la  Religion  des  Druzes,  etc.  visited  in  1840  by  the  Rev.  Mr  Thomson

2.  Tom.  Paris,  1838.  8vo.    Also  Niehuhr  of  Beirut;  whose  report,  however,  adds

Reiseheschr.  II.  p.  428  sq.   Volney  Voyage  little  to  our  previous  information  respect-

II.  p.  37  sq.  Par.  1787.     Burckhardt's  ing  them.    See  the  Missionary  Herald  for

Travels  pp.  193-205.    BibHoth.  Sac.  1843,  Feb.  and  March,  1841.
pp.  205-253.  *  See  Von  Hammer's  Gesch.  der  Assassi-

'  Usually  called  Amalriyeh,  by  a  vnl-  nen,  Stuttg.   1818.     Wilken  Gesch.  der

gar  corruption.  Kr.  II.  p.  240  sq.     Quatremere  Notice

^  See  Barhebr.  Chron.    Syr.   p.  173.  Historique  sur  les  Ismaeliens,  in  Fundgr.

Assemani  Biblioth.  Oriental.  Tom.  II.  p.  des  Orients  IV.  p.  339  sq.    Also  Niebnhr

318,  where  an  account  of  their  origin  is  Ptcisebeschr.  II.  p.  444  sq.  Burckhardt's

givea    Pococke  Spec.  Hist  Arab.  i!d.  1.  Travels  p.  150  sq.    Gesenins'  Notes  on

pp.  25,  2G5.    ManndreU,  under  March  4th.  Bnrckhardt  p.  514-517.     Ritter  Erdk.

Niebuhr  Reiseheschr.  II.  p.  439  sq.    Vol-  XVIL  p.  9G6-974.    Abulfed.  Tab.  Sjt.  p.

ney  Voyage  II.  p.  1  sq.     Burckhardt's  20.    Schultens  Index  in  Vit.  Salad,  art

Travels  pp.  151,  155  sq.    Gesenins'  Notes  Masiata.
on  Bnrckhardt  p.  517.     Ritter  Erdk.

iii.  407,468

NOTES.

Note  XXXI.— Page  33.

ScMMEiL,  St.  Samtel.  Our  visit  to  SCimmeil  enables  me  to  correct
an  error  of  more  than  three  centuries'  standing.  Tucher  of  Nrtmberg
in  A.  D.  1479,  on  his  journey  from  Bethlehem  by  way  of  Dhikhrin  to
Gaza  (see  Text  p.  29),  passed  by  this  place ;  and  confounding  the  name
Summeil  with  Samuel,  calls  it  the  Castle  of  St.  Samuel.  He  says  it
then  paid  a  rent  of  two  thousand  ducats  yearly  to  a  hospital  in  St.
Abraham  or  Hebron;  from  which  twelve  hundred  loaves  of  bread  and
other  articles  of  food,  were  daily  distributed  to  the  poor.  See  Reissb.
p.  678.  Tucher's  work  was  first  published  in  Germany  in  A.  D.  1482. —
The  next  year,  in  A  D.  1483,  Breydenbach  and  Felix  Fabri  travelled
from  Hebron  to  Gaza,  apparently  by  way  of  Beit  Jibrin ;  at  least  they
lodged  the  first  night  at  the  vUlage  of  Sukkariyeh  not  far  distant.  Fa-
bri, in  describing  St.  Abraham  (Hebron),  speaks  of  the  same  hospital  as
situated  near  the  great  mosk;  and  tells  the  same  story  of  the  twelve
hundred  loaves  of  bread,  and  the  two  thousand  ducats  rent  from  a  castle
of  St.  Samuel ;  which  he  supposed  to  be  not  far  off,  though  he  did  not
see  it.  The  very  same  account  of  a  distribution  of  bread  from  the  great
mosk,  or  an  establishment  connected  with  it,  is  given  in  Gumpenberg's
Journal  A.  D.  1449  (Reissb.  p.  445) ;  and  also  in  the  Arabic  History
of  Jerusalem  and  Hebron  by  Mejr  ed-Din,  A.  D.  1495;  Fundgr.  des  Or.
II.  p.  377.

All  this  goes  to  confirm  the  statements  of  Tucher  ;  and  there  is  noth-
ing improbable  in  the  account,  that  the  mosk  or  hospital  at  Hebron  may
have  derived  a  part  of  its  revenues  from  Summeil ;  just  as  the  great  mosk
at  Jerusalem  still  receives  rents  from  the  villages  of  Taiyibeh  and  Ram-
Allah.  This  is  also  implied  in  the  name  Summeil  el-Khulil,  which  it
still  bears.  But  now  comes  Breydenbach,  who  made  this  journey  with
Fabri,  in  which  they  certainly  did  not  take  the  route  by  Summeil,  and
relates  that  on  their  first  day's  journey  from  Hebron,  before  they  came
to  Sukkariyeh,  they  passed  by  a  castle  of  St.  Samuel,  near  which  was  a

514

NOTES.

[XXXII,

small  town  called  St.  Abraham's  Castle ;  tere  was  a  hospital  which  dis-
tributed bread,  etc.  Reissb.  p.  186.  This  implies,  that  there  was  a
second  castle  of  St.  Abraham  distinct  from  Hebron,  and  a  second  castle
of  St.  Samuel  between  Hebron  and  Sukkariyeh.  But  Fabri,  who  was
in  the  same  party,  says  not  a  word  of  all  this;  and  the  whole  is  obvious-
ly a  mere  figment,  arising  out  of  a  gross  misapprehension  of  Tucber's
language,  which  the  writer  copies  in  order  to  supply  his  own  deficiencies.
It  furnishes  one  instance  of  the  higher  value  of  Fabri's  testimony  iv,
general,  as  compared  with  that  of  Breydenbach.  Yet  Breydenbach's
account  has  been  copied  and  credited  by  Biisching  and  others;  and  in
consequence,  a  castle  of  St.  Abraham  and  another  of  St.  Samuel
figure  on  Berghaus'  map,  at  some  distance  west  of  Hebron.  See  Biisch-
ing's  Erdbeschr.  Th.  XI.  i.  p.  449.    Bachiene  Th.  II.  ii.  p.  348.

»

Note  XXXII.— Page  41.

The  "  Desert  "  near  Gaza.  In  Acts  8,  26,  Philip  is  directed  to
go  from  Samaria  "  toward  the  south,  unto  the  way  that  goeth  down
from  Jerusalem  unto  Gaza,  which  is  desert ;  "  inl  rijv  oSov  r-qv  Kara^ai-
vovaav  airb  'lepovcraX-qfj.  ets  Tdt,av  ■  avrr]  icTiv  epr]ixo<;.  Here  avrr]  may
refer  either  to  o8ov  (way)  or  to  Gaza.  The  facts  in  the  history  of  Gaza
given  in  the  text,  render  it  improbable  that  the  city  is  here  meant ;
although  there  is  a  possibility,  that  Luke  might  have  written  just  after
the  destruction  of  Gaza  about  A.  D.  65;  and  thus  have  been  led  from
the  novelty  of  the  event  to  mention  it.  On  this  hypothesis,  the  words
must  belong,  not  to  the  angel,  but  to  Luke,  as  a  mere  parenthetic  remark.
If  attributed  to  the  angel,  and  understood  in  this  sense,  it  is  difficult  to
see  what  bearing  they  could  have  upon  his  instructions  to  Philip;  since
the  latter  was  not  to  go  to  Gaza,  but  only  upon  the  road  leading  to  it ;
and  this  road  was  the  same,  whether  Gaza  was  desolate  or  not.

More  probable  therefore  is  it,  that  the  term  "  desert "  is  to  be  refer-
red to  the  road  on  which  Philip  should  find  the  eunuch ;  and  was  indeed
meant  as  a  description,  to  point  out  to  him  the  particular  road,  where  he
should  fall  in  with  the  latter.  This  was  the  more  necessary,  because
there  were  several  ways  leading  from  J erusalem  to  Gaza.  The  most
frequented  at  the  present  day,  although  the  longest,  is  the  way  by  Ramleh.
Anciently  there  appear  to  have  been  two  more  direct  roads ;  one  down
the  great  Wady  es-Siirar  by  Beth-shemesh,  and  then  passing  near  Tell
es-Safieh  ;  the  other,  through  Wady  el-Musnrr  to  Betogabra  or  Eleu-
theropolis,  and  thence  to  Gaza  through  a  more  southern  tract.  Both
these  roads  exist  at  the  present  day ;  and  the  latter  now  actually  passes
through  the  desert ;  that  is,  through  a  tract  of  country  without  villages,
inhabited  only  by  nomadic  Arabs.  This  is  more  particularly  described
in  the  subsequent  pages  of  the  text.

If  we  may  suppose  the  case  to  have  been  the  same,  or  nearly  so,  when
the  book  of  Acts  was  written,  the  explanation  becomes  easy ;  for  the
chief  difficulty  has  ever  been,  to  show  how  this  region,  in  itself  so  fertile,
could  be  called  "  desert."  That  the  district  was  at  that  time  in  like
manner  deserted,  is  not  improbable.    In  the  days  of  the  Maccabees,  the

xxxiil]

INSCRIPTIONS  AT  BEIT  JIBRIN.

515

Idumeans  had  taken  possession  of  Judea  as  far  north  as  to  Hebron,
Adora,  and  Marissa,  cities  lying  on  or  near  the  mountains;  -where  they
■were  subdued  and  compelled  to  embrace  Judaism ;  1  Mace.  5,  65.
Joseph.  Antiq.  13.  9.  1.  ib.  15.  7.  9.  This  serves  to  show,  that  the  south-
ern part  of  Judea  was  no  longer  occupied  by  the  Jews  themselves;  nor
is  there  any  mention  of  cities  or  villages  in  the  plain  between  Gaza  and
the  mountains,  later  than  the  time  of  Nehemiah.  It  seems  therefore  pro-
bable, that  even  then  the  migratory  hordes  of  the  southern  desert  had
spread  themselves  further  to  the  north;  and  thus  connected  this  tract,  as
at  the  present  day,  with  their  own  "  desert."

When  Jerome  says  that  in  his  time  "  the  site  of  ancient  Gaza  pre-
sented only  vestiges  of  foundations,  and  the  city  of  that  day  stood  in  a  dif-
ferent spot,"  this  seems  only  an  hypothesis  of  his  own,  in  order  to  make
out  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy;  Zeph.  2,  4.  Amos  1,  7.  Eusebius  has
nothing  of  the  kind ;  and  it  is  inconsistent  with  all  other  historical  ac-
counts.   See  Onomast.  art.  Gaza.

When  we  were  at  Tell  el-Hasy,  and  saw  the  water  standing  along
the  bottom  of  the  adjacent  Wady,  we  could  not  but  remark  the  coinci-
dence of  several  circumstances  with  the  account  of  the  eunuch's  baptism.
This  water  is  on  the  most  direct  route  from  Beit  Jibrin  to  Gaza,  on  the
most  southern  road  from  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  country  now
"  desert,"  i.  e.  without  villages  or  fixed  habitations.  The  thought  strtick
us,  that  this  might  not  improbably  be  the  place  of  water  described.
There  is  at  present  no  other  similar  water  on  this  road;  and  various
circumstances — the  way  to  Gaza,  the  chariot,  and  the  subsequent  finding
of  Philip  at  Azotus — all  go  to  show  that  the  transaction  took  place  in
or  near  the  plain.

Inscriptions  at  Beit  Jibrin.  The  two  following  inscriptions  in
old  Cufic,  were  copied  by  Mr  Smith  in  the  cavern  with  a  small  fountain,
N.  E.  of  the  ruined  church  of  Santa  Hanneh,  near  Beit  Jibrin.
Through  the  kindness  of  Professor  Koediger  of  Halle,  I  am  enabled
to  subjoin  their  probable  form  in  modern  Arabic,  with  a  translation.
It  will  be  seen  that  they  are  the  work  of  visitors,  and  afford  no  in-

NoTE  XXXIII.— Page  52.

formation  respecting  the  caverns.

1.

0  God !    Ibn  SuleimAn  testifies,

lliat  there  is  no  god  but  God.

516

NOTES.

[xxxiv.

11.

ULl.lnzJ

p-g-UI  OGodl

yfJ  Forgive  thoa  Yez-

Ju  id  'bn  'Omar

^^JOXIII  [J^l]  (jjf  Ibn  el-Kandy.

NoTK  XXXIV.— Page  64.

Yicus  Betagab.eorum.  a  Tillage  of  this  name  is  mentioned  in
the  Life  of  St.  Euthymius  (ob.  473)  by  Cyril  of  Scythopolis,  ati
situated  in  the  region  of  Gaza  and  Eleutheropolis;  and  Keland  sup-
poses it  to  be  the  same  with  Betogabra;  Palaest.  p.  627.  This  biogra-
phy is  found  in  the  Greek  original  in  Cotelerii  Monum.  Ecclesiae
Graecae,  Tom.  II.  p.  200  sq.  The  Latin  version  of  G.  Hervetus  is
given  by  Surius  under  Jan.  20th,  and  also  by  Bolland  in  Acta  Sanctor.
Jan.  Tom.  II.  p.  298  sq.  The  passage  in  question  occurs  in  ^  150
of  the  Life,  Coteler.  p.  328.  Bolland  p.  326.

The  writer,  after  enumerating  several  miracles  of  St.  Euthymius,
proceeds  to  recount  another  which  took  place  in  the  village  of  the
Betagabaeans  (xaTo,  rrjv  BT^raya/iatW  xoj/xiyv,  in  vico  Betagahworum).
There  was  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Euthymius  a  presbyter  named  Ach-
thabius,  who  had  practised  there  a  life  of  obedience  to  Christ  for  forty-
five  years.  This  man  had  a  brother,  called  Romanus,  in  the  village  of
the  Tagabaeans,  {kv  rrj  Taya/3ai(Di/,  in  vico  TagahcBorum,)  twelve  miles
from  Gaza,  who  was  unlike  him  in  every  particular,  living  luxuriously
and  dissolutely.  A  certain  person,  envying  the  latter  his  wealth,  plotted
to  deprive  him  of  it ;  but  not  at  first  succeeding,  he  went  to  Eleuthero-
polis, and  engaged  a  magician  (yoTys)  to  use  his  arts  against  him.  In
this  way  the  sufferer  was  thrown  into  a  stupor  and  dropsy;  of  which  he
was  at  length  miraculously  healed  by  St.  Euthymius  in  a  vision.

On  this  passage  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  village  of  the  Betaga-
baeans  and  Tabagaeans  is  here  obviously  one  and  the  same  ;  and  the  name
should  therefore  be  written  alike  in  both  places.  It  is  indeed  so  written
(BrjTayajSaiW),  probably  by  emendation,  in  the  Greek  of  Cotelier  ;  but
the  version  of  Hervetus  (collated  by  Bolland)  has  "  Tagabaeorum"  in
the  second  instance,  showing  that  his  Greek  copy  had  the  same  reading.

XXXV.]

ZOAR.

517

— Again,  this  village  was  not  itself  Eleutheropolis,  but  lay  apparently
between  that  city  and  Gaza ;  or  at  least  lay  from  Gaza  somewhere  in
the  direction  of  Eleutheropolis. — Further  and  mainly,  the  village  was
not  Betogabra ;  for  admitting  the  reading  Betagabaji  (Br/Taya/Sai  oi')  to
be  correct,  the  omission  of  the  r  would  be  a  very  unusual  circumstance;
this  letter  being  (after 'Ain)  the  most  tenacious  of  the  whole  alphabet,
and  being  very  rarely  dropped,  if  in  any  other  instance.  Besides,  the
village  in  question  lay  twelve  Roman  miles  from  Gaza,  while  Beit  Jibrin
(Betogabra)  is  about  eight  hours  or  twenty-four  Roman  miles  distant
from  that  city.  I  hold  therefore  that  "  vicus  Tagabaeorum"  {Tayafialwv)
is  probably  the  true  reading ;  while  the  other  form  may  be  supposed  to
have  crept  in  later,  among  monkish  transcribers,  by  confounding  it  with
Betogabra.  This  was  the  more  natural;  as  the  village  was  probably
unknown  to  them ;  and  the  name  of  Beit  Jibrin  was  again  current  in  the
centuries  before  the  crusades.

This  conclusion  is  strengthened,  by  the  actual  existence  at  the  present
day,  of  what  appears  to  have  been  the  original  name  of  the  village  in
question.  From  Um  Lakis,  we  saw  and  took  the  bearing  of  a  deserted
site  called  T  jbfikah  or  TCibakah,  lying  S.  10^  E.  in  the  country  of  Hasy,
between  Huj  and  Tell  el-Hasy,  about  four  hours  or  twelve  Roman  miles
from  Gaza,  half  way  to  Beit  Jibrin.  (See  page  47.)  The  position
corresponds  very  exactly  to  that  of  the  "vicus  Tagabseorum."  This
name  too,  on  Greek  lips,  could  hardly  be  expected  to  escape  with  less
perversion;  especially  when  monkish  transcribers  probably  held  it  to  be
the  same  as  Betogabra,  and  assimilated  it  to  that  form.

Note  XXXV.— Page  107.

ZoAR.  In  the  text  I  have  brought  forward  the  reasons  which  show
conclusively,  that  the  modern  ez-Zuweirah  has  no  relation  to  the  ancient
Zoar.  The*object  of  this  note  is,  to  present  the  testimonies  on  which
those  arguments  rest,  and  to  collect  some  further  historical  notices  of
the  ancient  Zoar.

Abulfeda  repeatedly  speaks  of  Zoghar  (Zoar)  as  a  place  adjacent  to
the  Dead  Sea  and  Ghor.  Tab.  Syr.  ed.  Kohler  p.  8  bis,  9,  11,  148.
Ibn  el-Wardi  ib.  p.  178.  Abulfeda  also  calls  the  Dead  Sea  itself
"Lake  oi  Zoghar;"  ibid.  p.  12,  148,  156.  Edrisi,  in  the  manuscript
used  by  Jaubert,  hasZu'ara;  though  the  Latin  version  everywhere  reads
Zoghar;  p.  338.

That  Zoar  lay  near  and  in  sight  of  Sodom,  and  also  in  or  adjacent  to
the  plain,  so  as  to  be  exposed  to  the  same  destruction  as  the  other  cities,
is  apparent  from  Gen.  19,  19-21 ;  where  the  angel  exempts  Zoar  from
overthrow  at  the  entreaty  of  Lot.

That  the  ancient  Zoar  lay  on  the  east  side  of  the  Dead  Sea,  appears
from  several  considerations,  which  seem  to  be  decisive.  Lot  ascended
from  it  into  the  mountain,  where  his  daughters  bore  each  a  son;  and
these  became  the  ancestors  of  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites ;  Gen.  19,
30.  37.  38.  Now  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites  both  dwelt  in  the  east-
ern mountains;  and  the  purpose  of  the  sacred  writer,  is  here  obviously
to  recount  in  what  way  these  mountains  became  peopled,  viz.  by  an

Vol.  II.— 44.

518

NOTES.

[xxxv.

event  wliicli  took  place  on  the  spot.  Further,  Josephus  in  speak-
ing of  this  citj,  calls  it  "  Zoar  of  Arabia,"  fx.ixP'-  Zoaptov  r>|;  'Apa/Jias,  B.
J.  4.  8.  4.  But  the  Arabia  of  Josephus  was  on  the  east  of  the  Dead
Sea ;  and  the  name  is  never  applied  to  the  mountains  west  of  the  sea,
which  belonged  to  Judea.  Bell.  Jud.  4.  8.  4.
«  To  the  same  effect  are  various  testimonies  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,

chieliy  in  the  Onomasticon.  Thus  in  the  article  Luith,  they  say  this
was  a  village  situated  between  Areopolis  and  Zoar.  But  Areopolis  was
Ar  of  Moab,  called  also  Rabbath  Moab,  and  lay  on  the  eastern  mountains
some  hours  north  of  Kerak ;  where  its  name  and  remains  exist  at  the
present  day.  See  Reland  Palaest.  pp.  577,  957.  Seetzen  in  Zach's
Moaatl.  Corr.  XVIII.  p.  433.  Burckbardt  p.  377.  Irby  and  Man-
gles p.  456.  [141.]  Again  in  the  art.  Nemrim,  they  speak  of  a  village
Benamerium  (Beth  Nimrin)  as  lying  north  of  Zoar  ;  and  Nimrin,  as  we
have  seen,  lay  east  of  the  Jordan  overagainst  Jericho.  See  Text,  Vol.  I.
p.  551. — Further,  Phjenon  is  said  by  them  to  be  situated  between  Petra
and  Zoar;  art.  Fenon,  tva)v. — Last  of  all,  Jerome  expressly  affirms,
that  Zoar  was  in  the  borders  of  Moab  :  "  Segor  in  fiuibus  Moabitarum
sita  est,  dividens  ab  lis  terram  Philistiim ;  "  Comm.  in  Esa.  xv.  5.  He
is  here  speaking  of  Zoar  as  being  the  key  (vectes)  of  Moab  towards  the
west.

In  like  manner,  the  crusaders  in  the  expedition  of  king  Baldwin  I,
to  the  country  S.  E.  of  the  Dead  Sea  in  A.  D.  1100,  after  marching
from  Hebron  and  descending  into  the  Ghor,  proceeded  around  the  south
end  of  the  lake,  (girato  autem  lacu  a  parte  ausirali,)  and  came  at
length  to  the  place  called  Segor,  doubtless  the  Zoghar  of  Abulfeda.
From  this  point  they  began  to  enter  the  eastern  mountains.  Fulcher
Cam.  23.  p.  405.    Will.  Tyr.  10.  8.

All  these  circumstances  seem  to  me  decisive  as  to  the  position  of
Zoar  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Dead  Sea,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains,
near  its  southern  end.  Josephus  and  Eusebius  indeed  expressly  describe
the  sea,  the  one  as  extending  to  Zoar,  and  the  other  as  lyipg  between
Jericho  and  that  place ;  Jo  eph.  B.  J.  4.  8.  4.  Onomast.  art.  31are  Sa-
linarum.  This  would  still  be  true  in  a  general  sense,  supposing  Zoar
to  have  stood,  as  I  have  assumed  in  the  text,  in  the  mouth  of  Wady
Kerak,  where  it  issues  upon  the  isthmus  of  the  peninsula.  This  point
is  in  fact  the  southern  end  of  the  broad  part  of  the  sea ;  the  water  which
extends  further  south  forming  rather  a  bay ;  while  the  site  in  question  is
hardly  more  distant  from  the  southern  extremity  even  of  this  bay,  than
Jericho  is  from  the  north  end  of  the  sea.  Further,  this  position  of  Zoar
seems  to  me  to  be  strongly  implied  in  the  notice  of  Eusebius  above
quoted,  which  places  Luith  between  Areopolis  and  Zoar;  for  had  Zoar
lain  further  south,  for  instance  at  the  mouth  of  Wady  el-Ahsy,  (the
present  Siifieh,)  it  would  have  been  far  more  natural  to  say,  that  Luith
lay  between  Charac-Moab  (Kerak)  and  Zoar.  So  too  Jerome's  account
of  Zoar  as  the  vectes  of  Moab  against  Palestine,  points  to  the  same  con-
clusion ;  for  Wady  Kerak  was  (and  is  to  the  present  day)  the  great  road
between  southern  Judoa  and  the  country  of  Moab.

The  account  given  of  the  lower  part  of  Wady  Kerak  by  Irby  and
Mangles,  is  as  follows:  "  All  this  tract  might  be,  and  probably  has  been
irrigated ;  for  it  would  be  easy  to  dam  up  the  brook  and  conduct  it  in

XXXVI.]

ZOAE.   TOMB  OF  AARON.

619

almost  every  direction.  The  form  of  fields,  and  even  the  marks  of  fur-
rows, are  to  be  seen  ;  and  some  ruins  like  those  of  cottages,  or  of  a  small
hamlet.  Lower  down  there  is  very  clearly  an  ancient  site ;  stones  that
have  been  used  in  building,  though  for  the  most  part  unhewn,  are  strewed
over  a  great  surface  of  uneven  ground,  and  mixed  both  with  bricks
and  pottery.  This  appearance  continues  without  interruption,  during
the  space  of  at  least  half  a  mile,  quite  down  to  the  plain  ;  so  that  it
would  seem  to  have  been  a  place  of  considerable  extent.  We  noticed
one  column,  and  we  found  a  pretty  specimen  of  antique  variegated  glass ;
it  may  possibly  be  the  site  of  the  ancient  Zoar.  Near  these  remains,
the  Wady  opens  from  its  glen  into  the  plain  to  the  northward  by  a  nook,
where  there  is  a  wall  of  rude  brick,  with  an  arched  doorway."  Travels
p.  447,  sq.  [138.]

The  preceding  considerations  seem  to  me  sufSciently  to  bear  out  all
the  positions  taken  in  the  text  relative  to  the  ancient  Zoar.  A  few
other  historical  notices  may  properly  find  their  place  here.

The  earliest  name  of  Zoar  was  Bela,  Gen.  14,  2.  In  the  Septuagint
the  name  Zoar  is  written  STf/ojp,  Segor;  Josephus  gives  it  by  Zcuapa,
Zoara;  while  Eusebius  and  Jerome  use  both  forms.  After  the  destruc-
tion of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  Zoar  continued  to  exist  as  a  city  of  Moab ;
Deut.  34,  3.  Is.  15,  5.  Jer.  48,  34.  It  is  never  mentioned  as  belong-
ing to  Judea ;  except  where  Josephus  speaks  of  it  as  having  been  wrest-
ed from  the  Arabians  by  Alexander  Jannaeus,  Antiq.  14.  1.  4.  Ptol-
emy also  assigns  it  to  Arabia  Petraea;  see  Reland  Palsest.  p.  463.
Eusebius  and  Jerome  describe  it  in  their  day  as  having  many  inhabitants
and  a  Roman  garrison;  Onomast.  art.  Bala.  Stephen  of  Byzantium
calls  it  a  large  Arillage  and  a  fortress;  Reland  Pahest.  p.  1065.  In  the
ecclesiastical  NotiiicB  it  «3  mentioned  as  the  seat  of  a  bishop  in  the
Third  Palestine,  down  to  the  centuries  preceding  the  crusades ;  Reland
pp.  217,  223,  226 ;  comp.  p.  230.  The  crusaders  appear  to  have  found
the  name  Segor  (Zoghar)  still  extant :  and  describe  the  place  as  pleasant-
ly situated  with  many  palm  trees ;  Fulcher  Carnot.  23.  p.  405.  WUL
Tyr.  10.  8.  Hence  they  also  call  it  Villa  Palmarum,  and  likewise
Paumier  or  Palmer  ;  Albert.  Aq.  7.  41,  42.  Jac.  de  Vitr.  53.  p.  1076.
Will.  Tyr.  22.  30.  But,  as  in  the  case  of  Jericho  and  'Ain  Jidy,  the
palm  trees  have  here  also  disappeared ;  and  although  the  name  of  Zoghar
appears  to  have  existed  in  Abulfeda's  time,  yet  we  have  no  further  noti-
ces of  the  city  itself.

In  view  of  aU  this  testimony,  M.  de  Saulcy  ought  not  to  assume,  so
lightly  as  he  has  done,  the  identity  of  the  names  and  position  of  Zoar
and  Zu^eirah.    Narrat.  I.  p.  481,  482.

Note  XXXVI.— Pages  152,  173.

Tomb  of  Aaron.  The  following  account  is  given  by  Irby  and
Mangles  of  their  ascent  of  Mount  Hor  in  1818,  and  of  the  Muham-
medan  Wely  dedicated  to  Neby  HarOn  on  the  summit.  Travels  p.
434  sq.  [134.]

"  We  engaged  an  Arab  shepherd  as  our  guide,  and  leaving  Abu  Ra-

520

NOTES.

[XXXVT.

stid  witL  our  servants  and  horses,  where  the  steepness  of  the  ascent  com-
mences, vre  began  to  mount  the  track,  which  is  extremely  steep  and
toilsome,  and  affords  but  an  indifferent  footing.  In  most  parts  the  pil-
grim must  pick  his  way  as  he  can,  and  frequently  on  his  hands  and
knees.  Where  by  nature  it  would  have  been  impassable,  there  are
flights  of  rude  steps,  or  inclined  planes,  constructed  of  stones  laid
together ;  and  here  and  there  are  niches  to  receive  the  footsteps,  cut
in  the  live  rock.  The  impressions  of  pilgrims'  feet  are  scratched  in
the  rock  in  many  places ;  but  without  inscriptions.  Much  juniper
grows  on  the  mountain,  almost  to  the  very  summit,  and  many  flower-
ing plants  which  we  had  not  observed  elsewhere;  some  of  these  are
very  beautiful;  most  of  them  are  thorny.  On  the  top  there  is  an
overhanging  shelf  in  the  rock,  which  forms  a  sort  of  cavern;  here  we
found  a  skin  of  extremely  bad  water,  suspended  for  drinking,  and  a
pallet  of  straw,  with  the  pitcher  and  other  poor  utensils  of  the  Sheikh
who  resides  here.  He  is  a  decrepit  old  man,  who  has  lived  here  dur-
ing the  space  of  forty  years,  and  occasionally  endured  the  fatigue  of
descending  and  reascendiug  the  mountain.

"  The  tomb  itself  is  enclosed  in  a  small  building,  differing  not  at
all  in  external  form  and  appearance  from  those  of  Muhammedan  saints,
common  throughout  every  province  of  Turkey.  It  has  probably  been
rebuilt  at  no  remote  period  ;  some  small  columns  are  bedded  in  the
walls,  and  some  fragments  of  granite,  and  slabs  of  white  marble  are
lying  about.  The  door  is  near  the  southwest  angle;  within  which  a
tomb,  with  a  pall  thrown  over  it,  presents  itself  immediately  on  en-
tering; it  is  patched  together  out  of  fragments  of  stone  and
marble,  that  have  made  part  of  other  fabrics.  Upon  one  of  these  are
several  short  lines  in  the  Hebrew  character^  cut  in  a  slovenly  man-
ner; we  had  them  interpreted  at  Acre,  and  they  proved  to  be  merely
the  names  of  a  Jew  and  his  family  who  had  scratched  this  record.
.  .  There  are  rags  and  shreds  of  yarn  with  glass  beads  and  paras,
left  as  votive  offerings  by  the  Arabs.

"  Not  far  from  the  northwest  angle  is  a  passage,  descending  by  steps
to  a  vault  or  grotto  beneath,  for  we  were  uncertain  which  to  call  it,
being  covered  with  so  thick  a  coat  of  whitewash,  that  it  is  diflicult  to
distinguish  whether  it  is  built  or  hollowed  out.  It  appeared,  in  great
part  at  lea^t,  a  grotto  ;  the  roof  is  covered,  but  the  whole  is  rude,  ill-
fashioned,  and  quite  dark.  The  Sheikh,  who  was  not  informed  that  we
were  Christians,  furnished  us  with  a  lamp  of  butter.  Towards  the  fur-
ther end  of  this  dark  vault  lie  the  two  corresponding  leaves  of  an  iron
grating,  which  formerly  prevented  all  nearer  approach  to  the. tomb  of
the  prophet ;  they  have,  however,  been  thrown  down,  and  we  advanced
so  as  to  touch  it;  it  was  covered  by  a  ragged  pall.  AYe  were  obliged  to
descend  barefooted;  and  were  not  without  some  apprehension  of  tread-
ing on  scorpions  or  other  reptiles  in  such  a  place.

"  The  view  from  the  summit  of  the  edifice  is  extremely  extensive  in
every  direction ;  but  the  eye  rests  on  few  objects,  which  it  cau  clearly
distinguish  and  give  a  name  to;  though  an  excellent  idea  is  obtaiued  of
the  general  face  and  features  of  the  country  .  .  .  An  artist  who
would  study  rock  scenery  in  all  its  wildest  and  most  extravagant  forms,
and  in  colours  which,  to  one  who  has  not  seen  them,  would  scarcely  ap-

XXXVII.]

PETRA.

521

pear  to  be  in  nature,  would  find  himself  rewarded,  should  he  resort  to
Mount  Hor  for  that  sole  purpose.

"  We  had  employed  just  an  hour  in  the  ascent;  and  found  that  our  re-
turn to  the  place  where  we  had  left  our  horses,  occupied  the  same  time."

Mr  Legh  who  accompanied  Irby  and  Mangles,  says  :  "  Against  the
walls  of  the  upper  apartment  were  suspended  beads,  bits  of  cloth  and
leather,  votive  offerings  left  by  the  devotees ;  on  one  side,  let  into  the
wall,  we  were  shown  a  dark-looking  stone,  that  was  reputed  to  possess
considerable  virtues  in  the  cure  of  diseases,  and  to  have  formerly  served
as  a  seat  to  the  prophet."  According  to  Mr  Stephens,  ostrich  eggs  have
since  been  added  to  the  other  offerings  here  suspended ;  Incidents,  etc.
II.  p.  95.  Schubert  found,  near  the  top  of  the  mountain,  many  frag-
ments of  pottery  and  bits  of  coloured  glass ;  but  the  convent  which  he
speaks  of  as  having  once  stood  here,  seems  to  have  no  sufficient  historical
foundation;  Reise  II.  p.  420,  421.

The  irregular  form  of  the  summit  of  Mount  Hor,  has  already  been
alluded  to ;  Text  p.  125.  The  date  of  the  tomb  of  Aaron  goes  back
beyond  the  time  of  the  crusaders,  who  already  found  here  an  oratory  or
Wely;  Gesta  Dei  p.  581.  Fulch.  Carnot.  ib.  p.  405.— The  old  Sheikh
who  formerly  resided  on  the  mountain  has  long  been  dead ;  his  place  as
keeper  of  the  Wely  was  now  occupied  by  an  inhabitant  of  Eljy,  who  oc-
casionally visits  the  spot.  He  was  present  during  our  affair  at  Wady
Miisa,  and  strongly  took  our  part ;  probably  not  being  willing  to  forego
the  benefit  which  might  be  expected  to  accrue  to  himself,  should  we  ascend
the  mountain.

Note  XXXVII.— Page  171,  173.

Petra.  Two  or  three  questions  respecting  the  various  names  applied
to  Petra,  and  also  respecting  the  application  of  this  name  to  other  places,
remain  to  be  investigated.

Josephus  relates,  that  the  most  ancient  name  of  Petra  was  Arke  or
Arekeme  ('ApK?;,  'ApeK€fx.q),  and  that  it  was  so  called  from  its  founder
Rekem  (opi ),  one  of  the  Midianitish  kings  slain  by  the  Israelites ;  Num.
31,  8.  Joseph.  Ant.  4.  4.  7.  ib.  4.  7.  1.  But  this  seems  to  be  some-
what doubtful ;  for  the  Targums  of  Oukelos  and  Pseudo-Jonathan  apply
the  name  Rekem  (cpn)  not  to  Petra,  but  to  Kadesh ;  Gen.  16,  14.  20,
1.  Eusebius  and  J erorae,  indeed,  speak  of  Rekem  as  the  Syrian  name
for  Petra ;  but  as  in  another  place  they  cite  Josephus  as  their  authority
for  this  assertion,  it  would  seem  that  they  in  no  case  speak  from  their
own  knowledge;  Oaomast.  arts.  PetTa,  Becem,  comp.  art.  Arcem.

There  seems  to  be  no  further  very  definite  ancient  notice  of  this
name ;  but  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century,  Abulfeda  de-
scribes a  place  called  er-Rakim,  which  in  its  character  would  well  corres-
pond to  Wady  Mnsa :  "Among  the  noted  towns  of  Syria  is  er-Rakim,  a
small  place  near  the  Belka,  the  houses  of  which  are  all  cut  in  the  live
rock,  as  if  of  one  stone;"  Tab.  Syr.  p.  11.  This  is  accordingly  as-
sumed by  Schultens  and  others,  as  the  Arekem  of  Josephus  and  the  Petra
of  the  Greeks;  Vita  Salad.  Index  art.  Errakimum.  Busching  Th.
XI.  i.  p.  508.  But  the  position  near  the  Belka  is  inconsistent  with  such
Vol.  II.— 44.*

522

NOTES.

[xxxvii.

an  hypothesis ;  and  the  matter  is  set  at  rest  by  another  passage  in  the
same  author.  In  his  Annals,  Abulfeda  speaks  of  the  same  place  as  near
to  Kerak ;  and  relates  that  Nureddin,  marching  from  Damascus  to  Kerak,
advanced  as  far  as  to  er-Rakim  and  there  turned  back.  It  lay  therefore
north  of  Kerak.  Abulf.  Annal.  Musi,  ad  A.  H.  568.  Schult.  Excerpt,
in  Vit.  Sal.  p.  15.  See  Gesenius  Comm.  zu  Jes.  16,  1.  p.  537.  The
excavated  dwellings  found  by  Seetzen,  which  Gesenius  refers  to  this
place,  were  situated  far  to  the  north  both  of  the  Belka  and  of  Jebel
'Ajlun;  Zach's  Monatl.  Corr.  XVIII.  pp.  355,  356.

Equally  untenable  is  the  hypothesis  first  suggested  by  Bochart,  which
identifies  Pctra  or  Wady  Miisa  with  the  place  called  by  Arabian  writers
el-Hijr,  where  are  excavated  caverns.  Bochart  was  probably  led  to  it
by  the  Chaldee  form  xnan,  Gen.  16,  14.  20,  1;  which  the  Targum  of
Onkelos  there  reads  instead  of  Bered  and  Shur.  He  and  others  also
read  the  Arabic  name  as  el-Hajr  (a  stone),  and  held  it  therefore  to  be
synonymous  with  the  name  Petra;  although  it  is  properly  written  with
Kesrah,  el-Hijr,  and  has  no  such  meaning.  See  Freytag's  Lex.  Arab.
I.  pp.  315,  316.  Bochart  Geogr.  Sacr.  p.  688.  Bernard  on  Joseph.  Ant.
4.  4.  7.  ed.  Haverc.    Reland  Pal.  p.  933.

But  apart  from  all  this,  the  place  called  el-Hljr  lay  at  least  eight  days'
journey  south  from  Wady  Musa,  and  therefore  cannot  be  brought  into
any  connection  with  Petra.  Edrisi  says  that  Tebuk  lies  between  el-Hijr
and  the  border  of  Syria,  four  days'  journey  from  the  latter ;  and  on  the
present  route  of  the  Syrian  Haj,  Tebuk  is  also  four  days  south  of  Ma'an  ;
Edrisi  par  Jaubert  p.  333.  Burckhardt's  Travels  App.  pp.  658,  659.
Further,  Edrisi,  in  describing  the  same  Syrian  route,  places  el-Hijr  at
four  days  from  Tebuk  towards  Medina;  ib.  pp.  359,  360.  Burckhardt's
notices  do  not  mention  el-Hijr;  probably  because  the  Haj  at  the  present
day,  south  of  Tebuk,  takes  a  more  western  route;  ib.  p.  659. — The  sup-
posed identity  of  el-Hijr  with  Petra  is  properly  denied  by  Bernard  and
Schultens,  as  above  quoted;  and  also  by  Gesenius,  Comm.  zu  Jes.  16,  1.
p.  537.  The  latter  however  refers  by  oversight  to  Rommel's  Abulfeda,
p.  84  ;  where  the  writer  is  speaking  of  another  el-Hijr,  situated  in  the
interior  province  Yemameh.  See  Abulf.  Tab.  Arab.  ed.  Hudson,  pp.
37,  60.    Edrisi  ib.  pp.  154,  155.

Thus  far  of  Arabian  writers.  We  turn  now  to  another  question :
Whether,  as  has  been  assumed,  there  existed  anciently  more  than  one
city  of  the  name  of  Petra  It  may  first  be  proper  to  remark,  that  as
early  as  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century,  the  general  name  of  Palestine
had  been  so  extended  as  to  include  the  whole  of  Arabia  Pctraja,  quite
to  Ailah.  Thus  at  the  council  of  Nicea  A.  D.  325,  among  the  bishops
of  Palestine  whose  subscriptions  are  there  preserved,  is  the  name  of
Peter,  bishop  of  Ailah;  and  Jerome,  paraphrasing  Eusebius,  places
Ailah  in  the  extreme  borders  of  Palestine  on  the  Red  Sea;  Onomast.
art.  Ailath.  Labbe  Concil.  Tom.  II.  c.  51.  Le  Quieu  Orieus  Chr.  III.
p.  759.  Hence  Eusebius,  writing  about  A.  D.  330,  could  with  proprie-
ty speak  of  Petra,  sometimes  as  a  city  of  Arabia  and  sometimes  as  be-
longing to  Palestine.  Thus  Onomast.  art.  Petra  :  "  Petra  civitas  Arabiae
in  terra  Edoin ;  "  but  under  the  arts.  Arcem  and  Cades:  "  Petra  civi-
tas nobilis  Pahcstinac."  When  therefore  in  other  writers,  we  find  Petra
assigned  sometimes  to  Palestine  and  sometimes  to  Arabia,  this  docs  not

xxxvn.]

PETRA.

523

in  itself  imply  more  than  one  Pctra.  Reland  Pal.  p.  926. — Early  in
the  fifth  century,  as  we  have  seen,  this  region  took  the  specific  name  of
the  Third  Palestine.    See  Text  p.  161.

Cellarius  assumes  a  Petra  of  the  Amalekitcs,  distinct  from  that  of
Arabia,  on  the  strength  of  Judg.  1,  36,  and  2  Kings  14,  7  ;  where  a
Petra  (Heb.  Sela)  is  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the  ascent  of  Akrab-
bim  and  with  the  Valley  of  Salt ;  Notit.  OrbisII.  p.  680.  The  consider-
ations advanced  in  the  text,  show  this  conjecture  to  be  without  solid
foundation  ;  see  Text  p.  169  sq.

At  a  still  earlier  period,  a  Petra  of  Palestine  had  been  assumed,  also
as  distinct  from  Petra  of  Arabia,  on  the  strength  of  a  passage  in  the
works  of  St.  Athanasius ;  see  Geogr.  Sacr.  Caroli  a  St.  Paulo,  Amst.
1711.  p.  306.  Reland  p.  927.  The  passage  is  usually  referred  to  as
contained  in  the  "  Epist.  ad  solitariam  Vitara  agentes ;  "  though  in  the.
Benedictine  edition  at  least,  it  is  found,  not  in  that  epistle,  but  in  the
Historia  Arianor.  ^  18,  Opera  Tom.  I.  p.  354.  Paris  1698  :  koL  "Apeiov
fi,(.v  KoX  'AarepLOv  rov  fjiiv  aTro  YleTpuiv  rys  HakaLO-TU'rj^  tov  Si  a.TTo  Tri<;
'ApttjStas  {TrifTKoVous,  "  Et  Ariuni  quidem  et  Asterium,  ilium  Petrarum
PalaestinK,  hunc  ex  Arabia,  episeopos."  In  another  place  Athanasius
speaks  of  Asterius  alone  as  bishop  of  Petra  in  Arabia  :  'Aa-reptos  nerptuv
TTjs  'Apa/3ta9,  Tomus  ad  Antioch.  ^  10.  Opera  Tom.  I.  ii.  p.  776.

Now,  as  Reland  justly  remarks,  if  there  was  actually  a  city  called
Petra,  an  episcopal  see  in  Palestine,  distinct  from  that  of  Arabia,  it  is
certainly  very  singular,  that  there  should  nowhere  exist  the  slightest  al-
lusion to  it  in  all  the  subscriptions  of  councils,  in  the  various  ecclesiasti-
cal Notiti;B,  and  in  the  numerous  writings  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  who
were  cotemporary  with  Athanasius,  and  lived  in  and  wrote  expressly
upon  Palestine.  This  remark  afi'ords  strong  ground  to  suspect  a  corrup-
tion of  the  text  in  the  passage  of  Athanasius ;  which,  as  Reland  has
acutely  shown,  might  very  easily  take  place.  Either  the  word  ller/Dtov
has  been  transposed  from  its  proper  place,  so  that  we  ought  to  read  :  tov
fiev  arro  tJj?  naA.ai(rTiVrjs,  tov  6i  aTro  Ilerpaiv  rr/s  'Apa/iitas, — or,  as  is  more
probable,  the  word  lleTp(ov  was  at  first  a  gloss  in  the  margin,  afterwards
inserted  in  the  text  in  the  wrong  place.  On  the  latter  supposition,  no
city  was  originally  mentioned,  but  the  text  stood  thus :  tov  /xei/  airo
Ilakai.

c.  600.  Itinerarium  B.  Antonint  Maetteis  (sen  PtAOENrnn)  ex  Museo
Menardi,  Juliomagi-Andium  (Angers)  1640.  4.  Printed  from  another  manu-
script in  the  Acta  Sanctorum,  Maii  T.  IL  p.  x.  Ugolini  Thesaur.  Tom.  VII. —
The  date  of  this  Itinerary  is  uncertain  ;  but  it  appears  to  be  later  than  the
time  of  Justinian  (ob.  565)  and  earlier  than  the  Muhammedan  conquests.

*  e.  697.  Adamnaxus  (ex  Aeoflfo)  de  Locis  Sanctis  Libri  III,  ed.  Gretsero,
Ingoldst.  1619;  reprinted  in  Gretseri  0pp.  Tom.  IV.  Ratisb.  1734.  Printed
also  in  Mabillon  Acta  Sanctor.  Ord.  Benedict.  Sjbc.  III.  P.  II.  p.  499.  Eng-
lish in  Wright's  Early  Travels  in  Palestine,  p.  1  sq. — Arculfus,  a  French
bishop,  returning  from  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  was  cast  away  upon  the
island  of  lona  on  the  western  coast  of  Scotland ;  where  Adamnanus  was
then  abbot  of  the  celebrated  monastery.  The  latter  wrote  down  this  ac-
count of  Palestine  from  the  relation  of  Arculfus ;  and  presented  it  in  A.  D.
698  to  Alfred,  king  of  Northumberland.  The  tract  of  the  Venerable  Bede
de  Locis  Saneti%  printed  in  his  works,  is  merely  an  abstract  of  this  work  of
Adamnanus.    See  Beckmann,  Vol.  II.  p.  508  sq.

c.  7 65.  St.  Willibaldi  Vita  seu  ITodmporicon,  containing  a  notice  of  his
pilgrimage  to  the  Holy  Land ;  printed  in  Oanisii  Thesaur.  Monumentor.  Eccl.
et  Hist.  ed.  Basnage,  Tom.  II.  P.  I.  p.  99  sq.  Also  in  Mabillon  Acta  Sanctor.
Ord.  Benedict.  Saec.  III.  P.  II.  p.  365.  The  latter  editor  gives  the  date  A.
D.  786.  English  in  Wright's  Early  Trav.  in  Pal.  p.  13  sq.  St.  Willibald  was
born  in  England,  and  became  bishop  of  Eichstadt  in  Germany  A.  D.  742.
There  exist  two  recensions  of  this  tract,  both  of  which  are  given  by  Mabillon.
See  Brocardus  below.

e.  870.  Beenhardi  (Sapientis  Monachi)  Itinerarium  in  Loca  Sancta,  in
Mabillon  Acta  Sanctor.  Ord.  Benedict.  Ssec.  III.  P.  II.  p.  523.  [472].  Printed
also  from  a  MS.  in  the  Cotton  Library  in  "  Relations  des  Voyages  de  Guil.  de
Eubruk,  Bernard  le  Sage,  et  Saawulf,  par  F.  Michel  et  T.  Wright,"  4to.  Paris,
1839.  p.  201  sq.  English  in  Wright's  Early  Trav.  in  Pal.  p.  23  sq.  Mabillon's
copy  contains  only  the  very  brief  Itinerary  of  Bernard  and  his  two  companions ;
that  of  Michel  and  Wright  gives  also  a  more  particular  account  of  the  sacred
places,  which  is  merely  written  out  from  the  tract  of  Adamnanus,  probably,
by  a  later  hand.  Bernard  relates,  that  he  received  the  benediction  of  the
pope  Nicholas  in  the  beginning  of  his  journey ;  doubtless  the  first  of  that  ^
name,  who  died  A.  D.  867 ;  for  there  was  no  other  pope  Nicholas  until  A.

'  There  exists  a  small  tract  ascribed  to  scriptor.  Tom.  I.  p.  665-7.    Ugolini  The-

EocHERics,  bishop  of  Lyons  in  the  5th  saur.  Tom.  VII.     But  Eucherius  appar-

century,  entitled :  Epixtola  ad  Faustinum  ently  was  never  in  Palestine ;  and  the  tract

de  iitu  Jndcece    urbisqve   Hierosohpnita-  is  drawn  from  Josephus,  Jerome,  and  others,

noc,  printed  in  Labb.  Biblioth.  nov.  Manu-  and  has  little  intrinsic  value.

536

BOOKS  ON  palesthte.

[App.  L

D.  1059.  This  justifies  the  date  of  A.  D.  870,  which  is  assigned  to  this  Itin-
erary by  "William  of  Malmsbnry,  de  Regiius  Anglor.  cap.  2.  See  Beckmann,
n.  p.  518.    The  Cotton  and  Oxford  MSS.  give  the  date  erroneously,  A.  D.  970.

1096-1125.  FuLCHERn  Cakxote:^sis  Gesta  Peregrinantium  Francorum
cum  armis  Hierusalem  pergentium  ;  in  Bongars'  "  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,"  p.
381.  More  complete  in  Du  Chesne  Scriptores  Francic.  Tom.  lY.  p.  816.
Paris  1641. — Fulcher  of  Chartres,  a  monk  or  presbyter,  accompanied  Robert
duke  of  Normandy  to  Palestine,  in  the  first  crusade,  A.  D.  1096.  His  history
extends  from  A.  D.  1095  to  A.  D.  1124.'

1102—3.  S^wtjLFi  Eelatio  de  Peregrinatione  ad  HieTosolymam  et  Terrain
Sanctam  ;  printed  for  the  first  time  in  Michel  and  "Wright's  "  Relations  des
"Toyages  de  GuO.  de  Rubruk,  etc."  Paris,  1839.  4to.  p.  237  sq.  English  in
"Wright's  Early  Trav.  in  Pal.  p.  31  sq.

e.  1125.  DA^•IEL  (Igoumen)  Journey  to  the  Holy  Land.  Daniel  was  a
Russian  abbot  ("Hyoiz/ifi/or)  who  visited  Palestine  in  the  beginning  of  the
twelfth  century.  His  journal  is  one  of  the  earliest  documents  of  the  old
Slavonic  language,  and  was  first  printed  in  "  Puteshestwia  Rnsskich  ludei  w
tchuja  zemli,"  or  "  Travels  of  the  Russians  in  foreign  Lands,"  St.  Petersburg,
1837.  8.

*  c.  1150.  el-Edeisi  Geographia  Universalis,  containing  an  account  of
Palestine  about  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century.  Extracts  in  Arabic,  Rome
1392.  4to.  Madrid  1799.  8vo.  French,  Geographic  d'EoEisi,  par  P.  A.  Jau-
hert,  Tom.  I.  Paris  1836.  4to.  The  part  which  treats  of  Syria,  is  printed  in
Arabic  and  Latin  in  Rosenmuller's  Analecta  Arabica,  P.  H.  Lips.  1828.'

*  1160-73.  Benjamin  Ttoelexsis  Itinerarium,  Travels  of  Benjamin  of
Tudela,  a  Spanish  Jew.  Often  printed  e.  g.  Hebraice  cum  Vers,  et  notis
Const.  VEmpereur,  Lugd.  Bat.  1633.  8.  French,  Voyages  de  RahM  Benjamin,
etc.  par  J.  P.  Baratier,  2  Tom.  Amst.  1734.  8 ;  also  in  another  version  in
Bergeron's  Voyages,  Tom.  I.  la  Haye  1735.  4.  Eng.  Travels  of  Ealii  Ben-
jamin, Lond.  1783.  12mo.  Hebrew  and  English,  by  A.  Asher,  with  Xotes,  2
vols.  Berlin,  1840.  This  last  is  the  best  edition  of  all,  and  is  the  one  con-
stantly referred  to  in  the  text.  Also  in  "Wright's  Early  Trav.  in  Pal.  p.  63
sq.  Rabbi  Benjamin  has  often  been  reproached  as  being  full  of  inaccuracies
and  fables,  and  as  never  having  visited  the  countries  he  describes.  But  the
former  faults  are  common  to  the  writers  of  that  age ;  and  I  have  found  his
account  of  Palestine,  so  far  as  it  goes,  to  be  that  of  an  eyewitness,  and  quite
as  accurate  and  trustworthy  as  any  of  the  narratives  of  those  days.

c.  1175—80.    R.  Petaohle  Peregrinatio  etc.  Eeb.  et  Lat.  in  "Wagenseil
"  Exercitationes  sex  Varii  Argument!,"  Altorf,  1687.  4.  Alt.  et  Norimb.  1719.
4.    Hebrew  and  French,  Tour  du  Monde  ou  Voyages  du  Jt.  Pethachia,  par
M.  E.  Carmoly,  Paris  1831.  8.    Rabbi  Petachia  was  a  Jew  of  Ratisbon;  his
»  Itinerary  is  of  far  less  value  than  the  preceding  work  of  Rabbi  Benjamin.

1175.    Geeiiai'.di,  Friderici  I.  in  jEgyptam  et  Syriam  ad  Saladinum

*  The  histories  of  Fnlcher,  WiUiam  of  '  It  is  not  certain  that  Edrisi  had  him-
Tyre,  and  Jacob  de  "Vitry,  are  inserted  in  self  visited  Syria  ;  but  his  description  is  of
this  list  on  account  of  the  many  valuable  too  much  importance  not  to  be  meutioued
topogral)hical  notices  contained  in  them.  here.

App.  I.]

BOOKS  ON  PALESTINE.

537

legati,  Ithicrariu7n,  A.  D.  1175;  in  the  "Clironica  Slavonica  Helmoldi  et
Arnoldi  Abbatis  Lubicensis,"  ed.  Bangart,  Lub.  1702.  4.  p.  516  sq.  Gerhard
travelled  from  Egypt  to  Damascus  by  way  of  Sinai  and  the  east  side  of  the
Dead  Sea,  passing  through  Bostra.  The  Itinerary  is  inserted  by  Arnold  of
Lubeck  in  his  Chronicle ;  it  is  brief  and  of  httle  importance.

*  1182-85.  WiLLEEMTJS  (GriL.)  Tyeensis  Ektoria  Rerum  in  partibtts
trammarinis  gestarum  etc.  seu  Historia  Belli  Sacri ;  printed  Basel  1549.  ib.
1560.  ib.  1583.  Also  in  Bongars'  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,  Hanov.  1611.  fol.
This  writer,  the  chief  and  most  important  historian  of  the  crusades,  was
made  archbishop  of  Tyre  in  A.  D.  1174.  He  commenced  his  history  in  A.  D.
1182,  (see  lib.  1.  3,)  and  brought  it  down  in  twenty- two  books  from  the  com-
mencement of  the  crusades  to  the  raising  of  the  siege  of  Kerak  by  Saladin,
A.  D.  1184.    This  work  contains  many  valuable  topographical  notices.

1185.  Joannes  Phooas  de  Locis  Sanctis  etc.  Gr.  et  Lat.  in  the  Symmihta
of  Leo  AUatins,  Colon.  Agr.  1653.  8.  Venet.  1733.  fol.  The  Latin  version
is  also  printed  in  the  Acta  Sanctorum,  Maii  Tom.  II.  p.  i.  Phocas  was  a
Cretan  by  birth,  and  lived  as  a  monk  in  Patmos.  He  makes  no  allusion  to
the  crusaders.    The  above  date  is  that  assigned  by  L.  Allatius.

*  c.  1190.  En  quel  estat  la  Citez  de  JTiermalem  et  li  seins  Lieu  estoient
d  ce  jour. — This  very  curious  and  important  tract  contains  a  topographical
description  of  the  Holy  City,  as  it  was  when  Saladin  wrested  it  from  the
Franks  in  October,  1187  ;  see  the  first  paragraph.  The  tract  was  first  pub-
lished in  the  great  work  Assises  de  Jerusalem,  edited  by  Count  Beugnot,
Paris  1843,  fol.  Tom.  H.  p.  531  sq.  Reprinted  in  the  App.  to  Schuhz
Jerusalem,  Berlin  1845,  p.  107.  Williams'  Holy  City,  1849,  Vol.  I.  App.  p.
134.  Also  in  App.  H,  of  this  volume,  next  after  the  present  list  of  books.

*  e.  1200.  BoHAEDDiN  Vita  et  Res  gesta  Saladini,  Arab,  et  Lat.  ed.  A.
Sehultens  ;  cum  Ind.  Geograph.  Lngd.  Bat.  1735.  fol.  and  with  a  new  title-
page,  ibid.  1755.  Saladin  died  A.  D.  1193.  Bohaeddin  was  his  secretary  and
companion.  The  Geographical  Index  of  Sehultens  is  valuable  for  the  Arabic
topography  of  Palestine  and  Syria.

c.  1200.  Gaffrid  (Jeffeet)  Vinisaxjf  Lter  Hierosolymitanum  Regis
Anglorum  Richardi  1 ;  in  Historiae  Anglic.  Scriptores  ed.  Gale,  Tom.  II.  p.
247  sq.    English  in  Bohn's  Chronicles  of  the  Cnisaders,  pp.  65-339.

1210.  Samuel  Bar  Simson.^  Itineraire  de  Palestine,  in  Carmoly's  Itineraires
de  la  Tere  Sainte,  Brux.  1847.

1211.  Willebeandi  ab  Oldenborg  Itinerarium  Terra  Sanctw,  printed
in  the  Symmihta  of  Leo  Allatius,  Colon.  Agr.  1653.  8.  "Venet.  1733.  foL
The  author  was  Canon  at  Hildesheim.

1217.  Thetmari  (Magistri)  Iter  ad  Terram  Sanctam,  ed.  T.  Toller,  1851.
— Historia  de  dispositione  Terrm  Sanctm,  ed.  G.  M.  Laurent,  Eamb.  1852.

*  c.  1220.  Jaoobi  de  Viteiaoo  Historia  Hierosolymitana,  Duaci
(Douay)  1597.  8vo.  Also  in  Bongars'  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,  Hanov.  1611.
fol.  and  in  Martini  et  Durand  Thesaur.  nov.  Anecdot.  Tom.  III.  Lut.  Par.
1717.  The  writer,  a  French  priest,  became  bishop  of  'Akka,  and  composed
his  history  about  A.  D.  1220,  after  the  first  capture  of  Damietta  in  A.  D-
1219.   Ho  died  A.  D.  1240.    See  Histoire  Lit.  de  France,  T.  XVIII.  p.  224.

538

BOOKS  ON  PALESTIKE.

[App.  L

To  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  belong  also  the  following  Itineraries
and  Collections,  six  in  number :

I.  EuGESipprs  de  dktantiis  Locorvm  Terra  Sancta^  Gr.  et  Lat.  in  the
SymmiTcta  of  Leo  AUatius,  Colon.  Agr.  1653.8.  Yenet.  1733.  fol.  To  this
tract  Allatius  has  prefixed  the  date  A.  D.  1040 ;  bnt  the  writer  on  the  third
page  speaks  of  the  fortress  Mons  Eegalis  in  Arabia  Petrasa  as  having  been
built  up  by  King  Baldwin  I.  of  Jerusalem ;  and  this  took  place  in  A.  D.  1115.
See  Will.  Tyr.  11.  26.

IT.  Epipiiaxii  Hagiopolit^  Enarratio  Syria,  Urlis  Sanctce,  etc  Gr.  et
Lat.  in  the  Symmilcta  of  Leo  Allatius,  as  above.  The  writer  was  a  Syrian
monk.  The  date  of  the  tract  is  uncertain ;  but  it  seems  to  be  later  than  that
of  Phocas,  and  earlier  than  the  destruction  of  the  monasteries  on  Mount
Tabor  just  after  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century.

111.  JoHAXMS  WiBZBUEGiEXSis  i)e«cri^iio  73y.

App.  L]

BOOKS  ON  PALESTINE.

549

1803-7.  Ali  Bey,  Travels  in  Morocco,  Egypt,  Arabia,  Syria,  etc.  Lond.
1816. 4.  2  Vols. — The  author  was  a  Spaniard  named  Domingo  Badia  y  Lehlich,
■who  travelled  as  a  Muhammedan.  He  was  in  Palestine  in  1807.  See  Vol.  II.
pp.  140,  259.

*  1803-10.  Ulrich  Jacob  Seetzex,  Briefe,  etc.  in  Zach's  'Monatliche
C  orrespondenz,'  scattered  through  many  volumes.  The  most  important  let-
ters are  in  Vol.  XVII,  XVIII,  XXVL  XXVII.  A  few  less  important  ex-
tracts are  also  contained  in  the  Fundgruben  des  Orients,  Vol.  I.  pp.  48,  112.
II.  pp.  275,  474.  in.  p.  99.  Some  portions  of  these  letters  were  translated
into  English  under  the  title:  ".4  Brief  Account  of  the  countries  adjoining  the
Lille  of  Tiheriis,  the  Jordan,  and  Bead  Sea,''''  Lond.  1813.  4. — Seetzen  was
judicious,  enterprising,  and  indefatigable.  He  died  by  poison  in  Arabia  in
1811.  "What  we  have  hitherto  had  from  him  are  only  occasional  and  hasty
letters.  His  journals  have  quite  recently  been  published  for  the  first  time :
Eeisen  diirch  Syrien,  Palastina,  etc.  3  Bde,  Berlin,  1854-55.  The  third  vo-
lume did  not  come  to  hand  in  season  to  refer  to  it  in  this  work.  These  volumes
of  Travels  comprise  the  daily  jotting  of  Seetzen  in  his  journal,  often  in  pencil ;
but  were  never  arranged  nor  written  out  by  hiiu.  For  his  well  considered  and
final  judgments,  therefore,  we  must  still  look  to  his  letters,  in  the  collections
above  specified.  These  volumes  cover  all  his  journeys,  until  his  arrival  in
Egypt.  Letters  describing  his  researches  in  Egypt,  and  his  subsequent  jour-
ney in  the  peninsula  of  Mount  Sinai,  are  found  in  Zach  1.  c.  Vol.  XXVI,

XX  vn.

1806-7.  F.  A.  DE  Chateatjbeiand,  Itineraire  de  Paris  a  Jerusalem,  etc.
Paris,  1811.  8.  3  Tomes;  and  often.    English,  Travels,  etc.  Lond.  1811.  8.

2  Vols.  German,  Leipz.  1812.  8.  3  Bde. — Eloquent  and  superficial.  The  re-
ferences to  authorities  are  for  the  most  part  worthless.  See  above,  Vol.
L  Note  XXVIII,  at  the  end.

*  1809-16.  John  Lewis  Bueckhaedt,  Travds  in  Syria  and  the  Holy  Land,
Lond.  1822.  4.  German,  Reken  in  Syrie?i,  etc.  mit  Anmerlcungen  von  W.  Ge-
senius,  Weimar,  1823-4.  8.  2  Bde. — This  work  contains  all  the  journeys  of
Btirckhardt  in  Syria,  Palestine,  and  Mount  Sinai.  His  other  travels  do  not
belong  here.  As  an  oriental  traveller,  Burckhardt  stands  in  the  very  highest
rank ;  accurate,  judicious,  circumspect,  persevering.  He  accomplished  very
much;  yet  all  this  was  only  preparatory  to  the  great  object  he  had  in
view,  viz.  U>  penetrate  into  the  interior  of  Africa.  He  died  suddenly  in
1817,  at  Cairo.

1811.  J.  Fazakeelet,  Journey  from  Cairo  to  Mount  Sinai,  and  return
to  Cairo ;  in  R.  Walpole's  Travels  in  various  Countries  of  the  East,  Lond.
1820.  p.  362. — This  journey  was  made  in  company  with  Mr.  Galley
Knight.

1815.  "William  Tukitee,  Journal  of  a  Tour  in  the  Letant,  Lond.  1820.  8.

3  Vols.    The  account  of  Palestine  is  in  Vol.  II.

1815-16.  Orro  Fr.  vox  Riohtee,  WaUfahrten  im  Morgenlande,  heraus-
gegeben  ton  J.  P.  G.  Ewers,  Berlin  1822.  8. — The  narrative  is  brief;  but
marks  a  careful  observer.    The  author  died  at  Smyrna  in  1816.

1816.  J.  S.  BroKHTGHAM,  Travels  in  Palestine,  Lond.  1821.  4.   ib.  1822.

550

BOOKS  OX  PALESTINE.

[Aw.  I.

8.  2  Vols. — Travels  among  the  Arab  Tribes,  etc.  Lond.  1825.  4.  ib.  Ed.  2.  8vo.
2  Vols. — Both  together  in  German,  Eeisen,  etc.  'Weimar  1827.  8.  2  Bde.

1816-  18.  EoB.  EiCHAEDSOjr,  M.  D.  Travels  along  the  Mediterranean  and
parts  adjacent,  during  the  years  1816,  17,  18.  Lond.  1822.  8.  2  Vols.— Well
written,  hut  often  inaccurate.

1817.  T.  R.  JoLLiFFE,  Letters  from  Palestine,  etc.  2  Vols.  Lond.  1819.  8.
3d  Edit.  Lond.  1822.  8. — German  by  Bergk,  Seise  in  Paldstina  u.  s.  w.
Leipz,  1821.

1817-  18.  Le  Comte  de  Foebin,  Voyage  dans  le  Levant  en  1817  et  1818.
'Paris  1819.  fol.  With  splendid  plates.  Also  without  plates,  Paris  1819.  8.
The  work  has  more  value  for  the  arts  than  for  science.

*  1817-18.  Ikbt  axd  Maxgles,  Travels  in  Egypt  and  Nubia,  Syria  and
Asia  Minor,  during  the  years  1817  andlSlS.  Printed  for  private  distribution.
Lond.  1822.  8.  Reprinted  Lond.  1847.  12mo.  The  references  are  made  to
both  editions. — Well  written  and  full  of  accurate  information.

*  1818.  Th.  Legh,  Excursion  from  Jerusalem  to  Wady  Musa,  in  Mac-
michael's  "Journey  from  Moscow  to  Constantinople  in  the  years  1817-18."
Lond.  1819.  4.  Chap.  IV.  p.  185.  Reprinted  in  the  (American)  Biblical  Repo-
sitory, Oct.  1833.  Vol.  m.  p.  613.

1818.  F.  W.  Siebeb,  Beise  von  Kairo  nach  Jerusalem,  mit  Kupfem,
Prag  1823.  8. — Sieber's  Plan  of  Jerusalem  was  the  basis  of  Berggren's.  and
thus  of  Catherwood's.

1820—21.  J.  M.  A.  ScHOLZ,  ReUe  in  die  Gegend  zwiscJien  Alexaiidria  und
Percetonium, . . .  Egypten,  Paldstina,  und  Syrien,  Leipz.  u.  Soran  1822.  8. —
The  author  was  CathoUc  Professor  of  Theology  at  Bonn.  His  work  contdna
good  information  relative  to  the  Catholic  establishments  in  Palestine.

1820-  21.  F.  Hen^tkeb,  Notts  during  a  visit  to  Egypt,  .. .  Mount  Sinai,
and  Jerusalem,  Lond.  1823.  8.    Hasty  and  superficial.

1821.  John  Caene,  Letters  from  the  East,  2  Vols.  8vo.  Lond.  3d.  Edit.
1830.    Also,  Recollections  of  Travels  in  the  East,  2  Vols.  8vo.  Lond.  1830.

1821-  22.  J.  Beeggeen,  Rewr  i  Europa  och  Oesterlanderrte,  3  Delen,
Stockholm  1826-28.  8.  German,  Reisen  in  Europa  und  im  Morgenlande,  cms
dem  Schtcedischen,  3  Bde.  Leipz.  u.  Darmst.  1828—34.  8.

1823.  Rev.  Wm.  Jowett,  Christian  Researches  in  Syria  and  the  Holy
Land,  Lond.  1825.  8.    Boston  1826.  12.

*  1826-31.  Ed.  ROppell,  Reisen  in  Nuhien,  Kordofan,  und  dem  Petrti  ischcn
Ardbien,  Frankf.  1829.  8.  Also,  Reise  in  Ahyssinien,  2  Bde.  Frankf.  1838-
40.  8.  The  latter  work  includes  another  excursion  to  the  peninsula  of  Sinai
in  1831,  undertaken  in  order  to  determine  more  accurately  the  elevation  of
the  mountains.    See  ibid.  Vol.  L  p.  103.

*  1828.  Leox  de  Laboede,  Voyage  de  V Arabic  Petree,  ■pax  laborie  el
Linant,  Paris  1830-34.  fol.  English,  Journey  through  Arabia  Petrcea,  etc.
Lond.  1836.  8.  ib.  1838.  8. — The  chief  value  of  the  French  original  consists
in  its  splendid  plates;  of  which  the  text  is  for  the  most  part  explanatory.
The  English  work  is  a  smaller  compilation,  containing  only  a  portion  of  the
plates  on  a  reduced  scale.

1829.  A.  Prokesch  (Ritter  von  Osten),  Reise  im  heilige  Land  imJahre
1829    Wien  1831.  8.

App.  I.]

BOOKS  ON  PALESTIXB,

551

1830-31.  MiCHAUD  KT  PoujorLAT,  Correspandenee  d?  Orient  en  1830-31.
7  Tom.  Paris  1834.  8.

1832-33.  Ed.  Hooo,  M.  D.  Visit  to  Alexandria,  Damatcus,  and  Jeru-
salem, during  the  tuceessful  campaign  of  Ibrahim  Foiha,  2  Vols.  Lond.
1835.  12.

1833.    Rkt.  Spksce  Habdy,  Notices  of  the  Holy  Land,  etc.  Lond.  1635.  8.
1833.    Rev.  Veee  Moxbo,  A  Summer  Eamble  in  Syria.  2  Vols.  Lond.
1835.  8.

*  1834.  (MjLKMOvr)  Duo  de  Raguse,  Voyage  en  Hongrie  . . .  en  Syrie,
en  Palestine,  et  en  EgypU.  5  Tom.  Paris  1837.  8.  Bruxelles  1837-39.  12.—
Valuable  chiefly  in  a  political  and  military  respect.

1836.  J.  L.  Stkphkxs,  Incidents  of  Travel  in  Egypt,  Arabia,  and  the
Holy  Land,  by  an  American.  2  Vols.  12mo.  New  York  1837.  London  1837.
Several  editions.

1836.  Rev.  C.  B.  Elliott,  Travels  in  the  three  great  Empires  of
Austria,  Russia,  an-I  Turlcey,  2  Vols.  London  1838.  8. — The  Journey  in
Syria  and  Palestine  is  described  in  the  second  volume.

1836-38.  Joseph  Rcsseggkb,  Reisen  in  Europa,  Asien,  und  Afriia.
Stuttg.  1841-49.  8.  4  Vols.  The  author  travelled  mainly  as  a  geologist.
His  notices  of  Palestine  are  contained  in  the  first  and  fourth  volomes.

1837.  Lord  Llsdsat's  Letters  on  Egypt,  Edom,  and  the  Holy  Land.  2
Vols.  Lond.  1838.  12.    Several  editions.

1837.  Joseph  Salzbachee,  Erinnerungen  aus  meiner  Pilgerreise  nach
Pom  und  Jerusalem  im  Jahre  1837.  2  Bde.  Wien  1S39.  8. — The  author  is
Domcapitular  "  or  Canon  of  St.  Stephen's  Cathedral  Vienna.  His  wor£
contains  the  latest  information  as  to  the  Catholic  establishments  in  Palestine.

1837.  G.  H.  vox  ScHTBEBT,  Reise  nach  dem  Morgenlande,  3  Bde.
Erlaugen  1838—40.  8. — One  main  object  of  this  journey  ■was  Natural  History.
The  author  is  Professor  in  the  University  at  Munich.

*  1838.  John  Bowbixg,  Report  on  the  Commercial  Statistics  of  Syria.
Presented  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament.  Lond.  1840.  fol.  Dr  Bowring
travelled  in  Egypt  and  Syria  in  1838,  as  the  accredited  agent  of  the  British
Government,  for  the  purpose  of  coUecting  information  on  the  trade  and  com-
merce of  those  countries.  The  Report  contains  a  large  and  valuable  body
of  facts.

1842—43.  Rev.  Samtel  "Vroi,coTT,  Xotices  of  Jerusalem  ;  an  Excursion  to
Hebron  arid  Sebbeh  or  Masada  ;  and  Journey  from  Jerusalem  northwards  to
Beirut,  etc.    In  Biblioth.  Sacra,  1843,  pp.  17-87.

1842—43.  Ret.  George  Williams,  The  Holy  City,  Lond.  1845.  8.  Second
edition,  Lond.  1 849.  8.  2  Vols. — ilr  TVilliams  stands  forth  as  the  champion
of  all  ecclesiastical  and  other  tradition.

*  1842-47.  Eesst  Gustav  Schtltz,  Jerusalem,  eine  Vorlesung.  Berlin
1845. — Mittheilungen  uber  eine  Reise  durch  Samarien  und  Galilaa  [in  1847].
In  Zeitschr.  der  morgenl.  Ges.  1849,  HI.  46  sq. — Schultz  was  Prussian  con-
sul at  Jerusalem,  with  some  interruptions,  from  1842  till  1851  ;  in  which
latter  ye.ir  he  died.  He  was  not  always  an  exact  observer,  and  his  judgments
were  sometimes  hastily  formed ;  but  his  bearing  was  ever  kind  and  gentle-
manly.

«

552  BOOKS  ON  PALESTINE.  ^

1842-  52.  Col.  Chuechill,  Mount  Lebanon,  a  ten  years'  Eesidenceyfrom
1842  to  1853,  etc.  3  Vols.  Lond.  1853.  Svo.  This  work  has  many  off  hand
stories  and  statements,  which  are  not  to  be  relied  upon.  The  map  of  Le-
banon professes  to  have  been  taken  from  the  surveys  of  the  English  engineers ;
but  it  is  full  of  mistakes.

*  1842-03.  W.  H.  Baetlktt,  Walks  about  the  City  amd  Entirons  of
Jerusalem  \in  1842],  Lond.  1844;  also  in  a  second  edition  enlarged. — Th^
Kile  Boat^  or  Glimpses  of  the  Land  of  Egypt  \in  1845],  Lond.  1849. — Forty
Days  in  the  Desert,  in  the  Track  of  the  Isrctelites  [in,  1845],  Lond.  no  date. —
Jerusalem  Revisited  \in  1853],  Lond.  1855. — Mr  Bartlett  was  an  artist;  and
the  main  purpose  of  his  journeys  was  to  obtain  artistic  illustrations  of  the
places  visited.  In  this  respect  his  works  are  of  high  value.  His  descrip-
tions also  are  written  with  taste  and  good  sense.

1843.  Rev.  Eli  Smith,  A  Visit  to  Antipatris  \in  April  1843].  Also  :
Account  of  an  ancient  temple  on  Mount  Lebanon  [Deir  el-Kul'ah].  In  Biblio-
theca  Sacra,  1843,  pp.  478  sq.  557.

*  1843.  Rev.  John  Wilson,  D.  D.  Lands  of  the  Bible  visited  and  described,
Edinb.  1847.  8.  2  Vols.

1843-  45.  Rev.  "Wm.  M.  Thomson,  The  Sources  of  the  Jordan,  etc.  as
visited  in  1843 ;  in  Biblioth.  Sacra,  1846,  pp.  184  sq. — Tour  from  Beirut
through  Northern  Syria  to  Aleppo,  and  back,  in  1847 ;  in  Biblioth.  Sacra,
1849,  pp.  1,  243,  447,  663.

1845.    W.  Keafft,  Die  Topogrnphie  Jerusalems,  Bonn  1846.

*  1845-6.  TiTTJS  ToBLEE,  M.  D.  visited  Jerusalem  at  this  time,  and  has
published  the  following  six  works  relating  to  the  Holy  Olty  and  its  environs  :
1.  Bethlehem,  St.  Gallen  1849.— 2.  Golgotha,  St.  Gallen  1851.— 3.  Die  Siloah-
quelle  und  der  Oelherg,  St.  Gallen  1852. — 4.  Denlbldtter  aus  Jerusalem,  St.
Gallen  1853. — 5.  Topographie  von  Jerusalem  und  seinen  Umgebungen,  2  Bde.
Berlin  1853-54. — 6.  Beitrag  zur  medicinischen  Topographie  von  Jerusalem,
Berlin  1855.

1847.  H.  Gadow,  Ein  Ausflug  von  Jerusalem  iiber  Jericho  an  den  Jor-
dan, das  todte  Meer,  und  nach  Mar  Saba ;  in  Zeitschr.  der  morgenl.  Ges.  1848,
n.  pp.  52  sq. — Mittheilungen  iiber  die  gegenwdrtigen  Terrainverhaltnisse  in
und  um  Jerusalem  ;  ibid.  1849.  III.  p.  35  sq.

*  1848.  W.  F.  Lynch,  Commander,  Official  Report  of  the  United  States'
Expedition  to  explore  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  River  Jordan  ;  published  at  the
National  Observatory,  Washington  1852.  4.  Appended  is  the  extensive  and
valuable  geological  report  of  Dr  H.  J.  Andehson,  Geological  Reconnaissance
of  part  of  the  Holy  Land. — This  official  work  was  preceded  by  a  more  popu-
lar one  :  Narrative  of  the  United  States'  Expedition  to  the  River  Jordan  and
the  Dead  Sea,  Phila.  1849.  8.

1849-50.  II.  A.  De  Foeest,  M.  D.  Notes  of  a  Tour  in  Mount  Lebanon
and  to  the  eastern  side  of  Lake  Huleh  ;  in  the  Jonrn.  of  the  Amer.  Orient.
Soc.  Vol.  II.  p.  237  sq. — Notes  on  Ruins  in  the  Bukd'a  and  in  the  BelCid
Ba'alhek ;  ibid.  Vol.  III.  p.  351  sq.

1849-51.  A.  VON  Kremeb,  Mittel-Syrien  und  Damascus,  Wien  1853.
8vo. — Also,  Topographie  von  Damascus,  2  Th.  Wien  1854-55.  4to. — Of  little
value.

App.  I.]

BOOKS  OX  PALESTINE.

553

c.  1850.  Tlie  true  Site  of  Cahwry  ;  in  the  Museum  of  Classical  Literature,
1853.  Yol.  n.  p.  811-476.

1850-  51.  F.  Dk  SitxcT,  Voyage  autour  de  la  Mer  Morte  et  dans  les
Terres  Bibliques^  2  Vols.  Paris  1853.  8.  Also  English :  Xarrative  of  a  Jour-
ney round  the  Dead  Sea  and  in.  the  Bible  Lands,  2  Vols.  Lond.  1853. — The
English  title,  at  least,  is  a  misnomer  ;  the  author  travelled  only  around  the
south  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.  My  references  to  this  work  are  all  to  the  Eng-
lish edition.

1851-  52.  C.  W.  M.  Van  dk  Veldk,  Narrative  of  a  Journey  through
Syria  and  Palestine,  2  Vols.  Edinb.  and  Lond.  1854.  8.

1852-  54.  Rev.  J.  "L.  Yo^tes^  Exeursion  to  the  Summit  of  Herman;  in
Biblioth.  Sacra,  1854,  p.  41  sq. — Excursion  to  the  Lakes  east  of  Damascus,
ibid.  p.  342  sq. — Excursion  from  Damascus  to  Yabrud  etc.  ibid.  p.  433  sq.
— Notes  of  a  Tour  from  Damascus  to  Ba'albeh  and  Hums,  ibid.  p.  649  sq.
From  these  papers  much  information  has  been  extracted  relative  to  the  en-
virons of  Damascus;  as  also  much  was  received  orally  from  the  author  during
my  visit  to  the  city.  To  him  I  was  also  indebted,  in  1852,  for  a  copy  of  his
map  of  the  course  of  the  Barada  from  its  source  in  Anti-Lebanon. — The
substance  of  the  above  papers,  as  also  an  account  of  his  residence  in  Damascus,
a  journey  into  Hauran,  and  other  excursions,  has  been  since  published  by
Mr  Porter  under  the  title  :  Fixe  years  in  Damascus,  2  Vols.  Lond.  1855.
This  work  reached  me  too  late  to  be  of  service  in  preparing  my  own  account
of  that  city.

1853.  Arthub  Penbhtx  Sta>'let,  Sinai  and  Palestine  in  connection  with
their  History,  Lond.  1856.

II.   WOBKS  ON  THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  PALESTINE,  ETC.*
By  writers  who  bad  not  tbemselves  visited  that  country.

1.  PALESTINE.

1590.  Chbist.  Adeichomius,  Theatrum  Terrce  Sanctce,  cum  Taiulis  geo-
graph.  Colon.  Agr.  1590.  fol.  ibid.  1593,  1600,  1613, 1628,  1682.— The  author
was  a  Dutch  ecclesiastic,  a  native  of  Delft,  and  died  at  Cologne  in  1585.  He
follows  chiefly  Brocardus  ;  but  gives  at  the  end  of  the  volume  a  list  of  many
other  authors  consulted.

1646.  Sam.  Bochabti  Geographia  Sacra,  seu  Phaleg  et  Canaan,  Cadomi
(Caen)  1646.  fol.  Franckf.  1674.  4.  Lugd.  Bat.  1692.  foL  ibid.  ed.  Villeman-
dy,  1707.  fol.

1665.  'Sic.  Saksox,  Geographia  Sacra  ex  V.  et  N.  Test,  desumta  et  in
Tdbulis  quatuor  eoncinnata.  Paris  1665.  Cum  Notis  Clerici,  Lugd.  Bat.  1704,
fol. — Sanson,  a  celebrated  French  geographer,  died  A.  D.  1667.

'  The  date  here  prefixed  refers  to  the  time  of  first  publication.

Vol.  n.— 47

554

BOOKS  ON  PALESTINE.

[App.  L

1677.  Olf.  Dappke's  NauJceurige  Beschrijving  van  gantsch  Syrie,  en
Palestyn  of  Heileige  Lant,  etc.  Eotterd.  1677  fol.  Amst.  1681.  fol.  German,
Asia,  oder  Beschreilung  des  gantzen  Syrien  vnd  Palestins  oder  gelobten
Landes,  Amst.  1681.  fol.  Niimb.  1689.  fol.  A  great  mass  of  materials  throwH
together  without  judgment.

*  1701.  Chkistoph.  Celulrits,  Notitia  OrbU  Antiqui  sen  Geographia
Plenior,  2  Tom.  4  to.  Lips.  1701-5.  Auxit  J.  C.  Schwarz,  ib,  1731-32.  With
new  title,  ib.  1772-73.  Syria  and  Palestine  are  contained  in  the  second  volume.

1708.  Ed.  Wells,  An  Historical  Geography  of  the  New  Test.  2  Vols.
Lond.  1708.  8.  ib.  1712.  8;  several  times  reprinted.  Also,  An  Historical
Geography  of  the  Old  Test.  3  Vols.  Lond.  1712. *8.  etc.  Both  works  in  Germ,
by  Panzer,  Niirnb.  1765.  8.  4  Theile.

*  1714.  Hade.  Eeland,  Palcestina  ex  monumentis  teferibus  illmtrata,
Traj.  Bat.  1714.  4.  Norimb.  1716.  4.  Reprinted  in  tJgolini  Thesaur.  Antiq.
Sacr.  T.  VI. — This  yet  remains  the  standard  classic  work  on  Palestine,  as  far
down  as  to  the  era  of  the  crusades.  A  new  edition,  including  the  results  of
modern  researches,  would  be  still  more  valuable.

1758-68.  Will.  Alb.  Bachie>-e  Heilige  Geographic,  etc.  6  Deelen.
Utrecht  1758-68.  8.  German  by  G.  A.  Maas,  Historische  und  Geographische
Beschreibung  von  Paldstina,  etc.  II  Th.  in  7  Bde.    Cleve  u.  Leipz.  1766—75.  8.

*  1785.  Ant.  Feiede.  BiiscHiNG's  Erdheschreihung.  Th.  V,  Paldstina.
Araiien,  etc.  Altona  1785.  8.  With  a  new  title-page  as  Th.  XI.  Abth.
I.  Hamb.  1792. — One  of  the  best  treatises  on  the  modern  geography  of  Pa-
lestine.

1790.  YsBEAKD  VAN  Hamelsveld,  Aardrijhunde  des  Bijhels  etc.  Amst.
1790.  8.  6  Deelen.  German  by  Jiinisch,  Biblische  Geographie^  Hamb.  1793-
96.  8.  3  Bde. — The  translation  was  never  completed.

1799.  CoxEAD  Manneet,  Geographic  der  Griechen  und  Piimer.  Th.  VT.
Abth.  1,  Arabien,  Paldstina,  Syrien,  Niirnb.  1799.  8.    Edit.  2.  Leipz.  1831.

1817.    C.  F.  Kloden  Landeshunde  ton  Paldstina,  Berlin  1817.  8.

*  1818.  Gael  Eittee  Die  ErdJcunde  etc.  Th.  H,  WestrAsim.  Berlin
1818.  8.  For  the  second  edition  see  below,  1848-^5.

*  1820.  G.  B.  WdsEE,  BiUisches  Realwdrterlnch,  Leipz.  1820.  8.  Re-
written, much  enlarged,  and  improved,  3d  edition,  Leipz.  1847-8.  2  Bde. —
The  geographical  articles  are  written  with  great  care.

1826.  E.  F.  Karl  Rosexmuller,  Biblische  Geographic,  3  Bde.  Leipz.
1823-28.  8.  The  second  volume  is  occupied  with  Palestine. — This  work  ap-
pears to  have  been  compiled  hastily  and  without  extensive  research.

*  1835.  Gael  von  Eatjmee,  Paldstina,  Leipz.  1835.  8.  Third  edition,
enlarged  and  much  improved,  Leipz.  1850. — The  work  is  compiled  with  great
diligence,  and  forms  an  excellent  Manual.

1841.  J.  KiTTO,  Palestine,  its  Physical  and  Bible  History,  2  Yoiis.'Loni.
1841.

1841.  S.  MuNK,  Palestine  :  Description  Geographique,  Hist&rique,  et
Archeologique,  Paris  1841.  This  work  was  published  before  the  author  had
access  to  the  Biblical  Researches  ;  and,  being  stereotyped,  all  later  editions
remain  without  change.

App.  I.]

BOOKS  ON  PALESTINE.

555

*  1848-55.  Carl  Ritteb,  Vergleichende  Erdhunde  der  Sinai- Ralbinsel,
vm  Paldstina  und  Syrien,  4  Bde.  Berlin  1848-55.  These  volumes  constitute
a  part  of  the  second  edition  of  the  author's  great  work :  Die  Erdkunde,  etc.
viz.  Th.  XIV,  XV.  i-ii,  XVI,  XVII.  i-ii.— This  is  a  vast  storehouse  of  all  that
relates  to  the  geography  of  Palestine  and  Syria.

2.  JEEU8ALEAL

*  1747.  J.  B.  D'Anvillk,  Dissertation  sur  VEtendne  de  Tancienne  Jerw-
salem  et  de  son  Temple,  Faris  174:7.  8.  Reprinted  in  the  Appendix  to  Cha-
teaubriand's Itineraire.

1789.    J.  F.  Plessikg,  Ueher  Golgotha  vnd  Christi  Grab,  Halle  1789.
1833.    Justus  Olshausen,  Zur  Topographic  des  alien  Jerusalem,  Kiel
1833.  8.

1838.  F.  G.  Ceomk,  Jerusalem,  in  Ersch  und  Gruber's  Encyclopadie,
Sect.  II.  Th.  15.  p.  273 — 321.  This  is  the  most  complete  and  valuable  essay
on  the  ancient  and  modern  topography  of  the  Holy  City.

1847.  James  Feeguson,  An  Essay  on  the  ancient  Topography  of  Jerma-
lem,  Lond.  1847.

1852.  Fallmeratee,  Denkschrift  iiier  Golgotha  und  das  ffeilig-Grab,  in
"  Abhandlungen  der  K.  Bayer.  Akademie  der  Wiss."  HI.  CI.  vi^Bd.  HI.
Abth.    Published  also  separately,  Munich  1852.  4to.

APPENDIX  II.

LA  CITEZ  DE  JHERUSALEM.

The  following  curious  and  important  tract,  describing  the  streets  and
religious  establishments  of  Jerusalem,  at  the  time  the  city  was  captured  from
the  Christians  by  Saladin  in  A.  D.  1187,  was  first  published  as  a  note  by
Count  Beugnot,  in  his  splendid  edition  of  the  Assises  de  Jinisalem,  Tome  II.
p.  531  sq.  Paris  1843.  (This  work  is  also  issued  as  part  of  the  great  collec-
tion :  Se^eil  des  Eistoriens  des  Croisades  ;  Lois,  Tome  I,  11.)  The  manuscript
is  in  the  Bibliotheque  Imperiale,  Fonds  de  Sorbonne,  No.  387,  fol.  304-308.
Nothing  further  respecting  it  has  been  made  known.  The  first  paragraph
shows,  that  the  description  refers  to  the  time  of  Saladin's  conquest ;  and  the
tract  was  written  probably  not  long  after  that  event. — I  have  subjoined  a
few  slight  notes,  by  way  of  explanation.

I.  Unquel  estat  la  cites  de  Jhemsalem  et  li  seim  lieu  estoient  d  cejour.

"  Pource  que  li  plus  des  bons  Cresliens  parolent  et  houent  parler  volen-
tiers  de  la  seinte  cite  de  Jherusalem,  et  des  seins  lieus  oh  Jhesu  Cris  fu  mora
et  vis,  nous  dirons  comment  elle  aroit  an  jour  que  Salhadins  et  li  Sarrazin  la
conquisent  sur  les  Crestiens.  Aucunes  gens  porent  estre  qui  le  vodrent  ouir ;
oil  a  qui  il  desplaisoit,  porent  trespasser  ce  lieu  ....

"  II  ot  en  la  cite  de  Jherusalem  iiii.  maistres  portes  en  crois,  I'une  endroit
I'autre,  entre  les  pourternes.  Or  les  vous  nommeray  coument  elles  serient.
La  porte  David  estoit  vers  soleil  couchant  et  estoit  ii  la  droiture  des  portes
Obres, '  qui  estoit  vers  soleil  levant  de  derrieres  le  temple  Domini.  Cele
porte  tenoit  a  la  porte  David-.  Quant  on  estoit  devant  cele  porte,  si  tournoit
on  a  main  destre,  en  une  rue  par  devant  la  tour  David.  Si  poit  on  aler  au
mont  de  Syon  par  une  posterne  qui  la  estoit  en  cele  rue  ^  mein  senestre.
Ainsi  comme  on  ilsoit  hors  de  la  posterne,  un  moustier  monseigneur  S.  Jaque
de  Galice,'  qui  frere  estoit  monseigneur  S.  Jehan  evangeliste ;  la  dfeoit  on
que  S.  Jaques  ot  la  teste  copee  et  pource  fist  on  le  moustier  la.  La  grant  rue
qui  aloit  de  la  tour  David  droit  aux  portes  Ores.  La  grant  apeloit  on  la  rue
David*  jnsqu'au  change,  A  mein  senestre.   De  la  tour  David  avcit  une  grant

'  This  gate,  written  further  on  Ores  and       "  Here  ■we  have  the  great  ArmeniaD

Oires,  would  seem  to  be  the  Golden  gate.  convent  with  its  church  of  St.  James.

'■'  For  '  la  ^or■  at  Suez.

10  a.  m.  65°)

2  p.  m.  75°

Sunset,  70°
Clear  and  pleasant.    Wind  N.

Saturday,  March  I'Jth.

From  Encampment. — General  Course
from  S.  by  E.  to  S.  S.  E.

1.  'Ayun  Musa,  2  10

2.  W.  er-Keiyaneh,  1  05

3.  W.  el-Kurdbiyeh,  2

4.  W.  el-Abtha,  1  30

5.  W.  Siidr,  middle,  3  05

Total  9  50

Thermom.  F.  Sunrise,  52°
10  a.  m.  68°
2  p.  m.  74°
Sunset,  69°

Clear  and  pleasant.  Wind  N.  E.

Sunday,  March  ISth.
Remained  encamped  in  Wady  Sudr.

Thermom.  F.  Sunrise,
10  a.  m.
2  p.  m.
Sunset,
Clear.    Wind  E.  N.  E.

52°
68°
71°
66°

Monday,  March  19iA.

From  W.  SOdr,

1.  Wady  Wardan,

2.  W.  el-'Amarah,

3.  'Ain  Ilawariih,

4.  Nukeia'  el-Ful,

S.  by  E.
S.  S.  E.
S.  S.  E.
S.  S.  E.

3  15
3  30
2

30

5.  W.  Gburiindel,

6.  Encampment  in  do.

S.  S.  E.
S.  W.

H.  M.
1

30

Total  10  45

Thermom.  F.  Sunrise,  49°
10  a.  m.  67°
2  p.  m.  72°
Sunset,  68°

Clear  and  pleasant.  Wind  N.  W.

Tuesday,  March  20  •  r.     •      (  N.  bv  W.  30

6.  DeirDuwan,  ^  ^

7.  et-Taiyibeh,  N.  N.  E.

25
60
40
40
60

1  05

1  60

Total  6  20

Thermom.

F.  Sunrise,
10  a.  m.
2  p.  m.

50°
68°
66°

Clear  and  pleasant.  Wind  S.  W.

Saturday,  May  5th.

From  Taiyibeh,
3  20  I  1.  Beitin,  (Bethel)       W.  S.  W.  2
2  50  2.  el-Bireh,  (Beeroth)  S.  48°  W.  45

 1 3.  Ram-Allah,  W.  20

Total  6  10  [  4.  el-Jib,  (Gibeon)  S.by  W.  J  W.       1  15

5.  Neby  Samwil,
(Mizpeh)  S.  21°  W.  30

6.  Jemsalem,  Damasc.
Gate,  •  S.  35°  E.       1  60

Saturday,  Aprill-Ufi,

From  edh-Dhohenveh,

1.  el-Khulil,  Hebron,  N.  E.  by  E.

2.  Ramet  el-Khiilil,

3.  ed-Dirweh,

4.  Kufin,

5.  el-Burak,  (Solomon's  Pools)

6.  Rachel's  Tomb,

7.  Mar  Elyas,  (Convent)

8.  el-Kuds,  Jemsalem,  (Gate)

Total  13  15
General  Course  from  Hebron  to
Jemsalem,  between  N.  E.  by  N.  and
N.  N.  E.

Thermom.  F.  Sunrise,  42°
10  a.m.  61°
Clear  and  cold.    Wind  N.  E.  strong.

Total  6  40

Vn.  FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  'AIN
JIDY,  THE  DEAD  SEA,  JORDAN,
ETC.    (SEC.  X.)

WTTH  HORSES.

Tuesday,  May  8th.

From  Jerasalemi,  Yafa  Gate,

1.  Mar  Ely4s,  S.  25°  W.  1

2.  Rachel's  Tomb,    S.  W.  by  S.  30

3.  Beit  Lahm,  Beth-

lehem, S.  5°  E.  25

4.  el-Burak,  Solomon's

Pools,  S.  W.  ?       1  05

ITINERARY.

569

6.  el-Fnreidls,  (Frank  a  j*.

Mountain,)  Base,  E.  S.  E.  ?  1  50
6.  Tents  of  the  Ta'ami-

rah,                   W.  S.  W.  40

Total  5  30

Wedtiesday,  May  9tA.
From  Encampment,

1.  Teku'a,  (Tekoa)       S  5°  E.  25

2.  Bir  ez-Za'feraneh,  S.  35=  W.       1  40

)  S.  70=  W.  1  15

3.  Beni  Xa'im,  >  S.  30       2  45

S.  50=  E.  1

4.  Zif,  W.  side  of  TeU,  S.  W.  \  S.       1  15

5.  KtmnnL  (Carmel)      S.  i  W.       1  15

6.  Ma'in,  ^Maon)  S.  j  W.  25

Total  7  45

Theemom.  F.  Sunrise,  50°
2  p.  m.  67°
Clear  and  cooL    Wind  W.

Thurtday,  May  lOth,
From  Carmel,

1.  Bir  Selhub,               E.  i  S.  4  10

2.  Wady  el-Ghar,  bottom,  E.  i  S.  40

3.  Nukb  'Ain  Jidy,  (Pass)R  |  S.  1  50

4.  'Ain  Jidy,  (En-gedi)  E.  S.  E.  45

Encamp.

5.  Shore  of  Dead  Sea,    E  S.  E.  25

Total  7  50

Thebmoji.  F.  Snnrise,  51=
2  p.  m.  82=
Sunset,  80=

Clear  and  pleasant,  'VTind  East ;  at
evening  W.

Friday,  May  Wth.

From  Head  of  the  Pass,

1.  Wady  Sudeir,

2.  Wady  Hnsasah,

3.  W;idy  Derejeh,  (Khureitun)

4.  Wady  et-Ta'amirah,

5.  Cliff  over  'Ain  Terabeh,

50
2  30
50
35
1  05

Total  5  50
General  Course  all  day  about
K  N.  E.  parallel  to  the  shore.

Theemom.  F.  Sunrise,  68°
2  p.  m.  85°
Sunset,  78°
Clear  and  warm.    Wind  East;

in  the  afternoon  North.

Vol.  II.— 48.*

Saturday,  May  \1th.
From  Encampment,

1.  Wady  Ras  el-Ghu-  h.  m.

weir,             gen.  N.  N.  E.  1  05

2.  Wady  er-Rahib,

or  en-Nar,      gen.  N.  N.  E.  2  25

3.  Ras  el-Feshkhah,  N.  E.  by  E.  15

4.  'Ain  el-Feshkhah,  N.  E.  by  E.  40

5.  'Ain  Jehair,         N.  E.  by  E.  2  10

6.  el-Helu,  (Ford  of

Jordan)        about  E.  N.  E.  I  10

7.  'Ain  Hajla,  (Beth

Hoglah)            N.  W.  I N.  65

8.  Kusr  Hajla,        S.  W.  by  W.  20

9.  Eriha,  (Jericho)    N.  38=  W.  1  15

Total  10  15

Theemom.  F.  Sunrise,  70°
10  a.  m.  84°

Sunset,  78=
Clear  and  hot.    Wind  East ;  in
the  afternoon  S.

Sunday,  May  \Zth.

Remained  at  Jericho.

Thebmom.  F.  Sunrise,  70°
10  a.  m.  86°
2  p.  m.  91=

Sunset,  76=
Clear  and  hot    Wind  South ;  ia
the  afternoon  W.

Monday,  May  14oap(ra$d,  Antipatris,  ii.

242,  243.
Kefr  Siibt,  ii.  369.

Kefr  Selwan,  Heb.  Shiloah,  Gr.  "SiXud/i,

Siloam,  i.  232,  342.
Kefr  Som,  '  fasting,'  ii.  6.
Kefrnii,  ii.  356.
Kei.s,  Kcisiyeh,  ii.  17.
e'l-Kelb,  '  the  dog,'  ii.  492,  498.
el-Kelt,  Heb.  Cherith?  i.  441,  657,  658.
Kemenjeh,  ii.  205.

Keniseh,  Chald.  i\deh,  ii.  272.

es-Seba',  'lion,'  also  'seven,'  L  204.  iL
199,  200.

Seba'  Biyar,  '  seven  wells,'  i.  50,  585,  587.
es-Seba'iyeh,  W.  i.  104,  105,  145.
Sebbeh,  Masada,  i.  502,  525.
Sebustieh,  Gr.  ^efidarT],  Sehaste,  Samaria,

ii.  303,  311.
SefiTiirieh,  Gr.  2fv