SOURCE: https://archive.org/download/biblicalresearch01robi/biblicalresearch01robi_djvu.txt

Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arcliive
in  2015

Iittps://arcliive.org/details/biblicalresearch01robi

BIBLICAL  RESEARCHES

m

PALESimE,

AND   IN  THE   ADJACENT  REGIONS.

A

JOURNAL  OF  TRAVELS  IN  THE  YEAR
1838.
BY  E.  ROBIJfSON  AND  E.  SMITH.

DBAWN  CP  FBOM  THE  ORIQINAIi  DIARIES,  WITH  HISTOBICAI.  ILLUSTRATIONS,

BY

EDWARD  ROBmSOJT,  D.  D.  LL.  D.

rBOFxsaoB  of  biblical  literatube  in  the  TT  N  I  0  n  theologzoal

BEMINAET,  NEW  TOBE.

WITH   NEW   MAPS   AND  PLANS.

IN   TWO  VOLUMES,

'  VOL.  L

BOSTON:

PUBLISHED  BY  CROC'KER  AND  BREWSTER,

Kg.  4T  Washisgton  Steekt.

LONDON  JOHN'  MURRAY.

1856.

SEP  nam*

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1856,
Bt  EDWARD  ROBINSON.
In  tlie  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  tlie  United  States  for  the  Southern
District  of  New  York.

JOmf  F.  TROW,
PnHTER,  BTErEOTVrKll,  AND  EI.KCTBOTVPEB,
817  AND  379  UnOAUWAY,  N.  T

TO  THE

REV.  MOSES  STUART,

FBOrESSOn  of  sacred  UTERATURE  in  the  ANDOVER  theological  SElirSART,

THIS  "WORK,

THE  FRUIT  OF  STUDIES  BEGUN  IN  THE  BOSOM  OF  HIS  FAMILY,
IS  RESPECTFULLY  INSCRIBED,

iB  A  TOKBN  OP  GSATEPCL  ACK.NOWLEDQEMEST  ON  THE  PABT  Ot  A

PUPIL  AKD  FEIEND.

ADVEETISEMENT.

The  former  edition  of  the  Biblical  Researches  m  Palestute
Laving  been  for  several  years  out  of  print,  both  in  the  United
States  and  in  England,  the  work  is  now  again  issued,  in  a  con-
densed form,  in  two  volumes  ;  with  an  additional  supplemental
volume,  the  fruit  of  a  second  visit  to  the  Holy  Land  in  A.  D.  1852.

This  compression  of  the  original  work  has  been  effected,
partly  by  a  different  style  of  printing,  and  partly  by  the  omis-
sion of  portions  of  the  former  Appendix  and  Notes.  The  Text
remains  unchanged ;  except  the  few  corrections  necessarily  in-
cident to  such  a  work.  The  chief  portions  thus  omitted  are :
the  Memoir  on  the  Maps ;  the  Essay  on  the  Pronunciation  of
the  Arabic ;  and  the  Arabic  Lists  of  Names  of  Places.  These
latter  are  important  to  the  scholar;  but  not  to  the  general
reader.  It  has  therefore  been  thought  best,  to  have  these  Lists
carefully  corrected  and  enlarged,  and  then  printed  as  a  separate
work  at  Beirut,  under  the  personal  supervision  of  the  Rev.  Eli
Smith,  D.  D.

For  a  like  reason,  no  Arabic  type  has  been  used  in  the
Index  of  Names ;  care  being  taken  to  have  the  con-esponding
system  of  notation  fully  carried  out  in  that  Index.  The  reader
will  find  more  on  this  topic  in  the  Preface  to  the  new  volume.

In  respect  also  to  the  Maps  and  Plans,  the  reader  is  in  like
manner  referred  to  the  Preface  to  the  new  volume.
Vol.  I.— a*

vi  ADVERTISEMENT.

The  corrections  and  additions  to  the  original  work  are  few,
but  not  unimportant.  Notes  have  been  added  at  the  end  of
Yol.  I,  on  the  position  of  Israel  at  Sinai,  on  Jebel  Serbal,  and
6n  the  Sinaitic  Inscriptions.  Ancient  Geha  is  now  identified
with  Jeba' ;  Giheah  of  Benjamin  is  recognised  at  Tuleil  el-Ful;
while  Oj)hrah,  JEphron,  and  Ephraim,  as  being  probably  one
and  the  same,  are  fixed  at  Taiyibeh.  The  historical  evidence  is
also  given  of  the  identity  of  EleutherojpoUs  with  Beit  Jibrin ;
and  a  new  marginal  note  enumerates  the  reasons  for  not  seek-
ing Kadesh-harnea  in  the  high  western  desert.

The  publication  of  the  Biblical  Reseakches  was  received
with  unexpected  favour.  In  1842,  the  Royal  Geographical
Society  of  London  awarded  to  it  their  Patron's  Gold  Medal.
The  voice  of  approbation  and  kindness  came  up  from  the
scholars  of  Great  Britain  and  Germany,  from  the  Old  world,  as
well  as  from  the  ]S"ew  ;  and  the  volumes  have  been  permitted
to  take  rank  as  a  standard  work  in  relation  to  the  Holy  Land.
All  this  was  wholly  unanticipated  by  the  author,  and  demands
his  grateful  acknowledgments.

Not  unmindful  of  the  obligations  thence  resulting,  the
author  now  lays  before  the  Cliristian  public  the  present  work,
comprising  the  observations  made  during  his  two  visits  to  the
Holy  Land.  It  is  his  completed  work ;  it  constitutes  a  con-
nected whole  ;  and  is  therefore  issued  in  a  permanent  form.

May  the  Great  Head  of  the  Cliurch  cause  these  volumes
Btill  further  to  subserve  the  high  intei-ests  of  Biblical  learning
and  religious  truth !

Kew  York,  July,  1856.

PREFACE

TO  THE  ORIGINAL  WORK.

The  occasion,  the  motives,  and  the  manner  of  the  journey,
of  which  these  vohimes  contain  the  history,  are  sufficiently  de-
tailed at  the  beginning  and  close  of  the  introductory  Section.
It  remains  here  only  to  speak  of  the  form,  in  which  the  materials
have  been  wrought  up.

It  was  my  original  plan,  to  present  to  the  public  only  the
results  of  our  researches  in  Palestine,  without  any  reference  to
personal  incidents.  But  the  advice  of  friends,  whose  judgment
I  could  not  but  place  above  my  own,  was  averse  to  such  a
course.  I  have  therefore  everywhere  interwoven  the  personal
narrative ;  and  have  endeavoured  so  to  do  it,  as  to  exhibit  the
manner  in  which  the  Promised  Land  unfolded  itself  to  our  eyes,
and  the  processes  by  which  we  were  led  to  the  conclusions  and
opinions  advanced  in  this  work.  In  all  this  there  is  at  least  one
advantage  for  the  public.  As  we  venture  to  hope,  that  these
volumes  contain  a  considerable  amount  of  new  information  upon
the  historical  topography  of  Palestine,  this  course  will  enable
the  reader  better  to  judge  of  the  opportunities  for  observation
enjoyed  by  the  travellers,  as  well  as  of  the  credibility  of  their
testimony  and  the  general  accuracy  of  their  conclusions.  In
all  these  particulars,  we  have  no  desire  to  shun  the  closest
scrutiny.

A  similar  doubt  existed  for  a  time,  in  respect  to  the  form  of
narrative  to  be  adopted ;  whether  a  full  and  regularly  arranged
account  of  each  object  in  succession,  as  in  the  works  of  Pococke
and  Niebuhr;  or  a  daily  journal,  like  those  of  Maundrell  and

viii

PREFACE.

Burckhardt.  I  chose  the  latter,  for  a  reason  similar  to  that
already  assigned,  viz.  that  in  this  way  the  reader  is  better  able
to  follow  the  process  of  inquiry  and  conviction  in  the  traveller's
own  mind.  It  is,  however,  an  evil  necessarily  incident  to  this
form,  that  remarks  upon  one  and  the  same  object  sometimes
occur  in  different  places,  instead  of  being  brought  together  as
parts  of  a  whole.  Thus,  in  regard  to  the  Horeb  of  the  present
day,  the  probable  place  of  the  giving  of  the  law,  the  order  of
time  has  led  me  first  to  speak  of  it  as  it  appeared  on  our  ap-
proach ;  again,  as  we  measured  the  plain  and  took  bearings  of
the  mountains  around ;  and  then,  once  more,  in  connection  with
our  visit  to  its  summit.  In  like  manner,  at  Beit  Jibrin,  the
ancient  Eleutheropolis,  which  we  examined  at  two  different
times,  various  objects  of  interest  are  naturally  described  under
each  visit.  Yet  it  seems  to  me,  that  this  is  not  an  evil  of  suffi-
cient magnitude,  to  counterbalance  the  general  advantages  of
the  journal  form.

Another  more  important  change  of  the  original  plan,  arose
during  the  progi-ess  of  the  work,  which  has  had  the  effect,  not
only  to  enlarge  the  size,  but  also  to  increase  the  labour  of  pre-
paration more  than  fourfold.  I  mean  the  introduction  of  his-
torical illustrations,  and  the  discussion  of  various  points  relating
to  the  historical  topography  of  the  Holy  Land.  My  first  pur-
pose was  merely  to  describe  what  we  saw,  leaving  the  reader
to  make  his  own  application  of  the  facts.  But  as  I  proceeded,
questions  continually  arose,  which  I  could  not  pass  over  without
at  least  satisfying  my  own  mind ;  this  sometimes  led  to  long
courses  of  investigation  ;  and  when  I  had  thus  arrived  at  satis-
factory conclusions,  it  seemed  almost  like  a  neglect  of  duty
towards  the  reader,  not  to  embody  them  in  the  work.  Most  of
these  were  topics  relating  to  the  geography  of  the  Bible,  and
intimately  connected  with  its  interpretation  ;  and  I  remembered
too,  that  they  had  never  been  discussed  by  any  one,  who  had
himself  visited  the  Holy  Land.

One  branch  of  these  historical  investigations,  which  I  cannot
but  consider  as  important  for  the  future  geographer  and  travel
ler,  presents  a  field  comparatively  untrodden.  I  refer  to  the
mass  of  topographical  tradition,  long  since  fastened  upon  the
Holy  Land  by  foreign  ecclesiastics  and  monks,  in  distinction
from  the  ordinary  tradition  or  preservation  of  ancient  names

PREFACE.

ix

among  the  native  population.  The  general  view  which  I  have
taken  of  this  subject,  and  the  principles  on  which  we  acted  in
our  inquiries,  are  sufficiently  exhibited  in  the  beginning  of  Sec.
VII.  This  view  has  been  silently  carried  out  in  the  subsequent
parts  of  the  work ;  and  the  attempt  made  to  point  out,  in  most
cases,  not  only  what  is  truth  and  what  is  mere  legendary  tradi-
tion, but  also  to  show  how  far  the  latter  reaches  back.*

As  here  presented  to  the  public,  these  volumes  may  there-
fore be  said  to  exhibit  an  historical  review  of  the  Sacred  Geog-
raphy of  Palestine,  since  the  times  of  the  New  Testament ;
pointing  out  under  each  place  described,  how  far  and  in  what
period  it  has  hitherto  been  known.  This  applies  however,  in
strictness,  only  to  the  parts  of  the  country  examined  by  us ;
although  these  include,  in  a  certain  sense,  nearly  the  whole  of
Palestine  west  of  the  Jordan.

.  A  point  to  which  we  gave  particular  attention,  was  the  or-
thography of  Arabic  names,  both  in  Arabic  and  Eomau  letters.
In  respect  to  the  former,  my  companion,  Mr  Smith,  had  already
made  some  preparation  for  our  journey,  by  obtaining  the  names
of  places  in  many  of  the  provinces  and  districts,  written  by  edu-
cated natives.  These  lists  were  aftei'wards  verified  and  correct-
ed from  various  sources,  as  well  as  by  himself  on  visiting  the
respective  districts.  The  remtJining-  names  were  written  down
by  him  from  the  pronunciation  of  the  Arabs,  with  great  care,
and  according  to  the  est^iblishcd  rules  of  the  language.  In  the
region  of  Mount  Sinsi  and  Wady  Musa,  we  had  the  benefit  of
Bm-ckhardt's  orthography,  which  was  found  to  be  usually,
though  not  always,  correct.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that
Burckhardt  is  hitherto  the  only  Frank  traveller  in  Syria,  who
has,  to  any  extent,  given  us  Arabic  names  written  with  Arabic
letters."

In  this  connection,  we  could  not  but  feel  the  want  of  a  ree:u-
lar  system  of  orthography  for  the  same  names,  when  written
with  Lati^  letters.  Scarcely  a  trace  of  such  a  system  can  be
said  to  iave  existed  hitherto,  except  in  individual  works.  The
Bubjecc  was  brought  before  the  general  meeting  of  the  Syrian

A  paragraph  on  the  different  epochs  of  on  the  great  map  of  Palestine  by  Jacotin,

this  tradition  has  been  transferred  irom  this  and  also  those  in  the  Travels  of  Scholz

place  to  the  beginning  of  Sec.  VII.  p.  254.  are  so  very  incorrect,  as  to  form  no  ex-

'  The  names  written  in  Arabic  letters  ception  to  the  above  remarl-.

z

PREFACE.

mission  at  Jerusalem ;  and  after  long  consideration,  it  was  re-
solved to  adopt,  in  general,  the  system  proposed  by  Mr  Picker-
ing for  the  Indian  languages,'  with  such  modifications  as  might
be  necessary  in  adapting  it  to  the  oriental  tongues.  Two  mo-
tives led  to  a  preference  of  this  system ;  first,  its  own  intrinsic
merits  and  facility  of  adaptation  ;  and  secondly,  the  fact,  that  it
was  already  extensively  in  use  throughout  Europe  and  the
United  States,  in  writing  the  aboriginal  names  in  North  Ameri-
ca and  the  South  Sea  Islands ;  so  that  by  thus  adopting  it  for
the  oriental  languages,  a  uniformity  of  orthography  would  be
secured  among  the  missions,  and  also  in  the  publications,  of  the
American  Board.*

In  furtherance  of  the  same  general  object,  my  friend  took
pains  to  exhibit,  in  a  short  but  very  clear  Essay,  the  principles
which  govern  the  pronunciation  of  the  spoken  Arabic  at  the
present  day.^  This  was  highly  acceptable  to  Arabic  scholars.
It  was  printed  in  the  Appendix  to  the  last  volume ;  and  was
there  followed  by  the  Lists  of  Arabic  names  of  places  above
referred  to,  which  are  more  fully  described  at  the  beginning  of
Sec.  IX.  The  Arabic  orthography  of  all  the  names  occurring
in  the  text,  was  likewise  given  in  an  alphabetical  Index  at  the
close  of  the  work.  •

The  maps  were  drawn,  xmder  my  own  inspection,  by  Kiepert,
a  young  scholar  of  great  talent  and  promise  in  Berlin.  In  the
parts  of  the  country  visited  or  se^jn  by  us,  they  were  constructed
almost  solely  from  our  own  routes  and  observations  and  the  in-
formation we  were  able  to  collect,  brought  into  connection  with
known  and  fixed  points.  The  other  portions  Merc  supplied  from
the  best  authorities,  viz.  the  form  and  shores  of  the  gulfs  of  the
Red  Sea,  from  the  chart  of  Capt.  Moresby ;  the  country  south
of  "Wady  Miisa  and  parts  of  Sinai,  so  far  as  known,  from  La-
borde,  with  corrections  from  Burckhardt  and  Euppell ;  the
coast  of  Palestine,  as  far  north  as  to  'Akka,  and  the  country
around  Nazareth,  from  the  great  map  of  Jacotin,  conspiled  from

'  "  Ensay  mi  a  uniform  Orthography  for  '  In  a  few  Arabic  names  and  vords  ol-

the  Indian  Lanes  hove

mostly  bf^en  re  lui-ed  to  writing  accorJiug  liere  and  furtlier  on  been  introduced,
to  this  simple  system.

PREFACE.

surveys  made  during  the  French  expedition  in  A.  D.  1799  ;  the
positions  on  the  coast  being  corrected  from  later  asti'onomical
observations.'  The  small  portion  given  of  the  country  east  of
the  Jordan,  was  reconstructed  from  the  routes  and  observations
of  Burckhardt,  compared  -with  those  of  Seetzen,  Irby  and  Man-
gles, and  a  few  others  of  less  importance.  The  whole  of  Mount
Lebanon  north  of  Sidon,  was  drawn  from  manuscript  maps  of
Prof.  Ehrenberg  of  Berlin,  and  of  the  Rev.  Mr  Bird  formerly  of
the  American  Mission  in  Syria,  kindly  commrmicated  to  me  for
that  purpose.  The  map  of  the  former  was  used  by  Berghaus ;
those  of  the  latter  had  never  been  brought  before  the  public.

In  the  construction  of  the  maps,  it  was  a  main  principle,  to
admit  no  name  nor  position  on  mere  conjecture,  nor  without
some  sufficient  positive  authority.  Where  a  place  was  known
to  exist,  though  its  position  was  not  definitely  ascertained,  it  was
marked  as  uncertain.  The  operation  of  this  principle  was,  to
exclude  a  multitude  of  names,  ancient  and  modem,  which  figure
at  random  on  most  maps  of  Palestine.  For  what  is  the  advan-
tage of  multiplying  names,  if  we  know  not  where  they  belong  ?
On  the  other  hand,  I  would  fain  hope,  that  very  much  was
gained  in  truth  and  correctness.  Tlie  orthography  upon  the
maps,  for  the  most  part,  was  reduced  to  our  system.  In  respect
to  several  names,  however,  along  the  coasts  of  the  Red  Sea,  as
well  as  a  very  few  others,  this  was  not  in  my  power  ;  and  they
were  given  in  the  current  orthography.

This  is  all  I  have  to  say  respecting  the  work,  as  here  pre-
sented to  the  public.  "We  wish  it  to  be  regarded  merely  as  a
beginning,  a  first  attempt  to  lay  open  the  treasures  of  Biblical
Geography  and  History  still  remaining  in  the  Holy  Land ;
treasures  which  have  lain  for  ages  unexplored,  and  had  become
80  covered  with  the  dust  and  rubbish  of  many  centuries,  that
their  very  existence  was  forgotten.  "Were  it  in  our  power  again
to  travel  through  that  Land  of  Promise,  with  the  experience
acquired  during  our  former  journey  and  from  the  preparation
of  this  work,  and  furnished  too  with  suitable  instruments,  I
doubt  not  we  should  be  able  to  lay  before  the  Christian  world
results  far  more  important  and  satisfactory.    But  this  high  priv-

1)  The  great  map  of  Jacotin  is  valua-  and  around  Mount  Tabor.     The  other

hie  only  in  the  parts  actually  visited  by  parts  are  worthless,  being  apparently  mere

the  French  engineers,  viz.  along  the  coast  fancy  sketches.
tL8  far  as  to  'Akka,  the  region  of  Nazareth,

PREFACE.

ilege,  I  at  least  can  never  more  hope  to  enjoy.  My  companion,
however,  returns  to  the  seat  of  his  labours  in  Beirut,  taking
with  him  instruments  of  the  best  kind,  in  the  hope  of  being
able  during  his  occasional  journeys  to  verify  or  cori-ect  our
former  observations,  and  also  to  extend  his  examination  over
other  jiarts  of  the  country.  I  trust  that  I  may  yet  be  the  me-
dium of  communicating  many  of  his  further  observations  to  the
public  ;  and  that  in  this  way,  if  God  will,  we  may  still  be  active
together,  .in  promoting  the  study  and  illustration  of  the  Holy
Scriptxires.  Should  my  life  be  spared,  I  hope  to  be  enabled  to
use  all  the  materials  thus  collected  by  us  both,  for  the  prepara-
tion of  a  systematic  work  on  the  physical  and  historical  geogra-
phy of  the  Holy  Land.

The  manuscript  of  this  work  was  wholly  prepared  in  Berlin ;
where,  in  the  unrestricted  use  of  that  noble  institution,  the
Royal  Library,  and  of  the  very  valuable  private  collections  of
Hitter,  l»[eander,  and  Hengstenberg,  I  had  access  to  all  the  lit-
erary means  I  could  desire.  For  all  these  privileges,  and  for
other  aid  from  many  friends,  my  best  thanks  are  due.  How
much  I  owe  besides  to  the  advice  and  unwearied  kindness  of  Rit-
TEK,  I  need  not  say  to  those  who  know  him  ;  the  many  months
of  cherished  intercourse  to  which  his  friendship  admitted  me,
will  ever  remain  among  the  brightest  recollections  of  my  life.

The  manuscript  was  completed  in  August  1840.  Soon  after
that  time,  the  intervention  of  the  European  powers  caused  Pal-
estine once  more  to  revert  to  th^  sway  of  the  Sultan  ;  and  the
Egyptian  dominion  over  it  came  to  an  end.  But  I  see  no  rea-
son to  change  anything  I  have  written  ;  and  the  Avork  may
stand  as  a  record  of  the  aspect  of  the  land,  during  the  period  of
its  subjection  to  the  niler  of  Egypt.

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  be  able  to  add,  that  the  whole  of  the
manuscript  was  looked  through  by  my  companion  Mr  Smith ;
and  thus  received  the  benefit  of  his  corrections.

With  humble  gratitude  to  God,  I  here  bring  this  work  to  a
close.  It  is  the  fruit  of  studies  and  plans  of  life  running  back
for  nearly  twenty  years ;  and  for  the  last  four  years,  it  has
occupied,  more  or  less  exclusively,  well  nigh  all  my  M'aking
hours.  May  He,  who  has  thus  far  sustained  me,  make  it  useful
for  the  elucidation  of  His  truth  1

New  York,  June  1841.

ORTHOGRAPHY  AND  PRONUNCIATION  OF
ARABIC  NAMES  AND  WORDS.

Thronghout  the  whole  work  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  imitate  the
native  pronunciation  in  European  characters,  according  to  certain  definite
principles.  For  the  full  development  of  the  system,  the  reader  is  referred  to
Dr  Smith's  Essay  on  the  Pronunciation  of  the  Arabic,  printed  in  the  former
edition  of  this  work.  Vol.  III.  App.  pp.  89-111.  The  following  summary  ex-
hibits the  powers  given  to  the  different  Koman  consonants  and  vowels,  as
xised  for  this  purpose.

As,  however,  such  a  system  is  of  little  importance  to  the  general  reador,
it  is  fully  carried  out  only  in  the  first  Index ;  to  which  the  scholar  is  in
all  cases  referred,  for  the  correct  representation  of  the  Arabic  forms  and
pronunciation.

CONSONANTS.

b      represents  V_>  Be.

d    4>  Dal.

4  .....  \jO  Dad.

dh    Dhal ;  like  th  in  1M»,  then.

dh    Jb  Dha;  rarely  \jb  Did.

f    O  Fe.

g    ^  Jim  hard,  as  in  Egypt.

gh   ^  Ghain,  pron.  best  like  g  hard.

h    5  He.

^    c

j    ^  Jim  soft,  as  in  Syria,

k    (J  Kaf.

k    L5  Kaf  guttural

kh   ^  Khe  ;  sounded  nearly  like  the  Swiss-German  ch.

1    J  Lam.

m    I*  Mim.

n    ^  Nun.

t    rolling,  and  stronger  than  the  English  r.

■    \ju  Sin ;  always  sharp,  as  in  son.

I  yjO  Sad.

Vol.  I._B

xiv  ARABIC  OETHOGRAPHY  AND  PEONUNCIATION.

eh  represents  jjlw  SMn.

t    «y  Te.

%    Js  Ta.

th      MONET.

I.  The  Meastjbk  of  Distauok  is  usually  reckoned  by  hours,  the  length
of  which  varies  with  the  kind  of  animal,  and  also  according  to  the  nature  of
the  ground.  As  a  general  average  the  following  specification  in  miles  has
been  found  most  correct  and  convenient :

Geog.  M.   Stat  M.   Eom.  M.   Germ.  M.
1  Hour,  with  Camels  =2  2i         2i  i

1     "     with  Horses  or  Mules     =    2.4       2i         3.  f

In  1852  we  travelled  with  our  own  horses,  and  often  without  luggage;  so
that  an  average  rate  in  that  year  may  be  reckoned  at  about  3  English  statute
miles  the  hour.

FoTE.  The  measures  of  heights  are  sometimes  given  in  French  feet.
The  French  foot  contains  144  lines,  of  which  135  are  equal  to  an  English  foot.
The  proportion  of  the  English  foot  to  the  French  is  therefore  as  15  to  16.

n.  The  common  Measure  of  Lijro  is  the  Fedd&n  (yoke),  which  is  very
indefinite  and  variable.  In  general  it  may  be  compared  with  the  English
acre  and  German  Morgen.

ni.   CoEN  Measures  are  the  following:

1  Ardeb  is  equivalent,  very  nearly,  to  five  English  bushels.

1  Sitba'  is  the  twenty -fourth  part  of  an  Ardeb.

1  Mid  (measure)  in  Palestine  contains  twelve  Ruba's.

xvi

SPEIGHTS.  MONEY.

IV.  Weights.

1  Rutl  or  pound  is  in  general  about  a  quarter  of  an  ounce  less  than
the  English  pound  avoirdupois ;  hut  it  is  sometimes  also  reck-
oned only  at  12  oz.

1  VTchah  (called  by  the  Franks  Oke)  is  about  2J  lbs  English.

1  Kuntdr,  or  hundred-weight,  contains  100  Sutlt.

MONEY.

Monet  is  everywhere  reckoned  by  Piastres;  but  the  value  of  these  is
fluctuating,  and  has  greatly  depreciated  since  about  1820.

1  piastre  contains  40  Fuddahs,  called  in  Turkish  paraTts,
10  piastres  were  equivalent  in  1838  to  1  Austrian  florin.

20  "  "  "   to  1  Austrian  or  American  dollar.

21  "  "  "   to  1  Spanish  pillared  dollar.
100      "                  "  "    about  1  pound  sterling.

1  Kis  or  purse  is  500  piastres,  or  about  $25  or  5f  sterling.
At  Constantinople  in  1838  the  Spanish  dollar  (colonnato)  was  worth
23  piastres,  and  the  other  coins  in  proportion.

In  1852  the  American  and  Austrian  dollar  was  current  in  Smyrna  and  in
Palestine  at  24  piastres.  This  was  the  regular  rate  of  exchange  then  followed
by  the  Austrian  steamers.

For  the  Measures,  Weights,  and  Moneys  of  Egypt,  to  which  those
of  Syria  are  similar,  see  Lane's  Modern  Egyptians,  11.  p.  370  sq.  edit.  1.

FOR  THE  READER.

Throughout  Vols.  I  and  11,  a  reference  is  given,  at  the  bottom  of  each
page,  to  the  corresponding  pages  of  the  first  edition. — In  this  way  the  many
references  made  in  various  works  to  the  first  edition,  are  rendered  available
also  for  the  present  edition.

CONTENTS.

Advertisement       .......  Page  v

Pekfaoe  to  the  oeiginal  "Woek        ....  v^'i

Oethogeapht  and  Peonxjnciation  of  Aeabio  Names  and  Woeds  xiii
Measueks,  "Weights,  and  Monet  .  .         .         .         .  xv

For  the  Eeadee        .         ...         .        •        .  xvi

SECTION  I.

Inteoduction. — Geeece  aud  Egypt.
Pages  1-33.

Original  plan  of  the  journey ;  arrangement  wltb  Rev.  Eli  Smith,  1.  His  qualifi-.
cations,  1,  2. — Departure  from  New- York,  2.  England  and  Germany ;  early  win-
ter, 2.  Trieste,  steamers,  embarkation,  2,  3.  Ancona,  the  Adriatic,  Corfu,  3,  4.
Theaki,  Ithaca,  4.    Patras,  5.    Coast  of  Maina,  5,  6.    Approach  to  Attica,  6.

Greece.  The  Piraeus,  6. — Athens,  6.  Acropolis  and  Areopagus,  7.  Paul's
preaching,  7,  8.  The  Pnyx  and  Demosthenes,  8.  The  Academy,  Hymettus  and  its
honey,  9.  Sunrise  at  the  Parthenon,  9,  10.  Character  of  the  Greek  people,  10,  11.
— Correspondence  with  Mr  Smith,  11.  Syra,  11,  12.  Crete,  Canea,  12,  13.  Ap-
proach to  Alexandria,  13.

Egypt.  Escape  from  quarantine,  13,  14.  Landing,  motley  crowd,  14.  Lodg-
ings, 14.  Ancient  city,  15.  Column  of  Diocletian,  15.  Mode  of  travelling,  15,  16.
The  canal  and  boats,  16.  The  Nile  and  its  waters,  17.  Voyage,  17.  Lodgings  .at
Cairo,  difficulties,  17,  18.  Habib  Effendi  and  his  audience,  18.  Arab  procrastina-
tion, 18.  Voyage  up  the  Nile,  its  characteristics,  18,  19.  To  Thebes,  19.  Thebes,  20.
Its  architecture,  21.  Tombs  of  the  Kings,  21.  Sculptures,  e.  g.  Shishak,  22.  Cli-
mate, 23.  Return  to  Cairo,  23.  The  city,  23,  24.  Roda,  Old  Cairo,  24.  Heliopolis,
24.  Mounds  of  the  Jews,  25.  Pyramids  of  Glzeh,  25-27.  Sakkara,  mummy-pits,  27.
Memphis,  its  mounds,  27. — Muhammed  'Aly,  27.  His  conscriptions,  28.  Forced  civil-
ization, 28.  The  people  made  slaves,  as  of  old  by  Pharaoh,  28,  29.  Safety  in  travel-
ling, 29.  Imitated  by  the  Sultan,  30.  Important  changes  to  be  expected  in  the
East,  31.

Long  cherished  purpose  of  the  journey,  31.    Instruments,  32.    Journals,  32.
Books  and  Maps,  32,  33.
Vol.  I._B*

xviii

CONTENTS,

SECTION  II.

Fbom  Caieo  to  Suez.
Pages  84-59.

Preparations,  34.  Tent  and  beds,  34.  Provisions,  34.  Servants,  35.  Arms,  36.
Costume,  35.  Finnan,  36.  Camels,  36.  Contract,  curious  mode  of  sealing,  36.
Distinction  of  camel  and  dromedary,  37.  Routes  to  Suez,  37. — March  \2th.  Depart-
ure from  Cairo,  37,  38.  Kaid  Beg,  38.  Petrified  wood,  38.  Wadys,  what,  38.  The
Arabs  happy  in  the  desert,  39.  Encampment,  39. — March  13.  Various
Wadys,  70.  Gazelles,  71.  Bedawy  and  Indian  habits,  71.  Wady  Taiyibeh,  71,  72.
Country  further  south,  72.  Route  of  the  Israelites,  72.  Led  down  this  valley,  72.
Did  not  all  march  in  one  body,  73.  General  deficiency  of  water,  73.  Their  fur-
ther route,  73.

We  follow  up  Wady  Humr,  73.    Sarbiit  el-Jemol,  74.    Inscriptions  74.  Rain-

CONTENTS.

water,  75.  Mimosa  (Tulh,  Seyal)  in  the  Wadys,  15.— March  2\st.  Jebel  Wiitih,  75.
Fountain  of  Nisb,  75.  View  of  Jebel  et-Tih,  76.  Three  passes  through  it,  76.  Turn
off  to  Sunibit  el  Khadim,  77.  Mysterious  Egyptian  remains  and  monuments,  78-80.
Wady  Suwuk,  80  Mountain-goat  (Beden),  80.  Arab  feast  and  disappointment,  80,
%\.— March  22d.  Wady  Khiimileh,  81.  Arab  cemetery,  81.  Wady  el-Burk,  82.
Camel  gives  out,  82.  Battle  and  defeat  of  the  Tawarah,  82,  83.  Wady  Lebweh,  83.
Encampment  of  Sheikh  Salih,  83.  Cemetery,  84.  Wady  Berah,  inscriptions,  8i.
Encamp,  84.  Plants,  84. — March  23d.  Difficulties  of  an  early  start,  85.  Inscrip-
tions, 85.  Projecting  veins  of  rock,  like  walls,  85.  Old  cemetery,  85.  View  of
Mount  Serbal,  86.  Meet  Tuweilcb,  86.  Routes  to  Sinai,  86.  Approach  to  the  outer
cliffs  of  Sinai,  87.  Pass,  Nukb  Hawy,  87,  88.  View  of  (modem)  Horeb,  88,  89.
Plain  er-Rahah  in  front,  89.  Wady  Shu'eib  CJethro),  with  the  convent,  89.  Wady
el-Leja,  89.  Excitement  of  Besharah,  prayer  for  rain,  90.  Arrival  and  reception  at
the  convent,  90,  91.    Rooms,  91,  92.    Geographical  position,  92.

March  2ith.  Wady  Shu'eib,  92.  The  convent-buildings,  92,  93.  The  garden,  93.
Sheikh  Husein,  94.  Topography  of  the  region  and  measurement  of  the  plain,  94-96.
— March  25th.  Sunday  in  the  convent,  divine  service,  96.  Breakfast  with  the  monks,
97.  The  great  church  and  the  chapel  of  the  Bush,  97,  98.  Cells  and  rooms  of  the
convent,  98.    Library,  99.    Charnel-house,  99,  100.    Severity  of  Lent,  100.

March  26th.  Ascent  of  Jebel  Musa,  100-107.  Our  party;  the  superior  goes  with
ns,  100,  101.  No  regular  ascent  by  steps,  101.  Chapel  of  the  Virgin,  and  legend  of
the  fleas,  etc.  102.  Portals,  102.  First  sight  of  the  summit,  and  of  St.  Catharine,  103.
Well  and  cypress,  103.  Character  of  this  spot,  103.  Chapels  of  Elijah  and  Elisha,
103.  Reach  the  summit,  104.  Chapel;  travellers'  names,  104.  Elevation,  104.
Disappointment;  this  not  the  place  where  the  law  was  given,  and  affords  no  wide
prospect,  104-106.  Descent  to  the  well ;  appearance  of  rain,  106.  Visit  the  front  of
Horeb,  chapels,  106.  Ascend  Ras  es-Sufsafeh,  106,  107.  View,  probable  place
where  the  Law  was  given,  107.  Descent  to  el-Arba'in,  107.  Name  and  condition  of
this  convent,  108.    Lodgings,  respect  paid  to  superior,  108.

March  276n,  440,
441.  Valley,  scene  of  Jonathan's  adventure,  441.  Mukhm:i.s,  Mifhmngh,  442.  Deir
Duwan,  442,  443.  Way  to  Taiyibeh,  44.3,  444.  Taiyibch,  444-447.  Ilosiiit.ality,
the  Mcd.'ifch  or  inn,  445.  Restless  night,  446.  Population  and  ta.xes,  446.  Probably
Ophra,  Ephrua,  and  also  Ki/hraim,  447.

CONTENTS.

xxvii

May  5th.  Way  to  Beitin,  447,  448.  El-'Alya,  447.  BeitJn,  Bethel,  448-451.
Ruins  of  churches  at  some  distance,  448.  Ruins  and  spacious  reservoir,  448,  449.
Breakfast;  milk  and  fine  butter,  449.  Historical  Notices,  449-451.  El-Bireh,
Beeroth,  451-453.  Ram-Allah,  a  Christian  village,  453,  454.  Arab  schoolmaster,
454.  A  quarrel,  454.  El-Jlb,  Gibeon,  454-457.  Position  and  remains,  455.  His-
torical Notices,  455-457.  Neby  Samwil,  457-460.  Pretended  tomb  of  Samuel,  457.
Prospect,  458.  Not  the  Ramah  of  Samuel,  458-460.  Hist,  of  the  tradition,  452.
Probably  Mizpeh,  460.  Wady  Beit  Hanina,  460,  461.  Return  to  Jerusalem,  461.
—Notice  of  Kfilonieh,  461.  Horses  for  hire,  462.  Saddles,  etc.  462.  Rate  of
travel,  462.

Results  highly  gratifying,  462,  463.  Approach  of  Sennecharib,  as  described  by
Isaiah,  463.  Nob,  464.  Many  present  names  doubtless  of  Hebrew  origin,  464,  465.
Same  name  in  several  places,  465.

SECTION  X.

EXCUESION  TO  'AiN  JiDY,  THE  DeAD  SeA,  THE  JoEDAN,  ETC.

Pages  466-580.

Short  stay  in  Jerusalem,  466.  Insecurity  of  these  districts,  466.  Procure  guides
from  the  alleged  robbers,  467. — 8lh.  Difficulty  with  the  Mukariyeh,  468.  Mes-
sage to  the  governor,  468.  Departure,  469.  Rachel's  tomb,  469.  Pretended  well  of
David,  470.  Aqueduct  from  Solomon's  Pools,  470.  Bethlehem,  470-473.  Meet  an
armed  party  of  Bedawin,  470.    Hist.  Notices,  471.    Character  of  present  inhabitants,

472.  Disarming  of  the  people,  472.    Illustration  of  "  spreading  garments  in  the  way,"

473.  Reflections,  473.  Wells  over  the  aqueduct,  473.  Way  to  the  Pools,  474.  Meas-
urements, 474,  475.  Supply  of  water,  475,  476.  Way  to  the  Frank  mountain,  Urtas,
Etam?  477.  Sheep  of  Palestine,  477.  Appearance  of  the  Frank  mountain,  478.
Ruins  of  an  ancient  fortress  at  the  top,  478.  Prospect,  478,  479.  Name  and  legend,
479.  Probably  ancient  Herodimn,  480.  Perhaps  also  Bcth-haccerem,  480,  481.  Wady
Khureitun  and  cavern,  481.  Encampment  of  the  Ta'amirah,  482.  Character  of  the
tribe,  482.  Sheikh  Muhammed  the  Khatib,  our  guide,  483.  Visit  from  the  Sheikh  of
the  Jehalin,  484.

May  9th.  Bedawin  camp  and  flocks,  484,  485.  Baking  and  churning,  485.
Grinding  with  the  hand-mill,  485.  Tekua,  Tekoa,  its  ruins,  etc.  486,  487.  Our
further  course,  487,  488.  Bir  ez-Za'feraneh,  488.  Great  Wady  el  Khiilil,  489.  Gen-
eral character  of  the  region,  489.  Beni  Na'im,  mosk  and  village,  489-491.  Exten-
sive view,  490.  Probably  the  Caphar  Barucha  of  Jerome,  490.  Further  course,  490.
Zif,  Ziph,  492.  Plain  west  of  Kurmul,  492.  "  Plucking  the  ears  of  com,"  493.  Way
to  Kurmul,  Canael,  493.  Proceed  to  Ma'in,  Moon,  493.  Peasants  from  Yutta,  timid,
493. — May  \Qth.  View  from  Ma'in,  including  nine  ancient  places,  493-495.  Impres-
sion of  the  peasants  that  the  Franks  will  come  and  take  possession,  495. — Return
to  Cannel ;  its  remains,  495,  496.  Castle,  496.  Hist.  Notices,  497.  Scene  of  Da-
vid's adventure  with  Nabal,  498.  Similarity  of  personal  manners  at  the  present
day,  498.

Proceed  eastwards  towards  the  Dead  sea,  498.  Camp  of  the  Ka'abineh,  499.
Descent  great ;  coimtry  becomes  desert,  499,  500.    Beden,  "  wilderness  of  En-gedi,"

xxvm

CONTENTS.

500.  Continual  disappointment,  501.     First  view  of  Dead  sea  in  its  deep  chasm,

501,  502.  General  character,  peninsula  and  shoals,  501.  Hajr  Usdum,  502.  Moun-
tains and  general  impression,  502,  503.  Descent  of  the  pass,  503.  Optical  illusion
of  an  island,  503,  504.  Fountain  of  'Ain  Jidy,  504.  Alarm,  504.  Trees,  plants,  and
thicket  helow  the  fountain,  505.  Descent  to  the  shore ;  rich  plain  with  gardens  of
caicumberg,  505,  506.  Water  of  the  sea,  its  appearance  and  buoyancy,  506,  507.
Driftwood,  507.  Measurements,  507.  Climate,  507.  Ancient  En-gedi ;  Historical
Notices,  508.

The  Dead  Sea,  509-524.  Length  and  breadth,  509. — Form  and  character  of  the
shores,  510.  Phenomena,  511,  512.  Mineral  productions,  512.  Depression  of  the
level  of  the  sea,  513. — Character  of  the  waters,  513.  Analyses,  514,  515.  Level  of
the  water  varies,  515.  Deposites  of  salt,  515,  516.  Sea  contains  neither  animal  nor
vegetable  life,  516,  517.— Asphaltum,  517.— The  peninsula,  518-521.— The  ford,  52L
— Apples  of  Sodom,  probably  the  'Osher,  522-524.

May  Wth.  Sunrise,  song  of  birds,  524.  Ascent  of  the  pass,  stern  magnificence  of
the  prospect,  524.  Sebbeh,  the  ancient  Masada,  525,  526.  Journey  along  the  west-
ern side  of  the  Dead  sea,  526-533.  The  Rashaideh,  527.  Wady  Derejeh,  528.
Encamp  on  the  clifiF  above  'Ain  Terabeh,  528.  Prospect  of  the  sea,  529.  Circuitous
route,  529.  Great  Arab  road  along  the  sea,  530.  Evening  view,  530. — May  \2th.
Desert  region,  531.  Wady  er-Rahib,  the  continuation  of  the  Kadron,  531.  Ras  el-
Feshkhah  and  view,  531,  532.  Further  N.  the  sea  contracts,  532.  Descent  to  the
shore,  rugged  way,  532.  Horse  falls  from  a  ledge,  532.  Stink-stone,  533.  'Aia
el-Feshkhah,  533.  Proceed  along  the  shore  ;  ripe  berries  of  the  Ghurkud  ;  immense
lizaron  the  way.  With
coftee,  tea,  sugar,  butter,  dried  apricots,  tobacco,  wax-candles,
etc.  we  were  well  supplied.  We  found  the  dried  apricots  quite
a  luxury  in  the  desert ;  and  a  timely  distribution  of  coffee  and
tobacco  among  the  Arabs  is  an  easy  mode  of  winning  their
favour  and  confidence.  We  had  wooden  boxes,  like  those  of  the
Mecca  pilgrims,  for  packing  many  of  the  articles  ;  but  after-
wards abandoned  them  for  small  sacks  and  larger  saddle-bags  of
hair-cloth,  like  those  of  the  Bedawin.  These  proved  to  be  more
advantageous,  as  diminishing  the  bidk  of  the  loads,  and  thus
removing  a  source  of  expense  and  a  cause  of  grumbling  among  the
camel-drivers  and  muleteers.  We  took  also  a  supply  of  charcoal,
which  proved  of  essential  service.

We  hired  two  Egyptian  servants,  who  continued  with  us
all  the  way  to  Beinlt.  The  elder,  whom  we  knew  only  by  the
name  of  Komeh,  (although  that  seemed  not  to  be  his  real  name,)
was  a  fine  resolute  fellow,  fixithful  and  trust-worthy  in  all  he
undertook,  and  ready  to  stand  by  iis  to  the  last  drop  of  blood.
He  spoke  nothing  but  Arabic  ;  had  formerly  been  sent  with  a
missionary  family  to  Abyssinia,  as  their  guide  and  purveyor  ;
and  had  also  been  at  Mecca  ;  for  which  reason  he  was  sometimes
dignified  with  the  title  of  Hajji  Komeh.  The  younger,  Ibrahim,
spoke  a  little  English,  and  answered  our  purpose  well  enough  as
a  helper  to  the  other.

It  was  for  a  time  quite  a  matter  of  dehberation  with  us,
whether  we  should  take  any  arms.  We  knew  that  the  country
was  entirely  safe,  and  arms  unnecessary,  as  far  as  'Akabali,  and
also  in  Palestine  ;  but  as  to  the  desert  tracts  between,  we  were
not  so  sure.  We  might  very  probably  come  in  contact  with  the
lawless  hordes  that  roam  through  those  wastes  ;  and  then  the
mere  shoio  of  arms  would  protect  us  from  annoyance  and
vexations,  which  might  be  attenipted  if  we  were  known  to  be
wholly  unarmed.  On  this  ground  we  purchased  two  old  muskets
and  a  pair  of  old  pistols,  in  which  our  servants  and  Arab  guides
\isually  took  great  pride  ;  and  we  afterwards  had  reason  to  believe
that  we  had  acted  wisely.  It  wiU  of  course  be  understood,  that
we  never  had  a  thought  of  actually  using  these  weapons  for  per-
sonal defence  against  the  Arabs  ;  for  this,  we  knew,  would  only
bring  down  tenfold  vengeance  on  our  heads.

The  time  has  gone  by  when  it  was  necessary  for  a  Frank  to
assume  the  oriental  dress  in  any  part  of  Egypt  or  Syria.  It
may  sometimes  be  convenient  to  do  so,  if  he  is  to  reside  long  in
the  country  ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  mere  traveller,  it  now  only
excites  the  ridicule  of  the  natives.    A  person  in  a  Frank  dress,

i.  50.  51

36

FROM  CAIRO  TO  SUEZ.

[Sec,  n.

■with  a  long  beard,  they  hold  to  he  a  Jew.  We  usually  wore  the
Tarhvsli  or  red  cap  of  the  country,  as  a  matter  of  convenience  ;
but  in  the  desert  a  broad-brimmed  hat  of  light  materials  is  desi-
rable. We  also  took  with  us  each  a  common  Arab  cloak,  to
throw  over  our  Frank  dresses  in  case  of  suspicious  appearances
at  a  distance  ;  but  we  were  never  called  to  use  them  on  any
occasion  of  this  kind.

In  consequence  of  an  application  from  Mr  Gliddon  senior,
we  received  from  the  Pasha  a  Firman,  or  properly  speaking  a
Buyuruldy,  for  our  protection  ;  and  the  English  vice-consul,
Dr  Walne,  was  so  kind  as  to  procure  for  us  a  letter  from  Habib
Effendi  to  the  governor  of  'Akabah,  and  another  from  the  Greek
convent  in  Cairo  to  that  in  Mount  Sinai.  At  the  Enghsh  con-
sulate  we  also  found  Bedawin  from  Sinai ;  many  of  whom  are
continually  in  Cairo  with  their  camels,  and  are  much  employed
in  transporting  coals  from  thence  to  Suez,  for  the  steam-vessels
on  the  Red  Sea.  We  had  wished  to  obtain  Tuwedeb  as  our
guide,  who  has  of  late  years  become  so  well  known  among  trav-
ellers ;  but  he  was  not  then  in  Cairo.  We  therefore,  with  the
help  of  the  English  dragoman,  made  a  contract  for  camels  and
attendants  with  Besharah,  who  had  formerly  accompanied  La-
borde,  and  was  now  grown  into  a  man  of  weight  in  his  tribe,
though  not  a  regular  Sheikh.  After  a  long  talk  and  some
clamour,  the  bargain  was  completed  for  thi-ee  dromedaries  and
live  camels,  at  the  rate  of  one  hundred  and  ninety  piastres  each,
from  Cairo  to 'Akabah;'  it  being  also  agreed  that  TuweUeb
should  accompany  us  from  the  convent.  The  contract  was  im-
mediately written  down  by  an  ordinary  scribe  upon  his  knee,  and
signed  and  sealed  in  a  very  primitive  manner.  Most  of  the
Arabs  of  the  towns  have  each  his  signet-ring,  either  worn  on  the
finger  or  suspended  from  the  neck  ;  the  impression  of  which
serves  as  a  signature  ;  but  the  poor  Bedawy  of  the  desert  com-
monly has  little  to  do  with  such  matters,  and  has  therefore  no
seal.  Instead  of  it,  Besharah  presented  one  of  his  fingers  to  the
dragoman,  who  besmeared  the  tip  of  it  with  ink,  and  then
gravely  impressed  it  upon  the  paper  ;  which  to  him  was  then
doubtless  just  as  binding  as  if  sealed  with  gold  or  jewels.  He
proved  a  very  faithful  and  obHging  conductor,  and  fulfilled  his
contract  honourably.  He  was  of  the  Aulad  Sa'id  or  Sa'idiyeh,
one  of  the  three  divisions  of  the  Tawarah  Arabs  which  have  the
right  of  taking  travellers  to  the  convent,  and  are  reckoned  as

■  Tlie  Spanish  pillared  dollar,  or  colon-  twecn  22  and  23  piastres  ;  and  the  others

nato,  was  then  regularly  worth  in  K,  206.

also  as  inns  for  travellers  passing  between       '  This  gentleman  died  a  year  after-
Europe  and  India ;   see  Kiiniear's  Cairo,  wards  at  Alexandria,
etc.  p.  61. — At  present  (18.")6^  the  route  is       *  An  English  hotel  has  since  been  e»-
travcrsed   with  vans,  which  take   from  tnblished  at  Suez  for  the  benefit  of  pas-
14  to  16  hours.    Seven  station  houses  are  sengers  in  the  steam-vessels.

i.  CO,  G7

Mar.  15.]

SUEZ.

47

being  open  to  the  water  on  the  east,  or  rather  northeast,  where
is  the  harbour  and  a  good  quay.  Here  were  lying  quite  a  num-
ber of  the  Red  Sea  craft,  vessels  of  considerable  size,  with  neat
white  bottoms,  but  with  only  one  mast  and  sail,  and  no  deck
except  over  the  cabin.  The  timber  and  materials  for  all  vessels
built  here,  have  usually  been  brought  from  the  Nile  on  camels.'
Within  the  walls  are  many  open  places,  and  several  Khans  built
around  large  courts.  In  the  large  open  space  connected  with
the  building  occupied  by  the  consulate,  a  beautiful  tame  gazelle
was  running  about,  belonging  to  the  governor,  whose  house  was
adjacent  to  the  same  court.  The  houses  in  general  are  poorly
built.  There  is  a  bazar,  or  street  of  shops,  which  we  found
tolerably  furnished  with  provisions  and  stuffs,  mostly  from  Cairo.
The  inhabitants  consist  of  about  twelve  hundred  Muhammedans
and  one  hundred  and  fifty  Christians  of  the  Greek  church.  The

/    geographical  position  of  Suez  is  in  Lat.  29°  57'  30"  N.  and

*    Long.  32°  35'  E.  from  Greenwich.''

The  transit  of  the  productions  and  merchandise  of  the  east
from  the  Red  Sea  to  the  Nile,  has  always  made  this  an  im-
portant point,  and  caused  the  existence  of  a  city  in  the  vicinity  ;
though  Suez  itself,  as  a  town,  is  of  modern  origin,^  and  has  been
greatly  aided  by  the  concourse  of  pilgrims  who  annually  embark
here  for  Mecca.  The  present  arrangements  for  making  it  the
point  of  communication  between  Europe  and  India  by  means  of
steam-navigation  on  the  Red  Sea,  may  probably  give  to  it  an
impulse,  and  somewhat  enlarge  its  population  ;  but  it  can  never
well  become  any  thing  more  than  a  mere  place  of  passage,  which
both  the  traveller  and  the  inhabitant  wiU  hasten  to  leave  as
soon  as  possible.  The  aspect  both  within  and  without  is  too
desolate  and  dreary.  Not  a  garden,  not  a  tree,  not  a  trace  of
verdure,  not  a  drop  of  fresh  water  ;  a\]  the  water  with  which
Suez  is  supplied  for  personal  use,  being  brought  from  the  foun-
tain Naba',  three  hours  distant  across  the  gulf,  and  so  brackish
as  to  be  scarcely  drinkable.

About  ten  minutes  or  one  third  of  a  mile  north  of  the  town,
is  a  lofty  mound  of  rubbish,  in  which  a  few  substructions  are
visible,  and  frequent  fragments  of  pottery.  It  is  called  Tell
Kolzum.  This  is  doubtless  the  site  of  the  former  city  Kolzum,  so
often  mentioned  by  Arabian  writers  as  the  port  where  fleets
were  built  on  the  Red  Sea.  It  was  the  successor  of  the  Greek
Klysma ;  Kolzum  being  merely  the  Arabic  form  of  the  same  name.^

'  NiebuhrReisebeschr.  I.  p.  218.  Com-  *  Klysma  (KAuo-ytto)  is  mentioned  in
pare  Wilken's  Gesch.  der  Krenzziige,  III.  this  place  by  Cosmas  Iiidicopleustes  so
ii.  p.  223.  late  as  about  A.  D.  530 ;  see  Moutfaucon's

"  Wilkinson's  Handb.  for  Egypt,  p.  209.  Collectio  nova  Patrum,  T.  II.  p.  194.  In
*  See  Kote  YIII,  at  the  end  of  the  vol-    the  council  of  Constantinople,  A.  D.  553,

the  name  of  Stephanus,  bishop  of  Clysma,

i.  b8,  69

48

SUEZ.

[Sec.  n.

The  earlier  city  of  Arsinoe  or  Cleopatris  is  supposed  to  have  stood
somewhere  in  the  vicinity  ;  and  may  perhaps  have  occupied  the
same  spot.'

The  gulf  of  Suez,  as  seen  from  the  adjacent  hills,  presents
the  appearance  of  a  long  strip  of  water,  setting  far  up  like  a
large  river  through  a  desert  valley  of  twenty  or  thirty  miles  in
width  ;  the  shores  skirted  sometimes  by  arid  plains,  and  some-
times interrupted  by  naked  mountains  and  promontories  on
either  side.  The  whole  configuration  reminded  me  strongly  of
the  valley  of  the  Nile  on  a  larger  scale  ;  except  that  there  the
noble  river  bears  fertility  on  its  bosom,  and  scatters  it  abroad  in
lavish  profusion  ;  whUe  here  desolation  reigns  throughout.  The
gulf  becomes  narrower  towards  Suez,  and  terminates  in  a  line
of  coast  extending  from  the  town  westward  nearly  to  Jebel
'Atakah,  a  distance  of  six  or  eight  miles.  Further  south,  this
mountain  runs  quite  down  to  the  sea,  forming  the  promontory
called  Ras  'AtTikah  ;  beyond  which  opens  the  broad  mouth  or
plain  of  Wady  Tawarik  ;  and  then  follows  Jebel  Deraj  or
Kulalah,  and  the  long  chain  of  African  mountains.  On  the  east
side  of  the  gulf,  the  parallel  ridge  of  mountains,  called  er-Riihah,
is  here  twelve  or  fifteen  miles  distant  from  the  coast.  Around
the  head  of  the  gulf,  extensive  shoals  stretch  out  southward  far
into  the  sea,  and  are  left  bare  at  low  water  ;  except  a  narrow
winding  channel  like  a  small  river,  by  which  light  vessels  come
quite  up  to  the  town.  We  saw  these  shoals  twice  while  the
tide  was  out.  They  extend  a  mile  and  a  half  or  two  miles  be-
low Suez  ;  are  quite  level  and  hard,  thinly  covered  with  sea-
weed ;  and  are  composed  apparently  of  sand  mihgled  perhaps  with
coral.  We  saw  persons  walking  upon  them  quite  near  the  south-
ern extremity.  Larger  vessels  and  the  steamers  lie  ofi"  in  the  road
below  these  shoals,  more  than  two  miles  distant  from  the  town.

The  desert  plain  back  of  Suez,  which  has  been  mentioned
above  as  extending  west  as  far  as  to  'Atakah  and  north  to
'Ajrud,  is  composed  for  the  most  part  of  hard  gravel ;  and  is
apparently  of  no  recent  formation,  but  as  old  as  the  adjacent
hills  and  mountains.  Just  at  Suez  a  narrow  arm  of  the  sea  runs
up  northwards,  for  a  considerable  distance,  from  the  northeast
corner  of  the  gulf ;  in  which,  when  we  saw  it,  the  water  ex-
tended up  about  two  miles  ;  but  the  depression  or  bed  of  it
continues  beyond  the  mounds  of  the  ancient  canal,  and  as  far  as

appears  among  the  signers ;  Harduin  Acta  from  Tell  Kolzum  :  Jebel  Mukhsheib  N.

Concilior.  III.  p.  62.    For  Kolzum  see  05^  E.    TAset  Sudr  S.  41°  E.    Jebel 'Ati-

Edrisi  Geogr.  I.  p.  331,  333,  ed.  Jaubert.  kah,  north  peak,  N.  72°  W.  Exti-eme

Abulfeda  in  Biischiiig's  Magazin,  IV.  p.  poiut  of  Kis  'At;"ikah,  S.  26'  W.    End  of

196.    Comp.  Bochart's  Phaleg,  II.  c.  18.  the  shoal  running  out  from  the  eastera

'  The  following  bearings  wore  taken  shore,  S.  1°  W.

L  69,  70

Mar.  15.]

ENVIRONS.

49

the  eye  can  reach.  Opposite  Suez  this  arm  is  about  eleven
hundred  and  fifty  yards  wide  according  to  Niebuhr  ; '  but  higher
up  and  opposite  Tell  Kolzum,  it  is  broader,  and  has  several  low
islands  or  sand-banks,  which  are  mostly  covered  at  high  water.
It  is  4iere  and  around  the  northern  part  of  this  arm,  that  there
are  evident  traces  of  a  gradual  filling  up  of  this  part  of  the  Red
Sea.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  circumstances,  which  go  to  show
that  the  level  of  the  sea  itself  has  been  changed  ;  but  the  change,
if  any,  has  been  brought  about  solely  by  the  drifting  in  of  sand
from  the  northern  part  of  the  great  desert  plain,  which  here  ex-
tends to  the  eastern  mountains.  This  plain  is  ten  mUes  or  more
wide.  Burckhardt  crossed  it  in  1812  in  six  hours  from  the  wells
of  Mab'uk  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  to  the  mounds  of  the
canal ;  and  says  it  was  full  of  "  moving  sands  which  covered  the
plain  as  far  as  he  could  discern,  and  in  some  places  had  collected
into  hills  thirty  or  forty  feet  in  height."^  Such  it  was  as  we
also  saw  it  on  our  left  in  pa,ssing  around  the  head  of  the  bay  ;
and  this  sand,  driven  by  the  strong  nor-theast  wind  which  often
prevails,  is  continually  carried  towards  and  into  the  water,  and
the  process  of  filling  up  is  still  going  on.  There  can  be  little
room  for  doubt,  that  the  islands  above  Suez  were  formed  in  this
manner  ;  since  in  former  days  vessels  probably  lay  at  Kolzum,
which  they  now  cannot  reach.  Around  the  head  of  the  inlet,
there  are  also  obvious  indications,  that  the  water  once  extended
much  further  north,  and  probably  spread  itself  out  over  a  wid,€
tract  towards  the  northeast.  The  ground  bears  every  mark  of
being  stiU  occasionally  overflowed  ;  and  our  Arabs  said  it  was
often  covered  by  the  sea,  especially  in  mnter,  when  the  south
winds  prevail.  The  soil  of  this  part  is  a  fine  sand  like  that  of
the  adjacent  desert,  only  rendered  more  solid  by  the  action  of
the  waves.  In  some  parts  it  was  covered  with  a  saline  crust,,
and  occasionally  exhibited  strips  white  virith  shells.  Whether
the  shoals  south  of  Suez  were  formed  in  the  same  mannerj  it  m
more  difficult  to  decide  ;  though  they  would  seem  now  to  hayts
a  firmer  consistence.

We  were  told  that  the  tide  rises  at  Suez  and  upon  these
shoals  about  seven  English  feet.  According  to  the  French  mjsa-
surements,  the  average  rise  of  the  tides  in  their  time  was^  5  i
Paris  feet,  though  it  sometimes  exceeded  6  feet.  Niebuhr  fow  ^^
it  to  be  only  3^  feet.^  It  must  obviously  vary  much  with,  t  j^e
direction  of  the  wind ;  since  a  strong  wind  from  the  nortJEi'  ^yh
quarter  would  have  the  effect  to  drive  the  tide  out  and  prfev  gnt
its  return  ;  while  a  south  wind  would  produce  the  contra^   ^  re.

>  Reisebeschr.  I.  p.  253.  Mod.  I.  p.  90.    Niebuhr  Beschr.w  Ar«h

»  Travels  in  Syria,  etc  p.,  454.  p.  421  sq.  '  ■

'  Le  Pere  in  Descr.  de  I'Egypte,  Et.

Vol..  1-6  .,72

50

SUEZ.

[Skcl  n.

suits.  Opposite  Suez  there  is  a  ferry  ;  and  higter  up,  at  Tell
Kolzum,  a  ford,  wliicli  is  sometimes  used  at  low  water,  leading
over  two  of  the  sandy  islands.  Niebuhr's  guides  passed  this  ford
on  foot,  and  the  water  came  scarcely  up  to  their  knees. '  An
island  just  below  the  ford  is  called  Jezirat  el- Yehudiyeh,  Jews'
Island  but,  although  we  inquired  particularly,  we  could  not
learn  that  the  ford  itself  is  called  Derb  el-Yehud  or  Jews'  road,
as  reported  by  Ehrenberg.'^  There  is  also  another  ford  south  of
Suez,  near  the  edge  of  the  shoals,  where  a  long  narrow  sand-bank
extends  out  from  the  eastern  shore.  Here  at  low  tides  the  Arabs
sometimes  wade  across  the  channel ;  the  water  being  then  about
five  feet  deep,  or,  as  they  said,  coming  up  to  the  chin.

The  road  which  we  travelled  from  Cairo  to  Suez  is  the  short-
est and  most  direct  of  all  those  between  the  two  points  ;  and
like  all  the  rest  (except  the  southern  one)  is  wholly  destitute
of  water  as  far  as  to  'Ajrud.  On  the  Besatin  route  west  of  Jebel
Gharbun  are  the  shallow  pits  of  Gandali  (or  Gandelhy),  in
which  a  small  quantity  of  tolerable  water  collects.  On  the
more  southern  and  longer  branch  of  this  route,  through  Wady
Tawarik,  is  the  well  of  'Odheib  {'ddheih,  sweet  water)  near  the
shore  south  of  Ras  'Atakah,  about  eight  hours  from  Suez.
Here  is  also  a  small  mound  of  rubbish  with  fragments  of  pot-
tery, indicating  a  former  site.^  But  the  shortest  route  of  all
between  Suez  and  the  borders  of  the  Nile,  Kes  to  the  northward
of  all  these  roads,,  and  passes  nearer  to  the  valley  of  the  ancient
canal.  Caravans  proceeding  from  Suez  in  this  direction,  stop
the  first  night  at  Rejiim  el-Khail,  a  mere  station  in  the  desert
without  water  ;  and  the  next  day  reach  Eas  el- Wady,  a  con-
siderable village  on  the  border  of  Wady  Tumilat,  some  distance
northeast  of  Belbeis.  This  Wady  is  the  western  part  of  the
broad  valley  of  the  canal,  which  more  to  the  eastward  is  called
Wady  Seba'  Biyar  (Seven  Wells).  The  water  of  the  Nile  flows
up  into  it  during  the  annual  inundation,  sometimes  as  far  as  to
the  salt  lakes  called  Temsah  (Crocodile  Lakes),  as  marked  on
the  maps  ;  which  lakes  indeed  are  said  on  the  great  French  map
to  have  water  only  at  these  periods.  This  inundation  of  course
renders  the  vaUey  a  tract  of  fertile  land,  on  which  are  scattered
many  villages  and  traces  of  ancient  sites.  By  taking  a  direction
more  to  the  right  from  Eejum  el-Khail,  a  day's  journey  brings
the  traveller  to  the  weU  of  Abu  Suweirah,  situated  in  the
Northern  part  of  the  same  great  Wady,  a  little  northwest  of  the

'  Reisebeschr.  I.  p.  252.  and  Upper  Egypt ;  a  branch  of  it  passing

'  See  Lis  map  in  iNuturgesch.  Reisen,  directly  i'rom  Wady  Tuwariii  througli  a

Abt.  I.  Berlin,  1828.  side  valley  to  the  Nile  near  Tebbin,  some

Le  Pcre  in  Descript.  de  I'Egypte,  Et.  distance  above  Cairo. — Eor  other  names  of

Mod.  I.  p.  46.    This  route  serves  also  as  a  tlus  valley,  see  Note  IX,  at  the  end  of  the

mediim  of  communication  between  Suez  volume.

V  72, 78

Sec,  II.]

THE  EXODUS.

51

Crocodile  Lakes. '  A  more  direct  course  from  Suez  to  the  latter
place,  is  prevented  by  salt  marshes,  in  which  the  camels  sink
or  slip.  Our  Arabs,  who  had  themselves  been  this  route  and
gave  us  this  information,  said  these  marshes  were  made  by  a
canal  cut  thus  far  from  the  Red  Sea  and  then  neglected  ;  though
now  a  hill  (as  they  said)  separates  them  from  the  sea.  These
are  doubtless  the  well-known  marshes  or  Bitter  Lakes  of  the
ancients,  which  the  French  found  to  be  from  forty  to  fifty  feet
(12  to  15  metres)  below  the  usual  level  of  the  gulf  of  Suez  ;
while  the  broad  tract  of  sand,  which  now  separates  them  from
the  gulf,  is  only  about  three  feet  above  the  same  level,  A  higher
.  bank  or  swell  of  ground  at  their  western  extremity,  separates
them  in  like  manner  from  the  Crocodile  Lakes,  and  forms  the
utmost  limit  of  the  inundations  of  the  Nile,*

The  bearing  of  the  preceding  details  upon  one  of  the  most
remarkable  events  of  Biblical  History,  will  be  obvious  ;  I  mean
the  Exodus  of  the  Israelites  and  their  passage  through  the  Red
Sea.  I  propose  to  bring  together  in  this  place  all  I  have  to  say
on  this  subject ;  premising  such  information  as  we  were  able  to
obtain  relative  to  the  land  of  Groshen,  and  the  probable  route
of  the  Israelites  on  leaving  Egypt.

We  were  quite  satisfied  from  our  own  observation,  that  they
could  not  have  passed  to  the  Red  Sea  from  any  point  near
Heliopolis  or  Cairo  in  three  dayb,  the  longest  interval  which  the
language  of  the  narrative  allows.  Both  the  distance  and  the
want  of  water  on  aU  the  routes,  are  fatal  to  such  an  hypothesis.
We  read,  that  there  were  six  hundred  thousand  men  of  the
Israelites  above  twenty  years  of  age,  who  left  Egypt  on  foot,'
There  must  of  course  have  been  as  many  women  above  twenty
years  old  ;  and  at  least  an  equal  number  both  of  males  and
females  under  the  same  age  ;  besides  the  "  mixed  multitude "
spoken  of,  and  very  much  cattle.  The  whole  number  therefore
probably  amounted  to  two  and  a  half  millions,  and  certainly  to
not  less  than  two  millions.  Now  the  usual  day's  march  of  the
best  appointed  armies,  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  is  not
estimated  higher  than  fourteen  English,  or  twelve  geographical
miles ;  *  and  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  Israelites,  en-

'  See  Note  X,  end  of  the  volume.

°  Roziere  ia  Descr.  de  I'Egypte,  Antiq.
Mem.  I.  p.  137.  Le  Pire  and  Du  Bois-
Aym  -,  ib.  Et.  Mod.  I.  p.  21  sq.  187  sq.
Comp.  Bitter's  Erdkunde,  Th.  II.  1818,  p.
232  sq.  A  valuable  abstract  of  the  re-
Bults  contained  in  the  great  French  work,
is  given  by  Mr  Maclariu  in  the  Edinburgh

Philosophical  Journal,  1825,  Vol.  XIII.  p.
274.  See  further  in  Note  XI,  end  of  the
volume.

^  Ex.  12,  37.  38.  Compare  Num.  1,  2,
3.  45.  46,  where  a  year  later  the  number
is  given  at  603,550.

*  Rennell's  Compar.  Geogr.  of  Western
Asia,  I.  p.  liv.  I  am  informed  by  Prussian

i.  74,  75

52

THE  EXODUS.

[Sec.  n.

cumtered  witli  women  and  children  and  flocks,  would  be  able
to  accomplish  more.  But  the  distance  on  all  these  routes  being
not  less  than  sixty  geographical  mUes,  they  could  not  well  have
travelled  it  in  any  case  in  less  than  five  days.

The  difficulty  as  to  water  might  indeed  have  been  obviated,
so  far  as  the  Israelites  were  concerned,  by  taking  with  them  a
supply  from  the  Nile,  like  the  caravans  of  modern  days.  But
Pharaoh  appears  to  have  followed  them  upon  the  same  track
with  all  his  horses  and  chariots  and  horsemen  ;  and  this  could
not  have  taken  place  upon  any  of  the  routes  between  Cairo  and
the  Eed  Sea.  Horses  are  indeed  often  taken  across  at  the
present  day  ;  but  then  a  supply  of  water  must  be  provided  for
them,  usually  about  two  water-skins  for  each  horse.  Six  of
these  water-skins  are  a  load  for  a  camel ;  so  that  for  every  three
horses,  there  must  be  a  camel-load  of  water.  Still  they  not
nnfrequently  die  ;  and  we  saw  the  carcasses  of  several  which
had  perished  during  the  recent  passage  of  the  Haj.  Flocks  of
sheep  and  goats  might  pass  across  ;  but  for  neat  cattle  this
would  be  impossible,  without  a  like  supply  of  water.

LAND  OF  GOSHEN.

The  preceding  considerations  go  far  to  support  the  usual
view  of  scholars  at  the  present  day,  that  the  land  of  Goshen
lay  along  the  Pelusiac  arm  of  the  Nile,  on  the  east  of  the  Delta,
and  was  the  part  of  Egypt  nearest  to  Palestine.'  This  tract  is
now  comprehended  in  the  modern  province  esh-Shurkiyeh,
which  extends  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Abu  Za'bel  to  the
sea,  and  from  the  desert  to  the  former  Tanaitic  branch  of  the
Nile  ;  thus  including  also  the  valley  of  the  ancient  canal.  If
the  Pelusiac  arm,  as  is  commonly  assumed,  were  navigable  for
fleets  in  ancient  times,  the  Israelites  were  probably  conflned  to
its  eastern  bank  ;  but  if  we  are  at  liberty  to  suppose,  that  this
stream  was  never  much  larger  than  at  present,  then  they  may
have  spread  themselves  out  upon  the  Delta  beyond  it,  until
restrained  by  larger  branches  of  the  Nile.*  That  the  land  of
Goshen  lay  upon  the  waters  of  the  Nile,  is  apparent  from  the
circumstance,  that  the  Israelites  practised  irrigation  ;  that  it

officers  of  rank,  that  the  usual  march  of  rests,  may  be  found   in  Rosenmueller's

tboir  annies  is  three  German  miles  a  day,  Bibl.  Geogr.  111.  p.  246  sq.  (iesenins'

equal  to  twelve  geographicul  miles  of  sixty  Thcsaur.  Ling.  Heb.  p.  307.    Anier.  Bibl.

to  the  degree.  Forced  marclies  are  reckon-  Kepos.  Oct.  18;i2.  p.  744.    A  view  of  the

cd  at  five  German  miles  a  day.    In  either  various  earlier  theories  respecting  the  posi-

case  the  wliole  army  rests  every  fourtli  tion  of  Goslien,  is  given  in  licUcrinunn's

day.  Handb.  der  bibl.  Literutur,  I\'.  p.  I'Jl  sq.

'  The  usual  arguments  from  Scripture  Gesenius,  1.  c.
and  the  early  writers,  on  which  this  opinion       '■'  See  Note  XII,  end  of  the  volume.

i.  75,  76

Sec.  II.]

GOSHEN.

53

was  a  land  of  seed,  figs,  vines,  and  pomegranates  ;  that  the
people  ate  of  fish  freely  ;  while  the  enumeration  of  the  articles
for  which  they  longed  in  the  desert,  corresponds  remarkably
with  the  list  given  by  Mr  Lane  as  the  food  of  the  modern
Fellahs.'  All  this  goes  to  show,  that  the  Israelites,  when  in
Egypt,  lived  much  as  the  Egyptians  do  now  ;  and  that  Goshen
probably  extended  further  west  and  more  into  the  Delta  than
has  usually  been  supposed.  They  would  seem  to  have  lived
interspersed  among  the  Egyptians  of  that  district,  perhaps  in
separate  villages,  much  as  the  Copts  of  the  present  day  are
mingled  with  the  Muhammedans.  This  appears  from  the  cir-
cumstance of  their  borrowing  "jewels  of  gold  and  silver"  from
their  Egyptian  neighbours  ;  and  also  from  the  fact,  that  their
houses  were  to  be  marked  with  blood,  in  order  that  they  might
be  distinguished  and  spared  in  the  last  dread  plague  of  the
Egyptians.'

The  immediate  descendants  of  Jacob  were  doubtless  nomadic
shepherds  like  their  forefathers,  dwelling  in  tents ;  and  probably
drove  their  flocks  for  pasture  far  up  in  the  Wadys  of  the  desert,
like  the  present  inhabitants  of  the  same  region.'  But  in  pro-
cess of  time  they  became  also  tillers  of  the  soil,  and  exchanged
their  tents  for  more  fixed  habitations.  Even  now  there  is  a
colony  of  the  Tawarah  Arabs,  about  fifty  families,  living  near
Abu  Za'bel,  who  cultivate  the  soil  and  yet  dwell  in  tents.  They
came  thither  from  Mount  Sinai  about  four  years  before  the
French  invasion.  This  drove  them  back  for  a  time  to  the
mountains  of  the  Terabin,  east  of  Suez  ;  but  they  had  acquired
such  a  taste  for  the  good  things  of  Egypt,  that  like  the  Isra-
elites they  could  not  live  in  the  desert,  and  soon  returned  after
the  French  were  gone.  "  Now,"  said  our  Arabs,  "  though  we
acknowledge  them  as  cousins,  they  have  no  right  to  dwell  among
us ;  nor  could  they  live  in  our  barren  mountains  after  enjoying
so  long  the  luxuries  of  Egypt."

The  land  of  Goshen  was  the  best  of  the  land  ;  "*  and
such  too  the  province  esh-Shurkiyeh  has  ever  been,  down  to  the
present  time.  In  the  remarkable  Arabic  document  translated
by  De  Sacy,^  containing  a  valuation  of  all  the  provinces  and
villages  of  Egypt  in  the  year  1376,  the  province  of  the  Shurkiyeh

'  Deut.  11,  10.  Num.  20,  5. — Nnro.  11,  of  a  great  variety  of  kinds,  onions  and

6,  "  We  remember  the  fish  we  did  eat  in  leeks,  beans,  chick-peas,  lupins,"  etc.  etc.

Egypt  freely;   the  cucumbers,  and  the  '  Ex.  11,  2.    12,  12.  13.  22.  23,  etc.

melons,  and  the  leeks,  and  the  onions,  and  '  See  above,  p.  41.

the  garlic." — Manners  and  Customs  of  the  *  Gen.  47,  6  "in  the  best  of  the  land,

Mod.  Egyptians,  I.  p.  242.  "Their  food  ...  in  the  land  of  Goshen."

consists  of  bread  made  of  millet  or  of  '  Abdallatifs  Relation  de  I'Egypte,  par

maize,  milk,  new  cheese,  eggs,  small  salted  De  Sacy,  p.  583.
fish,  cucumbers  aud  melons,  and  gourds

i.  77, 78

54

THE  EXODUS.

[Sec.  n.

comprises  383  towns  and  villages,  and  is  valued  at  1,411,875
dinars;  a  larger  sum  than  is  put  upon  any  other  province,  with
one  exception.  During  my  stay  in  Cairo,  I  made  many  inquiries
respecting  this  district ;  to  which  the  uniform  reply  was,  that
it  was  considered  as  the  best  province  in  Egypt.  Wishing  to
obtain  more  definite  information,  I  ventured  to  request  of  Lord
Prudhoe,  with  whom  the  Pasha  was  understood  to  be  on  a  very
friendly  footing,  to  obtain  for  me,  if  possible,  a  statement  of
the  valuation  of  the  provinces  of  Egypt.  This,  as  he  after-
wards informed  me,  could  not  well  be  done  ;  but  he  had  ascer-
tained that  the  province  of  the  Shurkiyeh  bears  the  highest
valuation  and  yields  the  largest  revenue.  He  had  himself  just
returned  from  an  excursion  to  the  lower  parts  of  this  province,
and  confirmed  from  his  own  observation  the  reports  of  its  fer-
tility. This  arises  from  the  fact  that  it  is  intersected  by  canals,
while  the  surface  of  the  land  is  less  elevated  above  the  level  of
the  NUe,  than  in  other  parts  of  Egypt ;  so  that  it  is  more  easily
irrigated.  There  are  here  more  flocks  and  herds  than  anywhere
else  in  Egypt  ;  and  also  more  fishermen.  The  population  is
half  migratory,  composed  partly  of  Fellahs,  and  partly  of  Arabs
from  the  adjacent  deserts  and  even  from  Syria  ;  who  retain  in
part  their  nomadic  habits,  and  frequently  remove  from  one
village  to  another.  Yet  there  are  very  many  villages  wholly
deserted,  where  many  thousands  of  people  might  at  once  find  a
habitation.  Even  now  another  million  at  least  might  be  sus-
tained in  the  district  ;  and  the  soil  is  capable  of  higher  tiUage
to  an  indefinite  extent.  So  too  the  adjacent  desert,  so  far  as
water  could  be  applied  for  irrigation,  might  be  rendered  fertile ;
for  wherever  water  is,  there  is  fertility.

KOXJTE  OF  THE  ISRAELITES  TO  THE  RED  SEA.

From  the  land  of  Goshen  as  thus  defined  to  the  Red  Sea,
the  direct  and  only  route  was  along  the  valley  of  the  ancient
canal.  The  Israelites  broke  up  from  their  rendezvous  at
Rameses  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  first  month,  on  the  mor-
row after  the  passover  ;  " '  and  proceeded  by  Succoth  and  Etham
to  the  sea.  Without  stopping  to  inquire  as  to  the  identity  of
Rameses  with  lleroopolis,  or  the  position  of  the  latter  place,  it
is  enough  for  our  purpose,  that  the  former  town  (as  is  generally
admitted)  lay  probably  on  the  valley  of  the  canal  in  the  middle
part,  not  far  from  the  western  extremity  of  the  basin  of  the
Bitter  Lakes.  Nor  is  it  necessary  to  discuss  the  point,  whether
this  basin  anciently  formed  a  prolongation  of  the  gulf  of  the
Red  Sea,  as  is  supposed  by  some  ;  or,  as  is  more  probable,  was

'  Ex.  12,  3.7.    Num.33,  8.

i.  78,  79

Sec,  II.]

ROUTE  TO  THE  RED  SEA.

55

covered  with  brackish  water,  and  separated  from  the  Ked  Sea,
as  now,  by  a  tract  of  higher  ground.  Nothing  more  is  needed
for  our  present  purpose,  even  admitting  that  a  communication
existed  from  this  basin  to  the  sea,  than  to  suppose  that  the  in-
let, if  any,  was  already  so  small,  as  to  present  no  important
obstacle  to  the  advance  of  the  Israehtes.'

From  Rameses  to  the  head  of  the  gulf,  according  to  the
preceding  data,  would  be  a  distance  of  some  thirty  or  thirty-
five  miles  ;  which  might  easily  have  been  passed  over  by  the
Israelites  in  three  days.  A  large  portion  of  the  people  were
apparently  already  collected  at  Rameses,  waiting  for  permission
to  depart,  when  the  last  great  plague  took  place.  From  the
time  when  Pharaoh  dismissed  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  night  of
the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  (according  to  the  Jewish
reckoning),  until  the  morning  of  the  fifteenth  day,  when  the
people  set  ofi",  there  was  an  interval  of  some  thirty  hours,  during
which  these  leaders  could  easily  reach  Rameses  from  the  court
of  Pharaoh,  whether  this  were  at  Memphis,  or,  as  is  more  pro-
bable, at  Zoan  or  Tanis.*

The  first  day's  march  brought  them  to  Succoth,  a  name
signifying  "  booths,"  which  might  be  applied  to  any  temporary
station  or  encampment.  Whether  there  was  water  here  is  not
mentioned  ;  and  the  position  of  the  place  cannot  be  determined.
On  the  second  day  they  reached  Etham  "  in  the  edge  of  the
wilderness."  ^  What  wilderness  ?  The  Israelites  after  passing
the  Red  Sea  are  said  in  Exodus  to  have  gone  three  days'  march
into  the  desert  of  Shur ;  but  in  Numbers,  the  same  tract  is
called  the  desert  of  Etham.^  It  hence  follows,  that  Etham
probably  lay  on  the  edge  of  this  eastern  desert,  perhaps  not  far
from  the  present  head  of  the  gulf,  and  on  the  eastern  side  of
the  line  of  the  gulf  or  canal.  May  it  not  have  stood  upon  or
near  the  strip  of  land  between  the  gulf  and  the  basin  of  the
Bitter  Lakes  ?  *  At  any  rate,  it  would  seem  to  have  been  the
point,  from  which  the  direct  course  of  the  Israelites  to  Sinai
would  have  led  them  around  the  present  head  of  the  gulf  and
along  its  eastern  side.  From  Etham  they  "  turned "  more  to
the  right  ;  and  instead  of  passing  along  the  eastern  side,  they
marched  down  the  western  side  of  the  arm  of  the  gvdf,  to  the
vicinity  of  Suez.  This  movement,  apparently  so  directly  out
of  their  course,  might  well  give  Pharaoh  occasion  to  say,  "  they
are  entangled  in  the  land,  the  wilderness  hath  shut  them  in  ;  "

'  See  Kote  XIII,  end  of  the  volume.  *  Ex.  15,  22.   Num.  33,  8.

The  I'sahuist  places  the  scene  of  the  '  This  view  would  be  supported  by  the
miracles  of  Moses  in  the  region  of  Zoan.  Egyptian  etymology  which  Jablonsky  as-
Ps.  7S,  12.  43.  signs  to  the  name  Etham,  viz.  ATIOM,

'  Ex.  13,  20.  Num.  33,  6.  "  Border  of  the  Sea."

1.  80,  81

66

THE  EXODUS.

[Sec.  n.

and  lead  him  to  pursue  them  with  his  horsemen  and  chariots,
in  the  hope  of  speedily  overtaking  and  forcing  them  to  return. '

The  position  of  Migdol,  Pi-haheroth,  and  Baal-Zephon,  can-
not of  course  be  determined  ;  except  that  they  probably  were
on  or  near  the  great  plain  back  of  Suez.  If  the  wells  of  'Ajrud
,  and  Bir  Suweis  were  then  in  existence,  they  would  naturally
mark  the  sites  of  towns  ;  but  there  is  no  direct  evidence  either
for  or  against  such  an  hypothesis.  That  this  point,  so  important
for  the  navigation  of  the  Bed  Sea,  was  already  occupied  by  a
town,  perhaps  Baal-Zephon,  is  not  improbable.  A  few  centuries
later  several  cities  lay  in  the  vicinity  ;  and  these  must  have  had
wells,  or  there  were  more  fountains  than  at  present.  In  this
plain,  the  Israelites  would  have  abundant  space  for  their  en-
campment.

PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA.

The  question  here  has  respect  to  the  part  of  the  sea  where
the  passage  took  place.  This  many  writers  and  travellers  have
assumed  to  be  the  point  at  the  mouth  of  Wady  Tawarik,
south  of  Has  'Atakah  ;  principally  perhaps  because  it  was  sup-
posed that  the  Israelites  passed  down  that  valley.  But  accord-
ing to  the  preceding  views,  this  could  not  well  have  taken  place  ;
and  therefore,  if  they  crossed  at  that  point,  they  must  first  have
passed  down  around  Ras  'Atakah  and  encamped  in  the  plain  at
the  mouth  of  the  valley.

The  discussion  of  this  question  has  often  been  embarrassed,
by  not  sufficiently  attending  to  the  circumstances  narrated  by
the  sacred  historian  ;  which  are,  in  the  main  points,  the  follow-
ing. The  Israelites,  hemmed  in  on  all  sides, — on  their  left  and
in  front  the  sea,  on  their  right  Jebel  'Atakah,  and  behind  them
the  Egyptians, — began  to  despair  of  escape,  and  to  murmur
against  Moses.  The  Lord  now  directed  Moses  to  stretch  out  his
rod  over  the  sea  ;  and  the  Lord  caused  the  sea  to  flow  (Heb.  go)
by  a  strong  east  wind  all  that  night,  and  made  the  sea  dry  ;
and  the  waters  were  divided.  And  the  children  of  Israel  went
into  the  midst  of  the  sea  upon  the  dry  (ground)  ;  and  the
waters  were  a  wall  unto  them  on  their  right  hand  and  on  their
left.  The  Egyptians  pursued  and  went  in  after  them  ;  and  in
the  morning  watch,  the  Lord  troubled  the  host  of  the  Egyptians.
And  Moses  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea,  and  the  sea  re-
turned to  his  strength  when  the  morning  appeared,  and  the
Egyptians  fled  against  it ;  and  the  waters  returned  and  covered
all  the  host  of  Pharaoh.*

In  this  narration  there  are  two  main  points,  on  which

'  Ei.  14,  2.  3  sq.

i.  81,  82

»  Ex.  14,  11.  12.  21—28.

*

Sbc.  n.]  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA.  57

*

the  whole  question  may  be  said  to  turn.  The  first  is,  the
means  or  instrument  with  which  the  miracle  was  wrought.  The
Lord,  it  is  said,  caused  the  sea  to  go  (or  to  flow  out)  hy  a  strong
east  wind.  The  miracle  therefore  is  represented  as  mediate  ;
not  a  direct  suspension  of,  or  interference  with  the  laws  of  nature,
but  a  miraculous  adaptation  of  those  laws  to  produce  a  required
result.  It  was  wrought  by  natural  means  supernaturally  applied.
For  this  reason  we  are  here  entitled  to  look  only  for  the  natural
effects  arising  from  the  operation  of  such  a  cause.  In  the  some-
what indefinite  phraseology  of  the  Hebrew,  an  east  wind  means
any  wind  from  the  eastern  quarter ;  and  would  include  the  N.
E.  wind,  which  often  prevails  in  this  regioru  Now  it  will  be
obvious  from  the  inspection  of  any  good  map  of  the  gulf,'  that
a  strong  N.  E.  wind  acting  here  upon  the  ebb  tide,  would  neces-
sarily have  the  effect  to  drive  out  the  waters  from  the  small  arm
of  the  sea  which  runs  up  by  Suez,  and  also  from  the  end  of  the
gulf  itself,  leaving  the  shallower  portions  dry  ;  while  the  more
northern  part  of  the  arm,  which  was  anciently  broader  and
deeper  than  at  present,  would  still  remain  covered  with  water.
Thus  the  waters  would  be  divided,  and  be  a  wall  (or  defence)  to
the  IsraeUtes  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  Nor  will  it  be
less  obvious  from  a  similar  inspection,  that  in  no  other  part  of
the  whole  gulf,  would  a  N.  E.  wind  act  in  the  same  manner  to
drive  out  the  waters.  ■  On  this  ground,  then,  the  hypothesis  of
a  passage  through  the  sea  opposite  to  Wady  Tawarik,  would  be
untenable.

The  second  main  point  has  respect  to  the  interval  of  time
during  which  the  passage  was  effected.  It  was  night  ;  for  the
Lord  caused  the  sea  to  go  (out)  "  all  night  ; "  and  when  the
morning  appeared,  it  had  already  returned  in  its  strength  ;  for
the  Egyptians  were  ovei-whelmed  in  the  morning  watch.  If  then,
as  is  most  probable,  the  wind  thus  miraculously  sent,  acted  upon
the  ebb  tide  to  drive  out  the  waters  during  the  night  to  a  far
greater  extent  than  usual,  we  still  cannot  assume  that  this  ex-
traordinary ebb,  thus  brought  about  by  natural  means,  would
continue  more  than  three  or  four  hours  at  the  most.  The  Isra^
ehtes  were  probably  on  the  alert,  and  entered  upon  the  passage
as  soon  as  the  way  was  practicable  ;  but  as  the  wind  must  have
acted  for  some  time  before  the  required  effect  would  be  produced,
we  cannot  well  assume  that  they  set  off  before  the  middle
watch,  or  towards  midnight.  Before  the  morning  watch  or  two
o'clock,  they  had  probably  completed  the  passage  ;  for  the  Egyp-
tians had  entered  after  them,  and  were  destroyed  before  the
morning  appeared.    As  the  Israelites  numbered  more  than  two

•  Especially  Niebuhr's  Tab.  XXIV,  in  his  Beschr.  von  Arabien.

i.  83,  84

t

58  THE  EXODUS.  [Sec.  IL

millions  of  persons,  besides  flocks  and  herds,  they  would  of
course  be  able  to  pass  but  slowly.  If  the  part  left  dry  were
broad  enough  to  enable  them  to  cross  in  a  body  one  thousand
abreast,  which  would  require  a  space  of  more  than  half  a  mile
in  breadth  (and  is  perhaps  the  largest  supposition  admissible),
stUl  the  column  would  be  more  than  two  thousand  persons  in
depth  ;  and  in  all  probability  could  not  have  extended  less
than  two  miles.  It  would  then  have  occupied  at  least  an  hour
in  passing  over  its  own  length,  or  in  entering  the  sea  ;  and  de-
ducting this  from  the  largest  time  intervening  before  the  Egyp-
tians must  also  have  entered  the  sea,  there  will  remain  only
time  enough,  under  the  circumstances,  for  the  body  of  the  Isra-
elites to  have  passed  at  the  most  over  a  space  of  three  or  four
miles.  This  circumstance  is  fatal  to  the  hypothesis  of  their
having  crossed  from  Wady  Tawarik  ;  since  the  breadth  of  the
sea  at  that  point,  according  to  Niebuhr's  measurement,  is  three
German  or  twelve  geogr.  miles,  equal  to  a  whole  day's  journey.*

All  the  preceding  considerations  tend  conclusively  to  limit
the  place  of  passage  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Suez.  The  part
left  dry  might  have  been  within  the  arm  which  sets  up  from
the  gulf,  which  is  now  two  thirds  of  a  mile  wide  in  its  narrowest
part,  and  was  probably  once  wider  ;  or  it  might  have  been  to
the  southward  of  this  arm,  where  the  broad  shoals  are  still  left
bare  at  the  ebb,  and  the  channel  is  sometimes  forded.  If  simi-
lar shoals  might  be  supposed  to  have  anciently  existed  in  this
part,  the  latter  supposition  would  be  the  most  probable.  The
Israelites  would  then  naturally  have  crossed  from  the  shore  west
of  Suez  in  an  oblique  direction,  a  distance  of  three  or  four  miles
from  shore  to  shore.  In  this  case  there  is  room  for  all  the  con-
ditions of  the  miracle  to  be  amply  satisfied.

To  the  former  supposition,  that  the  passage  took  place
through  the  arm  of  the  gulf  above  Suez,  it  is  sometimes  object-
ed, that  there  could  not  be  in  that  part  space  and  depth  enough
of  water,  to  cause  the  destruction  of  the  Egyptians  in  the  manner
related.  It  must  however  be  remembered,  that  this  arm  was
anciently  both  wider  and  deeper  ;  and  also,  that  the  sea  in  its
reflux  would  not  only  return  with  the  usual  power  of  the  flood
tide,  but  with  a  far  greater  force  and  depth,  in  consequence  of
ha\ing  been  thus  extraordinarily  driven  out  by  a  N.  E.  wind.
It  would  seem  moreover  to  be  implied  in  the  triumphal  song  of
Moses  on  this  occasion,  that  on  the  return  of  the  sea,  the  wind
was  also  clianged,  and  acted  to  drive  in  the  flood  upon  the
Egyptians.'^    Even  now  caravans  never  cross  the  ford  above

'  Niebuhr's  Reisebeschr.  I.  p.  251.  '  Ex.  15,  10 ;  comp.  verse  8.

i.  84,  85

Sec.  II.]

PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA.

59

Suez  ;  and  it  is  considered  dangerous,  except  at  quite  low
water.'

Our  own  observation  on  the  spot,  led  both  my  companion  and
myself  to  incline  to  the  other  supposition,  that  the  passage
took  place  across  shoals  adjacent  to  Suez  on  the  south  and  south-
west. But  among  the  many  changes  which  have  occurred  here
in  the  lapse  of  ages,  it  is  of  course  impossible  to  decide  with
certainty  as  to  the  precise  spot ;  nor  is  this  necessary.  Either
of  the  above  suppositions  satisfies  the  conditions  of  the  case  ;
on  either  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  was  equally  great,  and
the  arm  of  J ehovah  alike  gloriously  revealed.

'  In  1799,  Gen.  Bonaparte  in  retoming  and  his  suite  were  exposed  to  the  greatest
from  'Ayiin  Musa  attempted  the  ford.  It  danger,  although  they  had  guides  well  ac-
was  already  late  and  grew  dark  ;  the  tide  quainted  with  the  ground.  See  Note  of
rose,  and  flowed  with  greater  rapidity  than  Du  Bois-Ayme,  Descr.  de  I'Egypte,  Antiq
had  been  expected :  so  that  the  General  Mem.  I.  p.  127  sq.

i.  86

SECTIOIf  III.

FROM    SUEZ    TO    MOUNT  SINAI.

Friday,  3Iarch  \Qth,  1838. — Having  seen  all  that  Suez
offers  to  the  notice  of  the  traveller,  we  were  glad  to  leave  it
again  this  day.  We  took  the  longer  route  around  the  head  of
the  arm  or  inlet,  in  order  to  examine  the  make  of  the  land;
though  most  persons  send  only  their  camels  round,  and  them-
selves cross  at  the  ferry.  Setting  off  at  1  o'clock  P.  M.  we
passed  to  the  left  of  Tell  Kolzum,  and  taking  a  course  N.^E.
reached  at  2.35  the  mounds  of  the  ancient  canal.  The  ground  •
all  the  way  is  a  hard  gravelly  plain,  shghtly  elevated  above  the
water,  and  sloping  gently  towards  it.  The  banks  of  the  ancient
canal  are  very  distinct,  here  five  or  six  feet  high,  and  running
parallel  to  each  other  thirty  or  forty  yards  apart,  as  far  as  the
eye  can  reach  in  a  northerly  direction.'  The  route  of  the  Haj
crosses  them  at  a  point  still  further  north.  We  now  turned
E.  S.  E.  descending  to  the  lower  level  or  bed  of  the  inlet,  where
the  ground  soon  began  to  bear  every  mark  of  being  occasionally
overflowed  ;  the  flood  tide  evidently  at  some  seasons  extending
far  up  to  the  northward.  The  bottom  was  fine  sand,  like  the
drift  sand  of  the  desert,  hardened  by  the  action  of  the  water,  and
covered  in  some  places  with  a  saline  efllorescence.  Here  we
silently  glided  out  of  Africa  into  Asia,  without  knowing  the
precise  line  of  division.  At  3  o'clock,  Suez  bearing  S.  25°  W.
we  again  changed  our  course  to  S.  by  E.  which  we  kept  for  the
rest  of  the  day.

In  half  an  hour  more  we  came  to  low  hills  of  sand  and
gravel,  connected  with  the  desert  on  our  left.  Among  these
hills,  tracts  of  low  land  of  the  character  just  described  run  up  to

'  See  in  Note  XI,  end  of  the  Tolome.

i.  87,  88

Mab.17.]

HEAD  OF  THE  GULF.

61

the  N.  E.  and  E.  for  a  great  distance  ;  showing  that  the  upper
part  of  this  arm  once  spread  itself  out  into  a  large  bay,  in
whicli  these  hills  weie  islands,  if  they  then  existed.  One  such
apparent  inlet  towards  the  N.  E.  was  very  large  and  distinctly
marked.  We  were  nowhere  able  to  see  the  water  on  our  right  ;
and  could  not  determine  how  far  up  it  extended  at  the  time  ;
partly  from  the  lowness  of  the  ground,  and  partly  on  account  of
the  mirage,  which  gave  to  the  whole  tract  in  that  direction  the
appearance  of  a  lake.  At  3.55  we  left  the  low  lands  entirely,
and  came  again  upon  a  gravelly  plain  ;  from  which,  half  an
hour  after,  the  town  bore  due  west,  about  an  hour  distant.  At
ten  minutes  past  5  o'clock  we  encamped  upon  this  desert  plain,
Suez  bearing  from  us  N.  N.  W.

The  nature  of  the  tract  we  had  thus  passed  over,  strongly
indicates,  that  the  arm  of  the  gulf  which  now  runs  up  north  of
Suez,  was  anciently  not  much  wider  at  its  entrance  than  at
present  ;  while  further  north  it  spread  itself  out  into  a  broader  and
deeper  bay.  Parallel  to  the  gulf  on  the  east  runs  the  long  range
of  mountains  called  er-Rahah,  which  seem  to  be  little  more
than  an  ascent  to  the  high  plateau  of  the  interior  desert.  They
are  some  four  or  five  hours  distant  from  the  shore  of  the  gulf ;
and  the  tract  between  is  here  a  gravelly  desert  plain,  sometimes
interrupted  by  low  ridges  and  hills,  running  in  A^arious  direc-
tions.

The  place  where  we  encamped  was  about  an  hour  and  a  half
distant  from  Suez  ;  and  probably  it  was  in  this  vicinity  that  the
children  of  Israel  came  out  upon  the  eastern  shore.  Here,  at
our  evening  devotions,  and  near  the  spot  where  it  was  composed
and  first  sung,  we  read,  and  felt  in  its  full  force,  the  magnifi-
cent triumphal  song  of  Moses  :  "  The  Lord  hath'  triumphed
gloriously  ;  the  horse  and  his  rider  he  hath  thrown  into  the  sea."
We  then  laid  us  down  in  peace  and  slept ;  for  the  Lord  caused
us  also  to  dwell  here  in  safety.

Saturday,  March  17th.  At  6.20  we  were  again  upon  our
camels,  refreshed  and  invigorated  by  the  balmy  air  of  the
morning.  The  weather  of  yesterday  had  been  fine  ;  and  it
continued  so  through  this  and  many  succeeding  days.  Our
course  all  day  varied  between  S.  by  E.  and  S.  S.  E.  nearly
parallel  to  the  coast,  but  for  the  most  part  at  some  distance
from  it.  At  7  o'clock  we  crossed  the  track  leading  from  the
ferry  of  Suez  to  the  fountain  Naba',  or,  as  it  was  called  by  our
Arabs,  el-Ghurkudeh,  from  which  that  town  is  supplied  with
water  for  drinking.  From  this  point  the  fountain  was  apparently
three  mUes  distant.  Some  of  our  Arabs  went  with  a  camel  for
water  ;  whde  we  kept  on  our  way,  sending  one  of  our  servants
with  them  to  see  that  the  skins  were  well  rinsed.    According  to

Vol.  I.— 6  i.  88  89

62

FBOM  STJEZ  TO  ilOTTXT  SDfAI.

[Sec.  in.

his  report,  the  fountain  is  a  mere  excavation  in  the  plain  at  the
foot  of  a  range  of  sand -hillocks,  a  basin  eight  or  ten  feet  in  diam-
eter and  six  or  eight  feet  deep,  vnih.  stone  steps  to  go  down  into
it.  In  this  basin  the  water,  which  is  quite  brackish,  boils  iip
continually  and  stands  two  or  three  feet  deep,  without  any  out-
let ;  furnishing  enough  to  supply  two  hundred  camel-loads  at
once.  About  twenty  camels  were  then  there,  taking  loads  of
water  for  Suez.

Half  an  hour  afterwards  a  very  gradual  ascent  lay  before  us,
which  terminated  at  8  o'clock  in  a  steep  descent.  From  the
brow  of  the  latter  we  had  a  wide  view  of  the  sea  and  of  the  low
plain  before  us,  in  which  a  few  stunted  palm  trees  marked  the
situation  of  'Ayun  Musa,  the  foimtains  of  Moses.  On  the  west
of  the  sea,  the  barren  peaks  of  'Atiikah  and  Deraj  rose  lofty
and  dark  ;  and  between  them  was  spread  out  the  broad  plain  of
Wady  Tawarik.  On  our  left,  further  to  the  south,  a  single  peak
in  the  range  of  er-Eahah  formed  a  sort  of  land-mark,  which  we
had  already  seen  from  Suez  ;  it  is  called  Taset  Sudr,  lying  at
the  head  of  the  Wady  of  that  name.  We  reached  'Ayun  Musa
half  an  hour  aftenvards.  Here  I  coiinted  seven  foimtains,  several
of  them  mere  recent  excavations  in  the  sand,  in  which  a  httle
brackish  water  was  standing.  Others  were  older  and  more  abun-
dant ;  but  the  water  is  dark-coloured  and  brackish,  and  deposits
a  hard  substance  as  it  rises  ;  so  that  mounds  have  been  formed
around  these  larger  springs,  on  the  top  of  which  the  water  tiows
out  and  runs  down  for  a  few  yards,  till  it  is  lost  in  the  sand.
"We  did  not  remark  that  the  water  was  warm,  as  reported  by
Monconys  and  others.  The  Arabs  call  the  northernmost  spring
sweet  ;  but  we  could  not  perceive  that  it  differed  much  from
the  others.  One  of  them  has  a  small  rude  drain  laid  with  stones,
a  few  paces  long,  which  the  French  have  dignified  with  the  name
of  a  Venetian  aqueduct.'  About  twenty  stunted  imtrimmed
palm  trees,  or  rather  palm  bushes,  grow  round  about  in  the  arid
sand.  A  patch  of  barley,  a  few  rods  square,  was  irrigated  from
one  or  two  of  the  more  southern  fountains.  The  barley  was
now  in  the  ear  ;  and  we  counted  six  men  busy  in  frightening  away
the  little  birds  called  Semmaneh  ;  thus  showing  the  value
attached  to  the  only  sj)ot  of  cidtivation  in  the  vicinity  of  Suez,
to  which  place  they  belonged.  There  were  also  a  few  cabbage
plants.  Near  the  fountains  is  a  low  mound  of  rubbi^h  with
fragments  of  tiles  and  pottery,  and  some  foundations  visible  on

'  .See  Monge  in  Descr.  de  TEgv-pte,  Et.  time  aware  of  this  hypothesis,  and  did  not

Mod.  I.  p.  401)  sq.    Laborde's  Map. — M.  therefore  examine  tlie  coast.    But  there  is

Monge  spciks  of  this  aquedact  as  extend-  nothing  around  the  springs  which  indicates

ing  down  to  the  sea  so  as  to  form  a  water-  it    See  also  Marmont's  Voyage,  Tom.  IV.

ing-pjuce  for  ships,    ^\'e  were  not  at  the  p.  153,  Brux.  1837.

L  89.  90

Mab.  17.]

'ATUIs  musa.

63

the  top,  apparently  marking  the  site  of  a  former  \-illage.^  Eas
'Atakah  bore  from' here  S.  70=  W.

Immediately  south  of  these  fountains,  the  path  rises  over
sand-hills.  At  9.35  we  crossed  Wady  er-Eeiyaneh  nmning  to-
wards the  sea  ;  as  do  all  the  following  Wadys.  An  hour  further
on,  a  path  branched  oif  to  the  left,  towards  the  mountain  at
the  head  of  Wady  Sudr,  where  the  Arabs  Terabin  have  their
chief  encampment.  We  came  to  Wady  Kurdhiyeh  at  11.35  ;
not  a  plain  as  Burckhardt  says  ;  for  the  Bedawin  usually  give
names  only  to  the  Wadys,  and  not  to  the  plains  between.  The
road  continues  over  a  gravelly  tract  of  several  hours  in  extent.
At  12+  o'clock  a  path  went  off  more  to  the  right,  which  leads
alonor  the  shore  to  the  fountain  Abu  Suweirah  near  the  mouth
of  Wady  Wardan,  and  so  to  the  warm  springs  of  Jebel  Ham-
mam.  Soon  after  1  o'clock  we  crossed  Wady  el-Ahtha  coming
down  through  the  plain.  AU  these  Wadys  are  mere  depres-
sions in  the  desert,  with  only  a  few  scattered  herbs  and  shrubs,
now  withered  and  parched  with  drought.  Along  these  plains
we  tirst  saw  scattered  rocks  of  coral  formation  ;  which  we  after-
wards found  also  in  the  adjacent  hUls.  At  4.10  we  encamped
near  the  middle  of  Wady  Sudr,  a  broad  tract  on  a  level  with
the  plain,  along  which  the  mountain-torrents  sweep  down  to
the  sea.  It  is  covered  with  drift  sand,  which  accumulates  in
mounds  around  the  shrubs  and  low  trees.  Here  were  a  few
stunted  tamarisk  trees,  and  many  herbs  and  shrubs  ;  so  that
our  camels  foimd  better  pastur'^  than  heretofore.  The  peak
Taset  Sudr  bore  nearly  east,  at  the  head  of  the  Wady.^

The  former  mountain  is  so  called  (Cup  of  Sudr)  from  a  foun-
tain near  it  which  runs  towards  Wady  Sudr.  Here  are  the
head-quarters  of  the  Terabin^  who  dweU  chiefly  in  the  moun-
tains er-Eahah,  but  visit  also  the  fountain  Abu  Suweirah,  and
claim  the  whole  territory  from  opposite  Suez  to  Wady  Ghurun-
del.  They  are  poor  and  few,  not  numbering  in  all  more  than
twenty-five  tents  or  some  forty  families.  These  Terabin  are  re-
garded by  the  Tawarah  as  strangers  here,  a  colony  from  the
main  tribe  of  the  same  name,  which  occupies  the  country  south
of  Gaza,  and  is  very  rich  in  flocks  and  herds.  Their  territory
as  above  described,  besides  the  two  foimtains  just  mentioned,
includes  also  those  of  Mab'uk,  Xaba'  and  'Ayim  Musa  in  the
north ;  as  weU  as  those  of  Hawarah  and  Wady  Ghiirundel  in
the  south.

With  our  Tawarah  guides,  we  had  every  reason  to  be  satis-

'  M.  MoDge  regards  this  as  the  former  '  The  northernmost  peak  of  Jehel  'Ata-
Bte  of  a  pottery,  where  earthen  vessels  kah  hore  N.  34°  W.  The  northern  end  of
were  mannfactnied  on  the  spot,  in  order  to  Jebel  Deraj  or  Kulalah,  N.  89='  W.  South-
carry  away  water;  Descr.  de  I'Egypte,  L  c.    em  end  of  the  same  S.  53°  W.

'  Travels  in  Syria,  etc.  p.  470.

L  91.  92

64

FROM  SrEZ  TO  MOUXT  SIXAI.

[Sec.  nL

fied.  They  were  good  natured  obliging  fello"ws,  ready  and  desi-
rous to  do  for  us  everything  we  wished,  so  far  as  it  was  in  their
power.  Besharah  had  the  command,  and  took  charge  of  the
arrangements  for  encamping  at  night  and  setting  off  in  the
morning  ;  but  in  other  respects  all  seemed  to  be  much  on  a  foot-
ing. They  walked  lightly  and  gaily  by  our  side  ;  often  out-
stripping the  camels  for  a  time,  and  then  as  often  lagging  be-
hind ;  and  they  seldom  seemed  tired  at  night.  Like  all  the
Tawarah  they  wore  turbans,  and  not  the  Kef  lyeh  of  the  north-
em  and  eastern  deserts.  Shoes  and  stockings  are  luxuries  which
neither  their  poverty  nor  their  habits  permit  them  to  indulge
in  :  and  their  sandals  were  of  the  rudest  and  most  primitive
kind,  made  of  the  thick  skin  of  a  species  of  fish  caught  in  the
Eed  Sea.  Some  of  the  men  had  old  muskets  with  match-locks  ;
the  barrels  mostly  very  long  and  apparently  of  Turkish  or
western  manufacture  ;  while  the  stocks  and  locks  were  ruder,
and  evidently  made  among  themselves.  Several  of  our  Arabs,
and  others  whom  we  saw  with  camels,  carried  in  their  hands  a
small  stick  or  staff  about  three  feet  long,  having  a  crook  at  the
top  with  an  oblong  head  parallel  to  the  staff,  and  cut  in  a  jjecu-
Kar  form.  This  is  only  worth  mentioning,  as  presenting  a
remarkable  instance  of  the  permanency  of  oriental  customs  ;
for  this  very  stick,  precisely  in  the  same  form,  appears  in  the
hands  of  figures  sculptured  on  the  walls  of  the  Theban  tem-
ples. '

We  had  paid  at  Cairo  one  hundred  piastres  in  advance  for
each  of  our  camels,  with  the  express  agreement  that  nothing
more  was  to  be  demanded  until  the  end  of  the  journey  ;  yet  on
arriving  at  Suez,  Besharah  came  to  us  in  quite  a  humble  mood,
saying  that  all  the  money  receiv^  at  Cairo  had  been  paid  out
for  necessaries  and  for  former  debts,  and  that  now  they  had
nothing  wherewith  to  buy  provisions  and  fodder.  To  us  it  was
a  matter  of  indifference,  whether  we  gave  them  money  then  or
aften\-ards,  so  long  as  we  took  care  not  to  advance  them  their
full  pay  ;  and  we  therefore  yielded  to  their  entreaty  in  this
respect.  It  was  of  course  our  wish  and  endeavour  in  all  things
to  deal  with  them  kindly,  and  treat  them  as  men  ;  and  in  this
way  we  won  their  confidence  and  received  from  them  kindness
in  return.  Travellers  often  complain  of  the  obsrinacy  of  the
Bedawin,  and  of  the  impositions  attempted  by  them  ;  and  pro-
bably not  without  reason  ;  but  the  fault,  I  apprehend,  most  fre-
quently lies  on  the  side  of  the  traveller  himself  He  cannot
usually  converse  with  his  guides  except  through  an  interpreter,
who  is  to  them  an  object  of  suspicion  or  contempt ;  and  the

'  See  RoscUini  Monumenti  Storici,  Plates  XLU,  CXXI,  CXXII,  CXX.XIV,  and
several  others,
i.  1*2.  03

ARAB  GUroESw

65

travelleT  thus  becomes  himself  suspected,  and  suspects  them  in
turn,  nndl  even  their  most  harmless  movements  are  distorted
and  ascribed  to  hostQe  motives.  Not  unfrequently  too,  the
stranger  undertakes  to  carry  hi?  point  by  threats  and  violence  ;
and  he  may  thus  succeed  for  the  moment  ;  bat  he  will  find  in
the  end,  that  instead  of  friends,  he  has  made  enemies  :  and  he
•wiU  leave  behind  no  good  name,  either  for  himself  or  for  his
coontrymen  who  may  come  after  him.  Kind  words  and  a  timely
appeal  to  their  palates  and  stomachs,  are  a  cheaper  and  far  more
eificacious  means  of  carrying  a  point  with  the  Bedawin.  than
hard  words  and  browbeating.  Had  we  adopted  the  latter  course
with  our  guides.  I  doubt  not  we  should  have  found  them  as  wilf  ol
and  obstinate  as  they  have  sometimes  been  represented.

Sunday.  March  \Sth.  We  remained  encamped  all  day  in
Wady  Sadi'.  We  had  deterniined,  before  setting  off  from  Cairo,
always  to  rest  on  the  Christian  Sabbath,  if  possible  ;  and  during
all  our  journeys  in  the  Holy  Land,  we  were  never  compelled  to
break  over  this  rule  but  once.  Strange  as  it  may  at  first  seem,
these  Sabbaths  in  the  desert  had  a  peculiar  charm  :  and  left  upon
the  mind  an  impression  that  can  never  be  forgotten.

We  had  made  no  agreement  with  our  Arabs  on  this  point ;
leaving  it  to  time  and  circumstances  to  open  the  way  for  such  an
arrangement.  On  mentioning  to  them  yesterday  our  wish  to
lie  by  for  to-day.  they  made  no  objection,  and  were  quite  ready
to  gratify  us.  The  poor  feUows  set  no  value  on  time  ;  and  when
a  bargain  is  once  made,  whether  they  spend  ten  days  or  fifteen
upon  the  way,  is  a  matter  of  no  importance  to  them.  We  gave
them  rice  for  their  dinner,  and  thus  aflorded  them  quite  a  feast.
One  of  them  had  s«Dre  eyes  :  and  we  were  glad  tor  his  sake  and
our  own,  that  we  had  brought  with  us  a  supply  of  eye-water.

About  noon  three  men  on  camels  came  up  and  stopped  near
us  for  the  rest  of  the  day  and  night.  One  was  a  young  monk,
a  sort  of  noviciate  in  the  convent  of  Mount  Sinai  ;  another  a
Greek  priest  fixtm  PhilippopolLs  ;  and  the  third  a  Wallachian
pilgrim ;  all  on  their  way  to  the  convent.  They  kept  near  us
daring  several  of  the  following  days.

Monday,  March  \^h.  We  rose  early  and  set  o£F  "with  the
risbig  sun  ;  which,  throwing  its  meUow  beams  across  the  gul£
gave  us  a  distinct  view  of  the  dark  fece  of  Atakah,  and  of  the
more  southern  Kulalah  (as  our  Arabs  called  it)  with  its  long
ridge,  and  of  the  broad  Wady  Tawarik  between  these  two  moun-
tains. Keeping  on  our  way  over  the  same  great  plain,  we
reached  at  9:^^  o'clock  the  north  side  of  Wady  Wardan.  a  broad
strip  like  Wady  Sudr,  marked  by  torrent-beds  and  drifts  of
sand.  In  it  towards  the  sea-shore  is  the  fountain  Abu  Suweirah,
which  usually  adords  a  small  quantity  of  sweet  water ;  but

Vol-  L — 6*  L  94.  05

66

FROM  SrEZ  TO  MOITis'T  SINAI.

[Sec.  nL

dries  up  when  the  rains  fail  for  a  season.  Here  was  the  scene
of  an  interesting  story  of  Arab  warfare,  related  bv  Burckhardt.*
The  mountains  on  the  east  still  bore  the  general  name  er-Eahah  ;
but  different  parts  were  now  named  after  the  Wadys  which
descend  from  them  ;  as  Taset  Si3dr,  J ebel  Wardan,  and  the  like.
Near  the  head  of  Wady  Wardan,  a  range  of  hills  comes  off
from  these  mountains  in  a  S.  W.  direction  ;  while  near  the
mouth  of  the  same  Wady  a  low  chain  of  sand-hills  begins  on
the  right,  and  runs  towards  the  S.  E.  These  unite  about  four
hours  from  Wady  Wardan,  and  terminate  the  great  plain.  At
12  o'clock  we  entered  among  the  hills,  the  road  winding  for  a
time  under  the  eastern  side  of  two  high  hUls  or  banks  of  sand
and  pebbles  ;  and  after  twenty-five  minutes  crossed  a  ridge
where  we  had  the  first  view  of  Jebel  Hammam,  bearing  south.
The  way  continued  among  hills  of  limestone  formation,  all
equally  destitute  of  vegetation,  and  some  of  them  exhibiting  an
abundance  of  crystallized  sulphate  of  hme.  Twenty  minutes
further  brought  us  to  the  small  Wady  el-'Amarah,  having  in  it  a
few  scattered  shrubs.  At  2^  o'clock  we  passed  a  large  square
rock  lying  near  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  our  right.  It  is  called
Hajr  er-Rukkab,  "  Stone  of  the  Eiders,"  and  is  mentioned  by
Niebuhr.  Fifteen  minutes  beyond  this,  we  came  to  the  foun-
tain Hawarah,  lying  to  the  left  of  the  road  on  a  large  mound,
composed  of  a  whitish  rocky  substance  formed  apparently  by
the  deposites  of  the  fountain  during  the  lapse  of  ages.  No
stream  was  now  flowing  from  it ;  though  there  are  traces  of
running  water  round  about.  The  basin  is  six  or  eight  feet  in
diameter,  and  the  water  about  two  feet  deep.  Its  taste  is  un-
pleasant, saltish,  and  somewhat  bitter  ;  but  we  could  not  per-
ceive that  it  was  very  much  worse  than  that  of  'Ayiin  Musa  ;
perhaps  because  we  were  not  yet  connoisseurs  in  bad  water.  The
Arabs  however  pronounce  it  bitter,  and  consider  it  as  the  worst
water  in  all  these  regions.  Yet  when  pinched  they  drink  of  it  ;
and  our  camels  also  drank  freely.  Near  by  the  spring  were  two
stunted  palm  trees  ;  and  round  about  it  many  bushes  of  the  shrub
Ghurkud,  now  in  blossom.*  This  is  a  low  bushy  thorny  shrub,
producing  a  small  fruit  wliich  ripens  in  June,  not  unlike  the
barberry,  very  juicy  and  slightly  acidulous.  The  Ghurkud  seems
to  delight  in  a  sahne  soil ;  for  we  found  it  growing  around  all
the  brackish  fountains  which  we  afterwards  fell  in  with,  during
our  journeys  in  and  around  Palestine.  In  the  midst  of  parched
deserts,  as  in  the  Ghor  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  where  the  heat

'  Page  471.    I  shall  recur  to  the  same  Arah.  p.  LX\1.    More  correctly  A^»;rari3

story  further  on,  in  speaking  of  the  charac-  tridenUUa  of  Desfontaiues  ;  Flora  Atlant.  I.

ter  of  the  Tawarah.  372.    Comp.  Geseniua'  Note  on  Buick-

•  Peganum  relusum,  Forsk.  Flora.  .Eg.  hardt,  p.  1082.
i.  96.  97

Mar.  19.]

'ain  HAWABAH.

67

was  intense  and  the  fountains  briny,  the  red  berries  of  this  plant
often  afforded  us  a  grateful  refreshment.

The  fountain  of  Hawarah  is  first  distinctly  mentioned  by
Burckhardt.  Pococke  perhaps  saw  it  ;  though  his  language  is
quite  indefinite.'  Niebuhr  passed  this  way  ;  but  his  guides  did
not  point  it  out  to  him  ;  probably  because  the  Arabs  make  no.
account  of  it  as  a  watering-place.  Since  Burckhardt's  day  it
has  generally  been  regarded  as  tbe  bitter  foixntain  Marah,
which  the  Israelites  reached  after  three  days'  march  without
water  in  the  desert  of  Shur.^  The  position  of  the  spring  and
the  nature  of  the  country  tally  very  exactly  with  this  supposi-
tion. After  having  passed  the  Red  Sea,  the  IsraeKtes  would
naturally  supply  themselves  from  the  fountains  of  Naba'  and
'Ayiin  Musa  ;  and  from  the  latter  to  Hawarah  is  a  distance  of
about  sixteen  and  a  half  hours,  or  thirty-three  geographical  miles ;
which,  as  we  have  seen  above,  was  for  them  a  good  three  days'
journey.  On  the  route  itself  there  is  no  water  ;  but  near  the
sea  is  now  the  small  fountain  Abu  Suweirah,  which  may  then
have  been  dry  or  not  have  existed  ;  and  in  the  mountains  on
the  left  is  the  "  Cup  of  Sudr,"  several  hours  from  the  road  and
probably  unknown  to  the  Israelites.  I  see  therefore  no  valid
objection  to  the  above  hypothesis.  The  fountain  lies  at  the
specified  distance,  and  on  their  direct  route  ;  for  there  is  no
probability  that  they  passed  by  the  lower  and  longer  road  along
the  sea-shore.  We  made  particular  inquiries,  to  ascertain
whether  the  name  Marah  stUl  exists,  as  reported  by  Shaw  ^  and
others  ;  but  neither  the  Tawarah  Arabs,  nor  the  inhabitants  of
Suez,  nor  the  monks  of  the  convent,  so  far  as  we  could  learn,
had  ever  heard  of  it.  Travellers  have  probably  been  led  into
error  by  the  name  of  Wady  el-'Amarah  ;  or  possibly  by  el-
Murkhah,  a  fountain  nearly  two  days'  journey  further  south,  on
the  lower  route  to  Mount  Sinai  and  Tiir.

Burckhardt  suggests  that  the  IsraeKtes  may  have  rendered
the  water  of  Marah  palatable,  by  mingling  with  it  the  juice  of
the  berries  of  the  Ghurkud.*  The  process  would  be  a  very
simple  one,  and  doubtless  effectual ;  and  the  presence  of  this
shrub  around  all  brackish  fountains,  would  cause  the  remedy  to
be  always  at  hand.  But  as  the  Israelites  broke  up  from  Egypt
on  the  morrow  of  Easter,  and  reached  Marah  apparently  not
more  than  two  or  three  weeks  later,  the  season  for  these  berries
would  hardly  have  arrived.  We  made  frequent  and  dihgent
inquiries,  whether  any  process  is  now  known  among  the  Bedawin
for  thus  sweetening  bad  water,  either  by  means  of  the  juice  of

>  Travels,  I.  p.  139.  fol.  s  Travels,  4to.  p.  314.

"  Ex.  15,  23  sq.    Num.  33,  8.  *  Travels  in  Syria,  p.  474.

i.  97.  98

68

FROM  SUEZ  TO  MOrXT  SIHAI.

[Sec.  in.

berries,  or  the  bark  or  leaves  of  any  tree  or  plant  ;  but  we  were
invariably  answered  in  the  negative.'

Proceeding  on  our  way,  in  half  an  hour  we  had  on  our  left
a  small  plain  or  basin,  called  Nukeia'  el-Ful,  in  which  water
stands  after  abundant  rains,  causing  a  soil  of  rich  loam,  which
produces  a  luxuriant  vegetation.  This  was  testified  by  the
large  stalks  of  an  abundance  of  weeds  now  dry.  On  some  por-
tions of  it  the  Terabin  sow  wheat  and  barley  after  the  rains,
and  reap  a  good  crop.  It  was  the  only  spot  of  soil  known  to
our  Arabs  in  these  parts.  A  few  goats  were  feeding  upon  the
herbs  on  the  hills  around,  watched  by  females.  From  them  we
obtained  a  supply  of  milk,  for  which  we  paid  in  bread  instead
of  money,  as  being  far  more  acceptable.  These  were  the  first
flocks  we  had  seen  since  leaving  Cairo  ;  and  we  afterwards  saw
the  few  tents  of  the  owners,  Terabin  Arabs,  pitched  near  the
head  of  Wady  Ghurundel.  We  reached  this  latter  Wady  at  4^
o'clock  ;  it  comes  down  as  a  broad  valley  from  the  mountains  on
the  left,  and  runs  from  N.  E.  to  S.  W.  to  the  sea  south  of  Ras
Hammam.  The  mountain  at  its  head  is  called  Ras  Wady
Ghurundel,  a  continuation  of  the  chain  er-Rahah,  which  here
bends  oif  towards  the  S.  E.  and  E.  where  it  afterwards  receives
the  name  et-Tih,  and  extends  across  the  peninsula  to  the  gulf
of  'Akabah.  Thus  far  our  course  all  day  had  been  about  JS.  S.
E.,  but  we  now  turned  down  the  Wady  S.  W.  and  encamped
after  half  an  hour  in  a  deep  and  narrow  part  of  its  bed.

Wady  Ghurundel  is  deeper  and  better  supplied  with  bushes
and  shrubs  than  any  we  had  yet  seen  ;  and  like  Stidr  and
Wardan  it  bore  marks  of  having  had  water  running  in  it  the
present  year.  The  Ghurkud  is  very  frequent.  Straggling  trees
of  various  kinds  are  found  in  it  ;  the  most  common  of  which  is
the  Turfa,  a  species  of  tamarisk,  Tamarix  Gallica  manni/'era
of  Ehrenberg,  on  which  our  camels  browsed  freely  ;  and  also
mimosas  or  acacias,  called  by  the  Arabs  Tulh  and  Seyal.  A
few  small  palm  trees  are  scattered  through  the  valley.  We
saw  many  of  the  wood-ticks  mentioned  by  Burckhardt  ;  but
they  did  not  trouble  us.  About  half  an  hour  below  our  encamp-
ment, the  Arabs  procured  water,  as  they  said,  from  fountains
with  a  running  brook.  It  was  brackish,  and  of  the  same  gene-
ral character  as  that  of  all  the  preceding  fountains,  though  less
disagreeable  than  that  of  Hawarah.  We  kept  it  over  night  in
our  leather-bottles,  and  it  did  not  change  its  taste  ;  though  the
Arabs  said  it  would  grow  worse,  as  Burckhardt  also  testifies.

'  It  is  perhaps  hardly  necessary  to  re-  ulations  as  to  the  name  of  any  particnlor

mark,  that  the  Hebrew  original,  like  the  plant  can  only  rest  on  air.  See  Lord  Lind-

English  version,  has  here  only  the  general  say's  Letters,  1st  edit.  I.  p.  U63  sq.
word  for  "  tree  ; "  and  therefore  all  spec-

L  98  99

Mar.  19.]

■WADT  GHUBTJNDEL.

When  the  rains  fail  for  two  or  three  years,  the  hrook  ceases  to
flow  ;  hut  water  is  always  to  be  found  by  digging  a  little  below
the  surface.

This  Wady  is  now  commonly  regarded  as  the  EKm  of  Scrip-
ture, to  which  the  Israehtes  came  after  leaving  Marah,  and
found  twelve  wells  of  water  and  seventy  palm  trees. '  There  is
nothing  improbable  in  this  supposition,  if  we  admit  'Ain
Hawarah  to  be  Marah.  The  fountains  of  Wady  Ghurfmdel  are
two  and  a  half  hours,  or  nearly  half  a  day's  journey  for  the
Israelites,  distant  from  Hawarah  ;  and  are  stUl  one  of  the  chief
■watering  places  of  the  Arabs.  The  main  objection  which  might
here  be  urged,  is  the  distance  from  this  point  to  the  next  sta-
tion, where  the  Israelites  "  encamped  by  the  Red  Sea  ; "  ^  a
fixed  and  definite  i^oint,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel.  But
this  objection  may  perhaps  be  evaded.

Beyond  Wady  Ghurundel  the  mountains,  or  at  least  a  more
mountainous  tract,  may  be  said  to  commence.  On  the  right
along  the  coast  in  the  S.  W.  is  the  high  mountain  called  J ebel
Hammam,  from  the  hot  sulphur  springs  at  its  northern  end.
On  the  left  the  continuation  of  er-Eahah  appears,  with  several
spurs  running  down  from  it  S.  W.  along  the  south  side  of  Ghurun-
del and  extending  almost  to  Jebel  Hammam.  The  whole  region
is  of  limestone  formation.  Wady  Ghurundel  does  not  extend
up  through  the  mountains  on  the  left  towards  Gaza,  as  was  re-
ported to  Burckhardt  ;  but  near  its  head  another  valley,  called
Wady  Wutah,  comes  into  it  from  the  east ;  where  the  latter
runs  up  between  the  Tih  on  the  X.  E.  and  a  mountain  ridge  in
front  of  it,  called  also  Wutah.  Here  is  quite  a  retired  vaUey
hemmed  in  by  mountains,  from  the  head  of  which  a  pass  leads
over  to  the  plain  er-Ramleh  ;  the  whole  forming  a  shorter  but
more  difficult  roirte  from  Ghurundel  to  Mount  Sinai.

Tuesday,  March  20th.  isiebuhr  travelled  down  Wady
Ghurfmdel  to  the  sea,  about  two  and  a  half  hours  from  our  en-
campment ;  and  then  an  hour  and  a  half  along  the  shore  of  the
bay  called  Birket  Hammum  Far'On  to  the  hot  springs  ;  which
he  and  many  travellers  have  described.^    Thence  the  way  passes

•  Ex.  15,  27.  Niun.  33,  9.  We  found  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  The  largest  of
nowhere  any  trace  of  a  valley  called  them  has  a  temperature  of  55°  7  Reanm.
'Ahm  or  Gh  ilim,  as  reported  by  Gesenius  that  of  the  air  being  26  3  IJeamn.  The
ou  the  authority  of  Ehrenberg ;  see  Gese-  water  deposites  a  great  deal  of  common
nius  Lex.  Hebr.  Man,  art.  SS'^X  salt  mixed  with  sulphur  ;  and  the  latter  is

^  Xum.  33  10.  also  found  sublimated  on  the  walls  of  the

*  The  following  account  of  these  springs  many  caverns  connected  with  the  fount-
is  by  Ruissegger,  who  passed  this  way  "a  ^if^  ^^'SCRIPTIONS.

75

evidently  later  than  the  neighbouring  inscriptions.  The  spot  is
one  where  travellers  would  be  likely  to  rest  during  the  heat  of
the  midday  sun.  Burckhardt  mentions  the  drawings,  but  not
the  inscriptions.'

A  little  beyond  this  place  our  Arabs  expected  to  find  rain
water  among  the  rocks  ;  and  scattered  themselves,  running  off
into  the  different  openings  of  the  mountains,  to  seek  for  it.
They  were  not  very  successful,  finding  but  httle,  and  that
strongly  impregnated  with  camel's  dung.  Yet  our  Arabs  seemed
to  drink  it  with  gusto.  We  now  found  ourselves  in  fact  strait-
ened for  water.  What  we  had  brought  from  the  spring  Naba'
near  Suez,  had  become  much  worse  than  at  first  ;  and  since  then
we  had  met  with  none  fit  to  fill  the  empty  water-skins.  We
had  got  tolerably  accustomed  to  a  leathery  taste  in  the  water  we
carried :  but  had  not  yet  learned  to  relish  that  which  was  briny
and  bitter,  or  which  smacked  of  camel's  dung.  This  however
was  the  only  time  we  were  thus  straitened  ;  nor  did  we  now
suffer  much  inconvenieuee.  We  encamped  at  5.10  in  Wady
Humr,  after  a  long  day's  march  of  eleven  hours,  near  the  place
where  the  high  rocks  on  either  side  terminate.  The  valley  has
several  trees  and  many  shrubs,  so  that  the  camels  found  good
pasturage.  The  only  trees  throughout  this  region  are  the  Turfa,
properly  a  tamarisk,  with  long  narrow  leaves  and  without  thorns,
the  same  on  which  the  manna  (Arabic  Monn)  is  elsewhere  found  ;
and  the  Tidh  or  Seyal,  said  by  the  Arabs  to  be  identical,  a
species  of  very  thorny  acacia,  producing  a  little  gum  arable  of  an
inferior  quahty.^  This  the  Arabs  sometimes  gather  and  sell,
when  not  too  lazy.  But  all  these  trees  are  here  small  and
•stunted,  for  the  want  both  of  soil  and  of  water.

Wednesday,  March  2lst.  We  set  off  at  6.20,  stiU  follow-
ing up  Wady  Humr,  E.  S.  E.  The  rocks  on  our  right  became
lower ;  while  on  our  left  the  high  mountain  Jebel  Wutah  rose
almost  from  the  bank  of  the  Wady.  This  is  strictly  a  spur  of
Jebel  et-Tih,  connected  with  it  at  the  eastern  end,  and  thence
running  westward  parallel  with  it,  having  the  retired  Wady
Wutah  between.  In  less  than  an  hour,  the  rocks  ceased  on  the
right ;  and  at  7.15  a  road  turned  off  on  that  side  to  Wady  en-
Nusb,  across  an  uneven  sandy  plain  called  Debbet  en-Xusb.
This  road  is  often  taken  by  the  Arabs  and  by  travellers  on  ac-
count of  the  fine  spring  of  water  in  that  valley ;  but  it  is  longer,
and  returns  after  some  hours  into  the  direct  road.  One  or  two
of  o\ir  men  with  a  camel  were  sent  round  by  this  route,  in  order
to  fill  the  water-skins ;  and  they  brought  us  a  load  of  better  water

'  Page  476.  botanists  it  is  known  s.s  Acacia  r/ummifera,

'  This  tree  is  the  iRmosa  Sejal  of  For-  and  is  called  bv  Abdallatif  Thlh  ;  Spren-
Bkal ;  Flora  £g.  Arab.  p.  177.    Bv  later    gel  Hist.  Rei  Herbar.  I.  p.  270.

U.  109,  110

76

FKOM  SUEZ  TO  MOUNT  SIKAI.

[Sec.  m.

than  "sre  had  found  since  leaving  the  Nile.  "Wadv  Humr  now
spreads  out  into  a  broad  plain  sprinkled  over  Avith  herbs,  extend-
ing round  the  east  end  of  Jebel  Wiitah  quite  to  et-Tih.  At  8
o'clock  the  valley  became  narrower  between  sand-hiUs  for  half  an
hour  :  but  then  opened  again  as  before.  At  9  o'clock  we  reached
the  head  of  the  Wady  or  plain,  whence  we  ascended  for  twenty
minutes  a  rocky  slope  covered  with  sand.

From  this  spot  we  had  a  wide  view  over  the  surrounding
country.  On  our  left  was  the  Tih,  a  long,  lofty,  level,  unbrcken
ridge,  the  continuation  of  er-Eahah,  stretching  off  eastward  as
far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  apparently  of  limestone.  On  our
right  and  before  us,  along  the  foot  of  the  Tih,  lay  an  uneven
sandy  plain,  several  miles  in  breadth,  fuU  of  low  broken  ridges
and  water-courses.  This  sandy  plain  extends,  as  we  afterwards
found,  through  the  whole  interior  of  the  peninsula,  almost  to  the
eastern  coast.  It  lies  between  the  Tih  and  the  proper  moun-
tains of  the  peninsula,  which  rose  on  our  right  in  fantastic  shapes
and  wild  confusion.  Those  adjacent  to  the  plain  are  of  sand-
stone, cut  up  by  deep  valleys  and  ravines,  into  which  the  shallow
Wadys  which  descend  from  the  Tih  across  the  plain,  enter  and
find  their  way  down  to  the  sea.  Further  south  is  a  belt  of
griinstein  and  porphyry  ;  and  then  the  centre  of  the  peninsula
is  occupied  by  large  masses  of  granite,  constituting  the  proper
mountains  of  Sinai  itself  We  could  here  see  the  pass  leading
over  between  et-Tih  and  Jebel  Wtitah  into  TVady  "Wutah,  and
80  down  to  Wady  Ghurundel.  It  bore  from  us  N.  20^  W.
In  the  long  ridge  of  the  Tih  itself,  which  our  Arabs  said  takes
this  general  name  from  the  high  desert  on  its  northern  side,  they
pointed  out  two  passes,  through  which  caravan  roads  lead  from
Sinai  to  Gaza  and  Hebron.  The  westernmost  (stiU  some  hours
east  of  where  we  stood)  is  called  er-Rakineh,  and  the  other  el-
Mureikhy.  Between  them  is  a  third,  called  el-Wursah,  used
only  by  the  Arabs,  being  too  steep  and  difficult  for  loaded  cara-
vans. From  it  a  Wady  of  the  same  name  descends  southwards
across  the  plain  to  Wady  Nusb,  and  is  probably  the  Warsan
mentioned  by  Niebuhr. '  Still  further  east,  Jebel  et-Tih  divides
into  two  ridges,  which  then  run  nearly  parallel,  at  the  distance
of  several  hours  from  each  other,  to  the  gulf  of  'Akabah.  So  far
as  we  could  learn,  the  southern  branch  is  at  first  called  edh-
Dhulul,  and  the  northern  one  in  its  western  part,  el-'Ojmeh.
A  road  leads  from  Sinai  by  a  pass  over  the  southern  ridge  to  the
head  of  Wady  ez-Zulakah  and  'Ain  ;  *  and  thence  by  another
pass  over  the  northern  ridge  to  Gaza  and  Hebron.

•  Reisebeschr.  I.  p.  231.  leading  over  et-Tih.     Voyage  en  Arab.

*  This  pass  is  mentioned  bj  Laborde,  Petr.  p.  63.  EngL  ed.  p.  226.  Sir  F.
who  asserts  it  to  be  the  only  pass  or  road    Henniker  passed  by  way  of  er-Rakineh;

i.  110,  111

Mak.  21.]

JEBEL  ET-TIH.     PASSES,  ETC.

77

Proceeding  over  this  plain  in  a  direction  E.  S.  E.  before
coming  upon  the  sand  we  crossed  several  shallow  Wadys,  stud-
ded with  shrubs,  all  flowing  towards  Wady  Nusb.  One  of  them,
at  10  o'clock,  was  called  Wady  Beda'.  Beyond  this,  on  the
right,  are  three  springs  of  brackish  water,  called  el-Malih.
Crossing  a  low  ridge  at  10.45,  we  got  our  first  view  of  the  granite
peaks  around  Sinai,  still  indistinct  and  nameless  ;  bearing  S.  S.  E,
while  Serbal  at  the  same  time  bore  S.  by  E.  Here  we  came
upon  the  great  sandy  tract,  which  we  had  seen  before,  called  by
the  Arabs  Debbet  er-Eamleh,  and  also,  according  to  Burckhardt,
Eaml  el-Murak,  extending  eastward  further  than  the  eye  could
reach.  Among  the  sandstone  mountains  on  our  right,  the  site
of  Surabit  el-Khadim  had  already  been  pointed  out  to  us  ;  and
at  11^  o'clock  we  turned  off  to  the  right  on  a  course  nearly  south
to.  visit  it  ;  leaving  our  servants  and  loaded  animals  to  follow  the
direct  road  to  the  head  of  Wady  el-Khumileh,  and  encamp  a
short  distance  within  that  valley.

In  about  half  an  hour  we  descended  into  a  broad  sandy  val-
ley, called  Seih  en-Nusb,  which  runs  S.  W.  along  the  mountains
and  enters  them  obliquely,  having  several  branches  coming  in
also  from  the  east  and  S.  E.  In  one  of  these  we  crossed  about
noon  the  other  road,  coming  up  from  the  fountain  in  Wady
Nusb,  of  which  the  Seih  is  the  principal  head.  This  path  passes
on  eastward  up  a  sandy  hill  called  el-Murak,  and  joins  the  di-
rect road  stdl  upon  the  plain.  Our  way  led  across  the  same  hill
of  sand,  but  further  to  the  right ;  and  we  found  the  ascent  very
toilsome  from  the  depth  and  looseness  of  the  sand  ;  there  being
no  trace  of  a  path.  Descending  again  we  reached  a  broad  sandy
valley,  called  Wady  Suwuk,  running  from  S.  E.  to  N.  W.
within  the  skirts  of  the  mountains  into  Wady  Niasb.  On  the
further  side  of  this  valley  we  left  our  camels  at  half  past  1  o'clock,
and  crossing  on  foot  a  ridge  of  deep  sand  towards  the  west  into
a  rocky  ravine,  we  began  the  difficult  ascent  of  the  mountain  at
its  S.  E.  end.

The  mountain  may  be  some  six  or  seven  hundred  feet  high  ;
and  is  composed  entirely  of  precipitous  sandstone  rock,  mostly
red,  but  alternating  occasionally  with  strata  of  different  shades.
A  track  leads  up  the  toilsome  and  somewhat  dangerous  ascent,
along  the  face  of  the  precipice  at  the  head  of  the  ra\-ine,  marked
only  by  small  heaps  of  stones.  Chmbing  slowly  and  with  diffi-
culty to  the  top,  we  found  ourselves  at  the  end  of  three  quarters
of  an  hour  upon  a  level  ridge,  connected  with  a  tract  of  high
table  land  of  sandstone  formation,  much  resembling  the  Saxon
Switzerland,  and  like  it  intersected  in  every  direction  by  deep

as  also  Breydenbach  and  Fabri  in  1484. —  given  in  Note  XXIV,  at  the  end  of  the
A  special  Itinerary  of  all  these  rontes  ijs  volnme.

Vol.  I.— 7*  i.  112, 113

78

FROM  SUEZ  TO  MOUXT  SINAI.

[SEa  m.

precipitous  ra\ines  ;  wliile  higher  peaks  of  irregular  and  fantastic
form  lay  all  around  us.  A  short  distance  westward,  on  this  ridge,
Anth  a  deep  chasm  upon  either  side,  are  situated  the  singiilar
and  mysterious  monuments  of  Surabit  el-Khadim.

These  he  mostly  within  the  compass  of  a  small  enclosure,  one
hundred  and  sixty  feet  long  from  east  to  west  by  seventy  feet
broad,  marked  by  heaps  of  stones  thrown  or  fallen  together,  the
remains  perhaps  of  former  walls  or  rows  of  low  buildings.
Within  this  space  are  seen  about  fifteen  upright  stones,  hke
tombstones,  and  several  fallen  ones,  covered  with  Egyptian  hie-
roglyphics ;  and  also  the  remains  of  a  small  temple,  whose
columns  are  decorated  with  the  head  of  Isis  for  a  capital.  At
the  eastern  end  is  a  subterranean  chamber  excavated  in  the  sohd
rock,  resembling  an  Egyptian  sepulchre.  It  is  square  ;  and  the
roof  is  supported  in  the  middle  by  a  square  column  left  from  the
rock.  Both  the  column  and  the  sides  of  the  chamber  are  covered
with  hieroglyphics  ;  and  in  each  of  the  sides  is  a  small  niche.
The  whole  surface  of  the  enclosure  is  covered  with  fallen  columns,
fragments  of  sculpture,  and  hewn  stones  strewn  in  every  direction  ;
over  which  the  pilgrim  can  with  difficulty  find  his  way.  Other
similar  upright  stones  stand  without  the  enclosure  in  various  di-
rections, and  even  at  some  distance  ;  each  surrounded  by  a  heap
of  stones,  which  may  have  been  thrown  together  by  the  Arabs.
These  upright  stones  both  within  and  without  the  enclosure,
vary  from  about  seven  to  ten  feet  in  height  ;  while  they  are  from
eighteen  inches  to  two  feet  in  breadth,  and  from  fourteen  to  six-
teen inches  in  thickness.  They  are  rounded  off  on  the  top,
forming  an  arc  over  the  broadest  sides.  On  one  of  the.se  sides
usually  appears  the  common  Egyptian  symbol  of  the  winged
globe  with  two  serpents,  and  one  or  more  priests  presenting  offer-
ings to  the  gods  ;  while  various  figures  and  cartouches  cover  the
remaining  sides.  They  are  said  to  bear  the  names  of  different
Egyptian  kings  ;  but  no  two  of  them  to  have  the  name  of  the
same  monarch.  According  to  Major  Felix,  the  name  of  Osir-
tisen  I.  is  found  on  one  of  them,  whom  Wilkinson  supposes  to
have  been  the  patron  of  J oseph.  Not  the  least  singularity  about
these  monuments  is  the  wonderful  preservation  of  the  inscrip-
tions upon  this  soft  sandstone,  exposed  as  they  have  been  to  the
air  and  weather  during  the  lapse  of  so  many  ages.  On  some  of
the  stones  they  are  quite  perfect ;  on  othei-s  both  the  inscription
and  the  stone  itself  have  been  worn  away  deeply  by  the  tooth  of
time.

Tliis  spot  was  first  discovered  by  Nicbuhr  in  1761,  who,  in-
quiring for  the  inscriptions  of  Wady  el-Mukaiteb,  was  brought
by  his  guides  to  this  place  as  one  of  still  greater  interest  and
wonder  ;  or  rather,  as  it  would  seem,  from  ignorance  on  their

i.  113-115

Mas.  21.]

SUBABIT  EL-KHADIM,

79

part  of  the  real  object  of  his  inquiries.'  The  next  Frank  visiter
appears  to  have  been  the  French  traveller  Boutin  in  1811.  who
was  afterwards  murdered  in  Syria  ;  and  he  was  followed  by  Kiip-
peU  in  1817."^  Many  other  travellers  have  since  been  here  on
their  way  to  Sinai.  So  Lord  Prudhoe  and  Major  Felix  ;  and
after  them  Laborde  and  Linant,  who  have  given  drawings  and
views  of  the  place  and  several  of  the  monuments.'  AU  these
travellers,  with  the  exception  of  the  two  Englishmen,  have  pro-
nounced this  to  be  an  ancient  Egyptian  cemetery,  and  these
monuments  to  be  tombstones,  connected  with  a  supposed  colony
near  the  copper  mines  in  Wady  en-Nusb.  That  these  upright
stones  resemble  the  tombstones  of  the  west  in  form,  is  true  ;  and
this  would  seem  to  be  the  chief  circumstance  which  has  given
rise  to  the  hypothesis.  There  is  nothing  of  the  kind  in  Eg}-pt ;
nor  can  they  well  be  sepulchral  monuments,  unless  excavated
tombs  exist  beneath  them  ;  which  there  is  every  reason  to  believe
is  not  the  case.  "What  then  could  have  been  the  intent  of  these
temples  and  these  memorial  stones  in  the  midst  of  soUtude  and
silence  ?  in  this  lone  and  distant  desert,  with  which  they  would
seem  to  have  no  possible  connection  ?  This  is  a  point  wrapped
in  the  darkness  of  time,  which  the  hand  of  modem  science  has
not  yet  unveiled.

An  ingenious  hypothesis  was  mentioned  to  me  by  the  Eng-
lish nobleman  named  above,  viz.  that  this  was  perhaps  a  sacred
place  of  pilgrimage  for  the  ancient  Egyptians,  just  as  the  moun-
tain near  Mecca  is  to  the  Muhammedans  at  the  present  day  ;
and  to  it  the  Egyptian  kings  made  each  his  pilgrimage  and
erected  a  column  with  his  name.  A  slight  historical  ground  for
such  an  hvpothesis,  may  perhaps  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  Moses
demanded  permission  for  the  Israehtes  to  go  three  days'  jour-
ney into  the  desert  in  order  to  sacrifice  ;  *  a  demand  which  seems
to  have  caused  no  surprise  to  the  Egyptians,  as  if  it  were  some-
thing to  which  they  were  themselves  accustomed.  Still  aU  this
can  claim  to  be  nothing  more  than  conjecture.  Yet  this  lone
spot,  although  inexplicable,  is  deeply  interesting  ;  it  leads  the
beholder  back  into  the  gray  mists  of  high  antiquity  ;  and  fills
him  ^vith  wonder  and  awe  as  he  surveys  here,  far  from  the  abodes
of  life,  the  labours  of  men  unknown  for  an  object  alike  un-
known.'

From  the  high  tract  about  Surabit  el-Khadim,  there  is  a

'  Reisebeschr.  L  p.  235.  object  of  this  jotiniey  was  to  be  a  '  festi-

'  Burckhardt's  Travels  in  Syria,  etc.  p.    val '  corresponding  to  the  modem

67a.    RuppelTs  Beisen  in  Xubien,  etc.  p.    ffaj  of  the  Muhammedans.    Ex.  10,  9.

*  Lepsius,  who  visited  the  spot  in  1845,
The  most  exact  description  is  by  Rup-    regards  these  monuments  as  having  been
peD,  as  cited  in  the  preceding  note.  erected  in  connection  with  the  working  of

'  Ex.  8,  27.  28.  [23.  24.  Heb.]    The    copper  mines :  Br.  aus  Aeg.  p.  337  5q.  See

L  115,  116

80

FROM  SUEZ  TO  MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

wide  view  of  the  surrounding  country.  •    We  saw  no  traces  of

mines  around  the  jilace,  as  mentioned  by  Lahorde  ;  hut  our
Arabs  said  that  towards  the  west  in  Wady  Suhau,  a  branch  of
Wady  en-Nusb,  was  found  the  stone  from  which  el-Kuhal  is
made  and  carried  to  market.  We  suppose  this  to  be  antimony  ;
though  we  saw  none  of  it.^

After  spending  an  hour  and  a  quarter  amon^  these  monu-
ments, we  descended  again  by  the  same  rugged  path,  and  re-
turned to  our  camels  in  Wady  Suwuk.  From  this  point  to  the
fountain  of  Nusb  is  a  distance  of  about  two  and  a  half  hours  ;
and  the  Wady  Nusb,  having  collected  its  numerous  branches,
then  finds  its  way  through  the  mountains  to  the  w^estern  gulf,  or
rather  to  the  great  plain  along  the  coast.  In  the  valley  a  flock
of  sheep  and  goats  were  feeding,  tended  by  two  young  girls,
whose  tents  were  not  far  off.  The  owner  of  the  flock  soon  made
his  appearance  ;  and  after  some  chaffering  we  bought  a  kid,  in-
tending to  give  our  Arabs  a  good  supper.  Mounting  at
4|  o'clock,  we  proceeded  S.  E.  up  Wady  Suwuk  to  its  head.
One  of  the  Arabs  led  the  kid  by  a  string,  and  as  the  poor  animal
trotted  nimbly  by  their  side,  they  were  elated  at  the  thought  of
the  savoury  meat  in  prospect.  As  we  passed  along  the  valley,
our  sharp-sighted  guides  discovered  a  Beden  or  mountain  goat
(related  to  the  Steinbock  of  the  Alps)  among  the  rocks  on  our
left.  One  of  them  immediately  started  in  pursuit  ;  but  as  he
could  approach  only  on  the  windward  side,  the  goat  scented  him,
and  dashed  lightly  along  the  side  and  up  the  face  of  the  preci-
pice, presenting  a  graceful  object  against  the  sky  with  his  long
recurved  horns  and  bounding  leaps.  The  Arab  began  to  mount
after  him  with  great  agility,  but  was  called  back  by  his  com-
panions. At  the  head  of  the  valley  is  a  steep  and  rugged  pass,
which  our  camels  mounted  with  diflBculty  ;  and  here  we  saw  the
first  strata  of  griinstein.  On  reacliing  the  top,  we  found  our-
selves upon  the  western  ridge  of  Wady  el-Klmniileh,  a  broad
sandy  tract,  thus  far  a  mere  arm  of  the  great  plain  extending  to-
wards the  S.  E.  into  the  mountains.  Our  tent  stood  below  in
the  valley  ;  and  passing  down  by  a  gradual  descent,  we  reached
it  at  three  quarters  past  5  o'clock.  The  Greek  priests  who  had
kept  near  us  since  Sunday,  had  passed  on  some  distance  beyond  ;
and  we  saw  them* no  more  until  we  reached  the  convent.

The  poor  kid  was  now  let  loose,  and  ran  bleating  into  our

also  Wilkinson's  Mod.  Egypt,  II.  p.  405.  '  Ancient  copper  mines,  with  tablets

Handb.  for  Kpypt,  p.  216.  and    hicroglypbie  inscriptions  near,  are

'  The  pass  of  WCit  .h  bore  N.  30°  W. ;  still  found  in  Wady  Mugh  ira;  sec  Lep-

er-Rakineh  N.  20°  E. ;  Mount  Serbal  S.  sius  Briefe,  p.  336.  "  Bartlett's  Forty  Days

16°  E.,  and  .MA  'ihii'iii,  a  peak  in  the  clus-  in  the  Desert,  p.  41  sq.
ter  of  Sinai,  S.  .'^3 '  E.

i.  llo.  117

Mab.22.]

^VADT  EL-KHUMILEH.

81

tent,  as  if  aware  of  its  approacliing  fate.  All  was  activity  and  bustle
to  prepare  the  coming  feast  ;  the  kid  was  killed  and  dressed  with
great  dexterity  and  despatch  ;  and  its  still  quivering  members
were  laid  upon  the  fire  and  began  to  emit  savoury  odours,  par-
ticularly gratifying  to  Arab  nostrils.  But  nojv  a  change  came
over  the  fair  scene.  The  Arabs  of  whom  we  had  bought  the  kid,
had  in  some  way  learned  that  we  were  to  encamp  near ;  and
naturally  enough  concluding  that  the  kid  was  bought  in  order  to
be  eaten,  they  thought  good  to  honour  our  Arabs  with  a  visit,
to  the  number  of  five  or  six  persons.  Now  the  stem  law  of  Bed-
awin  hospitaUty  demands,  that  whenever  a  guest  is  present  at  a
meal,  whether  there  be  much  or  little,  the  first  and  best  portion
must  be  laid  before  the  stranger.  In  this  instance  the  five  or  six
guests  attained  their  object,  and  had  not  only  the  selling  of  the
kid,  but  also  the  eating  of  it  ;  wlnle  our  poor  Arabs,  whose
mouths  had  long  been  watering  with  expectation,  were  forced  to
take  up  with  the  fragments.  Besharah,  who  played  the  host,
fared  worst  of  all ;  and  came  afterwards  to  beg  for  a  biscuit,  say-
ing he  had  lost  the  whole  of  his  dinner.

Thursdaij,  March  22nd.  Starting  at  6^  o'clock,  we  con-
tinued down  Wady  Khumileh  on  a  S.  E.  course.  It  is  wide,
with  many  shrubs  and  with  rocks  of  sandstone  on  each  side.  In
fifteen  minutes  we  came  to  a  rock  on  the  right  hand  covered  with
Sinaite  inscriptions,  figures  of  camels,  mountain  goats,  and  the
like.  Five  minutes  further  is  another  large  rock  on  the  same
side  with  inscriptions,  and  several  crosses  apparently  of  the  same
age.  Here  are  also  inscribed  the  names  of  several  travellers  ;  one
is  Fa'erne,  1582,  perfectly  fresh.  The  Wady  gradually  contracts
and  grows  deeper  ;  and  at  8  o'clock  we  came  to  the  spot  where
it  turns  a  sharp  angle  to  the  W.  N.  W.  through  a  narrow  ravine,
and  passes  by  itself  to  the  sea,  as  our  Arabs  said,  (probably  un-
der another  name,)  receiving  Wady  Mukatteb  on  the  way.  We
stUl  kept  on  the  same  course,  ascending  a  branch  Wady  for
twenty  minutes  to  a  small  plain,  forming  the  water-shed  between
it  and  a  similar  short  Wady  running  S.  E.  to  the  Seih.  On  this
httle  plain  is  a  lone  Arab  burial  ground,  called  Mukberat  esh-
Sheikh  Ahmed,  where  all  the  Bedawin,  who  die  in  the  ^•icinity,
are  buried.  A  few  stones  rudely  piled  together,  or  set  up  singly,
serve  to  mark  the  graves  ;  and  there  was  one*  new  grave.  All
around  was  silence  and  sohtude,  with  nothing  to  disturb  this
wild  abode  of  the  dead.

Half  an  hour  more  brought  us  to  Wady  es-Seih,  which  here
comes  down  from  the  S.  E.  and  turning  more  to  the  W.  runs  on
to  join  Wady  Khumileh  further  down.  The  sandstone  rocks  had
already  begun  to  give  place  to  griinstein  and  porphyry.  Pass-
ing up  Wady  Seih  we  came  at  9  o'clock  to  an  open  place  among

1  118, 119

82

FROM  SUEZ  TO  MOUXT  SIKAI.

[Sec.  m.

precipitous  hills  of  porpliyry  and  granite,  disintegrated  and  shat-
tered, where  several  Wadys  unite  and  flow  off  through  "Wady
Seih.  Here  the  mountains  begin  to  assume  features  of  grander
and  sterner  desolation.  We  entered  the  mouth  of  Wady  el-Burk
on  a  course  S.  by.  W.  for  half  an  hour,  when  it  turned  S.  S.  E.
Here  at  the  angle  are  a  few  short  inscriptions,  quite  near  the
ground.  The  valley  is  narrow,  and  its  bed  covered  with  debris
from  the  adjacent  mountains, — loose  stones  and  fragments  of
rocks  s}>read  over  the  surface  and  rendering  the  way  difficult  and
painful  for  the  camels.  These  rocks  are  chiefly  granite  and  por-
phyiy,  intermixed  with  griinstein.  This  valley,  as  well  as  the
open  place  we  had  passed,  had  an  unusual  number  of  Seyal  trees,
the  largest  we  had  yet  seen.

In  this  valley  the  camel  of  my  companion  gave  out  ;  and  he
was  compelled  to  mount  another,  after  its  load  had  been  dis-
tributed among  the  rest.  The  camel  belonged  to  Besharah,  who
had  paid  eleven  Spanish  dollars  for  it  the  year  before  ;  a  low
price,  as  the  animal  probably  had  been  already  broken  down.
We  were  told  that  many  camels  had  died  in  the  peninsula  the
present  year,  owing  chiefly  to  the  excessive  drought ;  there  hav-
ing been  but  little  rain  (or  according  to  the  Arab  mode  of  speech,
none)  for  now  two  seasons.  There  was  of  coiirse  great  distress
among  all  the  Bedawin,  as  we  had  occasion  enough  to  learn
afterwards  for  ourselves.  The  wearied  camel  was  left  in  charge
of  a  boy  to  follow  at  a  slower  pace  ;  and  we  proceeded  on  our
way.    The  occurrence  detained  us  for  nearly  half  an  hour.

A  side  valley  called  Ibn  Sukr  came  in  from  the  left  at  10.45,
in  which  there  is  good  water  at  a  little  distance.  Half  an  hour
further  on,  a  rude  stone  wall  or  breast-work  crossed  the  valley,
marking  the  scene  of  one  of  the  most  important  events  in  the
history  of  the  Tawarah.  The  story  was  told  us  with  great  ani-
mation by  Besharah,  who  was  himself  present  at  the  time.  For-
merly the  carrying  of  goods  between  Cairo  and  Suez  belonged  of
right  to  the  Tawarah,  or,  in  occidental  phrase,  was  a  monopoly
of  theirs.  But  several  years  ago  the  merchants  began  to  employ
also  the  Ma'azeh  and  Haweitat,  to  the  great  annoyance  of  the
Tawarah,  inasmuch  as  it  took  from  them  a  source  of  support  and
distressed  them.  To  recompense  themselves  for  this  outrage,  the
tribes  all  combined,  and  plundered  a  large  caravan  of  several  hun-
dred camels  laden  with  coffee  and  other  merchandise,  between
Suez  and  Cairo,  bringing  home  to  their  mountains  a  rich  booty
of  coffee,  wares,  and  camels.  The  Pa.sha  sent  to  demand  back
the  plunder.  They  meantime  had  revelled  in  their  spoils,  and
eaten  up  or  disposed  of  the  whole  ;  and  their  laconic  answer  was :
"  We  were  hungry  and  have  eaten."  The  Pasha  immediately
despatched  a  force  of  two  or  three  thousand  men  against  them.

i.  liy-121

Mar.  22.]

WADY  BrRK.

83

The  Arabs  gathered  at  this  place  and  built  a  wall,  expecting  the
troops  to  come  along  the  valley.  But  the  latter  divided  and
climbed  along  the  tops  of  the  mountains  on  each  side  in  order  to
get  round  the  Arabs  ;  "who  of  course  were  compelled  to  meet
them  on  these  heights  ;  and  they  now  pointed  out  to  us  the
places  on  the  summits  of  these  rugged  ridges,  where  the  battle
was  fought.  Almost  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  Tawarah  were
routed  with  little  slaughter  ;  the  troops  marched  to  the  convent  ;
the  chief  Sheikh  came  and  surrendered  ;  and  peace  was  granted
on  condition  of  their  paying  the  expenses  of  the  war.  Since  that
time,  the  Tawarah  have  remained  in  quiet  subjection  to  the
Pasha.'

"We  reached  the  top  of  the  pass  at  the  head  of  Wady  Burk
at  a  quarter  past  noon  ;  and  immediately  descended  along  a
gully  for  twenty-five  minutes,  when  we  reached  Wady  'Akir,
which,  coming  down  from  before  us,  here  entered  the  mountains
on  our  right,  flowing  off  into  the  great  Wady  Feiran.  This  val-
ley we  now  followed  up  on  a  course  S.  E.  by  S.  Here  the
coloquintida  (colocynthus)  was  growing,  with  its  yellow  fruit
already  ripe.*  At  first  the  valley  is  narrow,  but  gradually  grows
wider.  At  1^  o'clock,  the  mouth  of  Wady  Kineh  was  pointed
out,  coming  in  from  the  S.  E.  through  the  ridge  on  our  left.
Above  this  point  the  Wady  we  were  in  loses  the  name  'Akir,
and  takes  that  of  el-Lebweh,  from  a  pass  before  us  at  its  head.
The  two  Wadys  Lebweh  and  Kineh  are  parallel  to  each  other  ;
both  spread  out  into  wide  plains  ;  the  ridge  between  them  in
some  parts  almost  disappears  ;  so  that  in  several  places  they
run  together  and  form  one  great  sloping  plain  several  miles  in
breadth,  covered  with  tufts  of  herbs,  chiefly  'Abeithiran,  but  no
trees  ;  furnishing  abundant  pasturage  in  seasons  when  raiu  falls.
In  the  upper  part  of  the  plain  of  Wady  Kineh  there  is  water ;
and  Sheikh  Salih,  the  head  Sheikh  of  the  Tawarah,  with  a  part
of  his  tribe,  was  encamped  not  far  off,  in  sight  of  our  road.
The  two  valleys  separate  again ;  and  near  the  pass  at  the  head
of  el-Lebweh  is  a  sharp  isolated  peak  on  the  left,  called  Zub  el-
Bahry.

The  pass  itself  is  a  mere  continuation  of  the  plain,  a  broad
water-shed,  rising  very  gradually  on  one  side  and  descending  as
gradually  on  the  other.  Burckhardt  has  noticed  this  as  a  pecu-
liar conlbrmation  of  the  mountain  ranges  of  the  peninsula  ;
"  the  valleys  reaching  to  the  very  summits,  where  they  form
a  plain,  and  thence  descending  on  the  other  side."^    But  the

'  Laborde  jelates  the  same  story,  as    age  en  Arab.  Petr.  p.  72.    EngL  p.  264.
having  occurred  several  years  before  his       '  Cucumis  colocynthw  of  Liunsns ;  in
jonmey  in  1828.    He  makes  it  refer  to    Arabic  Handhal.

the  caravan  of  the  Haj  on  its  return  from  "  Travels  in  Syria,  etc.  pp.  483,  484.
Mecca.    This  is  probably  an  error.    Voy-    Burckhardt  gives  the  name  el-Lebweh  to

i.  121,  122

84

FBOM  SUEZ  TO  MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  UL

same  general  feature  exists  in  the  great  Wady  el-'Arabah,
and  in  various  parts  of  Palestine.  We  reached  the  plain  at  the
top  of  the  ascent  at  3:^  o'clock,  where  is  a  small  Arab  cemetery.
The  surface  soon  begins  to  slope  towards  the  south,  and  opens  out
to  an  extensive  plain  with  many  shrubs,  forming  the  head  of
Wady  Berah  and  surrounded  by  peaks  of  moderate  height.  A
long,  high,  dark-looking  mountain  was  pointed  out  to  us,  called
ez-Zebir,  bearing  S.  about  two  hours  distant ;  on  the  top  of
which  there  was  said  to  be  table  land  and  pasturage  for  camels.
Passing  down  the  plain  on  the  same  course  as  betbre  (S.  E.  by
S.)  we  came  at  4  o'clock  to  its  S.  E.  part,  where  it  contracts
between  noble  granite  cliffs  ;  and  entering  Wady  Berah  for  a
short  distance,  we  encamped  at  4.15  on  its  Avestern  side.  The
rocks  on  both  sides  of  this  valley  presented  everywhere  surfaces
so  well  adapted  for  inscriptions,  that  leaving  my  companions  to
follow  down  the  right  side,  I  struck  across  to  the  left.  Here  on
a  large  rock  I  found  four  short  inscriptions  in  the  usual  unknown
character.  Over  the  longest  of  them  was  a  cross,  evidently  of
the  same  date.  J ust  by  our  tents  was  also  a  huge  detached  rock
covered  with  similar  inscriptions  much  obliterated.  Here  were
two  crosses,  apparently  of  later  date,  or  else  retouched.

This  evening  our  Arabs  again  brought  us  good  water  from  a
spring  in  the  small  Wady  Eetameh,  wliich  enters  the  Berah  op-
posite our  encampment.  They  had  shown  themselves  every  day
more  and  more  obliging;  and  commonly  took  as  active  a  part  in
pitching  the  tent  and  arranging  the  luggage  for  the  night,  as  our
servants.  In  all  these  matters,  our  resolute  Komeh  was  master
and  director,  and  made  the  Arabs  do  his  bidding.  He  found  the
less  difficulty  in  this,  as  being  cook  and  purveyor  he  knew  how
to  distribute  the  fragments  in  his  department  with  great  nicety
and  discrimination  ;  so  that  it  was  an  object  of  some  importance
to  a  hungry  Bedawy  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  liim.

Among  the  many  plants  we  had  noted  on  this  and  the  pre-
ceding days,  some  of  the  most  frequent  besides  the  'Aboithiran
were  the  JRetem,  a  species  of  the  broom  plant  Genista  ra'tum  of
Eorskal,'  with  small  whitish  variegated  blossoms,  growing  in  the
water-courses  of  the  Wadys  ;  the  Kirdhy,  a  green  thorny  plant
■with  small  yellow  flowers,  which  our  camels  cropped  with  avidity  ;
the  Silleh,  apparently  the  ZiUa  viyagrioides  of  Forskal  ;  the
Skih  or  Artemisia  Judaica  of  Sprengel  ;  and  the  'Ajram,  from
which  the  Arabs  obtain  a  substitute  for  soap,  by  pounding  it
when  dry  between  stones,  and  mixing  it  with  the  water  in  which
they  wash  their  lincu.

the  pass  at  the  head  of  Wady  Burk  ;  but    difTercnt  passes  nt  and  near  the  head  of  the
our  Arabs  on  being  questioned  were  very    Wadys  Lebweh  and  Kineh.
positiv)  that  this  was  not  the  case,  and       '  I'  lora  j1<",{j;ypt.  Arab.  p.  214.
■aid  that  Lcbwch  was  the  namo  of  three       ^  Ibid.  p.  12l.
i.  122-124

Mar.  23.]

WADT  BEKAH.  IKSCRIPTIONS.

85

Friday^  March  23d.  We  set  off  again  at  6.25  down  Wady
Berah,  our  course  being  S.  S.  E.^E.  We  had  ever  wished  to
set  off  earlier  in  the  morning,  than  vre  had  yet  been  able  to  do.
The  Arabs  were  never  in  a  hurry  to  break  up  ;  and  this  morning
especially  they  were  occupied  with  Bcsharah's  camel,  which  had
come  up  late  at  evening,  and  was  now  sent  home  to  their  en-
campment. As  we  were  approaching  Sinai,  and  no  longer  needed
to  carry  a  load  of  water,  this  caused  us  little  inconvenience.
But  let  us  rise  as  early  as  we  would,  we  found  it  difficult  to  start
under  an  hour  and  a  half  or  two  hours.  It  was  decidedly  a
saving  of  time,  on  the  whole,  to  breakfast  before  setting  off,
rather  than  stop  on  our  way  for  that  purpose;  and  this  with  the
delay  of  packing  the  utensils  and  tent,  and  loading  the  camels,
always  made  our  departure  later  than  the  time  appointed.

As  we  proceeded  down  the  valley,  the  rocks  on  the  right  pre-
sented several  inscriptions  in  the  same  unknown  writing.  Indeed
we  found  them  at  almost  every  point  where  the  overhanging  or
projecting  rocks  seemed  to  indicate  a  convenient  resting  place.
The  mountains  on  either  side  continued  of  the  same  character  as
those  we  had  passed  yesterday,  chiefly  porphyiy  and  red  granite,
with  an  occasional  vein  of  gray  granite.  The  rock  was  mostly
of  a  coarse  texture,  much  disintegrated  and  often  worn  away  by
the  weather,  like  sandstone.  Not  unfrequently  thin  perpendic-
ular veins  apparently  of  grilnstein  or  porphyry  were  to  be  seen,
projecting  above  the  granite  and  running  through  the  rocks  in  a
straight  line  over  mountains  and  valleys  for  miles,  and  presenting
the  appearance  of  low  Avails.  They  reminded  me  strongly  of
the  stone  fences  of  New  England.

At  a  quarter  past  7  o'clock  the  Wady  spread  out  into  a
plain,  where  the  peak  of  Jebel  Musa  was  first  pointed  out  to  us
bearing  S.  E.  while  the  left  hand  peak  of  Serbal  bore  S.  W.
Ten  minutes  later  Wady  'Osh,  a  side  valley,  entered  the  Berah
from  the  left,  in  which  sweet  water  is  found  at  some  distance.
Opposite  its  mouth,  on  our  right,  was  an  old  cemetery,  appa-
rently no  longer  used  by  the  Arabs.  The  heaps  of  stones  which
mark  the  graves  are  larger  than  usual,  and  our  guides  referred
them  back  to  the  times  of  the  Franks  ;  as  the  Bedawin  do
every  thing  of  which  they  know  nothing  themselves.  They
seem  to  have  a  general  impression,  not  perhaps  a  distinct  tradi-
tion, that  the  country  was  once  in  the  possession  of  Frank  Chris-
tians. At  7f  o'clock  Wady  el-Akhdar  came  in  from  the  N.  E.
It  was  said  to  begin  near  Jebel  et-Tih  where  there  is  a  spring
of  the  same  name,  'Ain  el-Akhdar  ;  and  uniting  here  with  the
Berah,  it  passes  on  S.  W.  to  join  Wady  esh-Sheikh.  The  united
valley  after  this  junction  takes  the  name  of  Wady  Feiran.  The
point  where  the  Berah  and  Akhdar  unite,  is  a  broad  open  space
Vol.  I.— 8  i  124.  125

86

FEOM  SUEZ  TO  MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  in.

covered  with  herbs  and  surrounded  by  low  hills.  Here  is  a  fine
view  of  Mount  Serbal  which  rose  in  full  majesty  upon  our  right
at  the  distance  of  twelve  or  fifteen  miles,  being  separated  from
us  only  by  a  low  ridge  or  tract  beyond  which  lies  Wady  Feiran.
As  thus  seen,  it  presents  the  appearance  of  a  long,  thin,  lofty
ridge  of  granite,  with  numerous  points  or  peaks,  of  which  there
are  reckoned  five  principal  ones  ;  the  whole  being  strictly  what
the  Germans  call  a  Kamm.  We  saw  it  now  in  the  bright
beams  of  the  morning  sun,  a  grand  and  noble  object,  as  its  rag-
ged peaks  were  reflected  upon  the  deep  azure  beyond.

Thus  far  we  had  followed  the  same  route  wliich  Burckhardt
took  in  1816  ;  but  from  this  point  he  turned  into  the  Akhdar,
and  then  crossed  higher  up  to  Wady  esh-Sheikh,  which  he  then
followed  to  Mount  Sinai.  We  kept  the  more  direct  and  usual
road,  crossing  the  Akhdar,  and  continuing  on  a  S.  S.  E.  course
up  the  short  ascent  of  Wady  Soleif  to  the  top  or  water-shed,
which  we  passed  at  8^  o'clock  ;  and  then  descending  along  a
Wady  stni  called  Soleif  towards  Wady  esh-Sheikh.  Here  we
met  Sheikh  Tuweileb,  on  foot,  the  same  who  was  to  be  our
future  guide,  returning  it  was  said  to  his  family.  At  three  quar-
ters past  8  o'clock  we  reached  Wady  esh-Sheikh,  one  of  the.
largest  and  most  famous  valleys  of  the  peninsula.  It  takes  its
rise  in  the  very  heart  of  Sinai,  whence  it  issues  a  broad  valley  at
first  in  an  eastern  direction,  and  then  sweeping  round  to  the
north  and  west,  it  passes  down  towards  Serbal.  We  found  it
here  running  from  N.  E.  to  S.  W.  After  receiving  the  Akhdar
it  takes  the  name  of  Feiran,  and  as  such  is  well  watered,  has
gardens  of  fruit  and  palm  trees,  and  receiving  many  branches  runs
to  the  northward  of  Serbal  quite  down  to  the  sea.  The  lower
and  easier  road  from  Wady  et-Taiyibeh  to  Sinai  enters  the
Feiran  from  the  head  of  Wady  Mukatteb,  and  follows  it  up
through  Wady  esh-Sheikh  almost  to  the  convent.  From  the
point  where  we  now  were,  this  road  is  long  and  circuitous  ;
while  a  shorter  one  strikes  directly  towards  the  convent,  ascend-
ing in  part  by  a  narrow  and  difficult  pass.  We  took  the  latter  ;
and  crossing  Wady  esh-Sheikh  proceeded  on  a  course  S.  E.  by
S.  up  the  broad  Wady  or  ratheu  sloping  plain,  es-Seheb,  thickly
studded  with  shrubs,  but  without  trees.  Here  and  around  Wady
esh-Sheikh  are  only  low  hills,  lying  between  the  rocky  mountains
beliind  us  and  tlie  cliff's  of  Sinai  before  us  ;  and  forming  as  it
were  a  lower  belt  around  the  lofty  central  granite  region.  Over
these  hills,  low  walls  of  porphyry  or  griinstein,  like  those  above
described,  run  in  various  directions,  stretching  off  to  a  great  dis-
tance.

Tliis  plain  of  Seheb  had  been  last  year  the  scene  of  threat-
ened war  between  the  different  tribes  of  the  Tawarah  ;  growing
2.  120. 127

WADT  ESH-SHEIKH,  ETC.

97

out  of  a  dispute  as  to  the  right  of  conducting  travellers  to  and
from  the  convent.  The  story  had  some  reference  to  Lord  Lind-
say and  his  party  ;  and  I  shall  give  it,  as  we  heard  it,  at  the
close  of  the  present  Section,  in  speaking  of  the  divisions  and
character  of  the  Tawarah.

We  came  to  the  top  of  the  plain  at  a  quarter  before  11
o'clock,  where  is  a  short  but  rough  pass,  full  of  debris,  having
on  the  right  a  low  sharp  peak  called  el-'Orf  From  this  point
to  the  base  of  the  cliffs  of  Sinai  there  is  a  sort  of  belt  or  tract
of  gravel  and  sand,  fuU  of  low  hiUs  and  ridges,  sinking  down
towards  the  foot  of  the  cliffs  into  the  "Wady  Solaf,  which  runs
off  west  along  their  base  to  join  Wady  esh-Sheikh.  The  black
and  frowning  mountains  before  us,  the  outworks  as  it  were  of
Sinai,  are  here  seen  to  great  advantage,  rising  abrupt  and  rug-
ged from  their  very  base  eight  hundred  to  a  thousand  feet  in
height,  as  if  forbidding  all  approach  to  the  sanctuary  within.
On  the  west  of  the  pass,  which  is  here  hardly  distinguishable,
the  cliffs  bear  the  name  of  J ebel  el-Haweit.  Descending  S.  S.
E.  across  the  belt,  we  came  at  12.15  to  Wady  Solaf,  which
has  its  head  not  very  far  to  the  left,  near  a  spring  called  Ghur-
beh,  where  some  tamarisks  and  other  trees  were  visible.  Here
the  road  from  Tur  falls  into  ours  from  the  S.  W.,  having  come
up  through  Wady  Hibran,  and  crossed  over  the  ridge  that  sepa-
rates the  waters  flowing  to  that  valley  from  those  of  Wady
esh-Sheikh  the  one  running  on  the  north  and  the  other  on  the
squth  of  SerbaL  The  same  ridge  also  forms  the  coimecting  link
between  Serbal  and  the  more  central  Sinai  This  road  enters
Wady  Solaf  an  hour  and  a  half  below.

We  ilow  turned  up  Wady  Solaf  a  Httle,  along  the  base  of
the  mountains  on  a  S.  E.  course,  passing  in  fifteen  minutes  the
mouth  of  a  very  narrow  valley  or  chasm,  Wady  Kudhwah,
coming  down  from  the  S.  S.  W.  through  the  cliffs ;  from  it  a
steep  pass  was  said  to  lead  S.  W.  over  the  mountains,  to  a
place  called  Biighabigh  with  water  and  gardens  at  or  near  the
head  of  Wady  Hibran.  Leaving  the  Solaf  at  12f  o'clock,  we
began  gradually  to  ascend  towards  the  foot  of  the  pass  before  us,
caUed  by  our  Arabs  Xukb  Hawy„  "'  Windy  Pass,"  and  by  Burck-
hardt  Nukb  er-Kahah  from  the  tract  above  it.^  We  reached
the  foot  at  a  quarter  past  1  o'clock,  and  dismounting  commenced
the  slow  and  toUsome  ascent  along  the  narrow  defile,  about  S.
by  E.  between  blackened  shattered  cliffs  of  granite  some  eight
hundred  feet  high,  and  not  more  than  two  hundred  and  fifty  yards

'  Here  and  elsewhere,  in  speaking  of    any)  running  water  in  the  peninsula.  We
running  waters,  I  mean  of  course  the    saw  none,
waters  of  the  rainy  season  as  thev  flow       '  P^^ge  596.
oflE,    At  this  time  diere  was  very  little  (if

L  127,  128

X

88

FROM  SUEZ  TO  MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  in.

apart  ;  which  every  moment  threatened  to  send  down  their  ruins
on  our  heads.  Nor  is  this  at  all  times  an  empty  threat  ;  for  the
whole  pass  is  filled  with  large  stones  and  rocks,  the  dehiis  of
these  cliffs.  The  bottom  is  a  deep  and  narrow  water-course,
where  the  wintery  torrent  sweeps  down  with  fearful  violence.
A  path  has  been  made  for  camels  along  the  shelving  piles  of
rocks,  partly  by  removing  the  topmost  blocks,  and  sometimes  by
laying  down  large  stones  side  by  side,  somewhat  in  the  manner
of  a  Swiss  mountain  road.  But  although  I  had  crossed  the
most  rugged  passes  of  the  Alps,  and  made  from  Chamouny  the
whole  circuit  of  Mont  Blanc,  I  had  never  found  a  path  so  rude
and  difficult  as  that  we  were  now  ascending. '  The  camels  toiled
slowly  and  painfully  along,  stopping  frequently ;  so  that  although
it  took  them  two  hours  and  a  quarter  to  reach  the  top  of  the
pass,  yet  the  distance  cannot  be  reckoned  at  more  than  one
hour.  From  a  point  about  half  way  up,  the  east  end  of  Jebel
ez-Zebir  bore  N.  42°  W.  and  two  peaks  at  its  western  end,
called  el-Benat,  N.  60°  W.  Higher  up  the  path  lies  in  the  bed
of  the  torrent  and  became  less  steep.  As  we  advanced,  the
sand  was  occasionally  moist,  and  on  digging  into  it  with  the
hand,  the  hole  was  soon  tilled  with  fine  sweet  water.  We  tried
the  experiment  in  several  places.  Here  too  were  several  small
palm  trees,  and  a  few  tufts  of  grass,  the  first  we  had  seen  since
leaving  the  borders  of  the  Nile.  Burckhardt  mentions  a  spring
called  Kaneitar  in  this  part  of  the  pass  but  it  was  now  dry  ;
at  least  we  neither  saw  nor  heard  of  any.  In  the  pass
found  upon  the  rocks  two  Sinaite  inscrij^tions  ;  one  of  them
having  over  it  a  cross  of  the  same  date.

It  was  half  past  3  o'clock  when  we  reached  the  'top,  from
which  the  convent  was  said  to  be  an  hour  distant  ;  but  we  found
it  two  hours,  as  did  also  Burckhardt.'  Descending  a  little  into
a  small  Wady,  which  has  its  head  here  and  runs  off  through  a
cleft  in  the  western  mountains  apparently  to  Wady  ROdhwah,
we  soon  began  to  ascend  again  gradually  on  a  course  S.  E.  by  S.
passing  by  a  small  spring  of  good  water  ;  beyond  which  the
valley  opens  by  degrees  and  its  bottom  becomes  less  uneven.
Here  the  interior  and  loftier  peaks  of  the  great  circle  of  Sinai
began  to  open  upon  us,  black,  rugged,  desolate  summits  ;  and
as  we  advanced,  the  dark  and  frowning  front  of  Sinai  itself
(the  present  Horeb  of  the  monks)  began  to  ai)pear.  We  were
still  gradually  ascending,  and  the  valley  gradually  opening  ;  but
as  yet  all  was  a  naked  desert.    Afterwaixls  a  few  shrubs  were

'  Pococke  speaks  of  this  pass  as  "a       '  Pago  597.

narrow  v:i!c  wliich  has  a  gentle  ascent       '  Page  SiKJ.    Burckhardt  travelled  in

with  water  iind  piilm  trees  iu  it."  Trav-  the  other  direction,  from  the  convent  down

eU  I.  fol.  p.  142.  the  pass.

i.  i-j'.r  i;io

Uar.  23.]

APPKOACH  TO  SINAI.

89

sprinkled  round  about,  and  a  small  encampment  of  black  tents
was  seen  on  our  right,  with  camels  and  goats  browsing,  and  a
few  donkeys  belonging  to  the  convent.  The  scenery  through
which  we  had  now  passed,  reminded  me  strongly  of  the  moun-
tains around  the  Mer  de  Glace  in  Switzerland.  I  had  never  seen
a  spot  more  wild  and  desolate.

As  we  advanced,  the  valley  still  opened  wider  and  wider  with
a  gentle  ascent,  and  became  full  of  shrubs  and  tufts  of  herbs,
shut  in  on  each  side  by  lofty  granite  ridges  with  rugged  shat-
tered peaks  a  thousand  feet  high,  while  the  face  of  Horeb  rose
directly  before  us.   Both  my  companion  and  myself  involuntarily
exclaimed  :  "  Here  is  room  enough  for  a  large  encampment  ! "
Reaching  the  top  of  the  ascent,  or  water-shed,  a  fine  broad  plain
lay  before  us,  sloping  down  gently  towards  the  S.  S.  E.  enclosed
by  rugged  and  venerable  mountains  of  dark  granite,  stern,  naked,
splintered  peaks  and  ridges,  of  indescribable  grandeur  ;  and  ter-
minated at  the  distance  of  more  than  a  mile  by  the  bold  and
awful  front  of  Horeb,  rising  perpendicularly  in  frowning  majesty,
from  twelve  to  fifteen  hundred  feet  in  height.    It  was  a  scene  of
solemn  grandeur,  wholly  unexpected,  and  such  as  we  had  never
seen  ;  and  the  associations  winch  at  the  moment  rushed  upon
our  minds,  were  almost  overwhelming.    As  we  went  on,  new
points  of  interest  were  continually  opening  to  our  view.    On  the
left  of  Horeb,  a  deep  and  narrow  valley  runs  up  S.  S.  E.  between
lofty  walls  of  rock,  as  if  in  continuation  of  the  S.  E.  corner  of
the  plain.    In  this  valley,  at  the  distance  of  nearly  a  mile  from
the  plain,  stands  the  convent  ;  and  the  deep  verdure  of  its  fruit
trees  and  cypresses  is  seen  as  the  traveller  approaches  ;  an  oasis
of  beauty  amid  scenes  of  the  sternest  desolation.    At  the  S.  W.
corner  of  the  plain  the  cliff's  also  retreat,  and  form  a  recess  or
open  place  extending  from  the  plain  westward  for  some  distance.
From  this  recess  there  runs  uj)  a  similar  narrow  valley  on  the
west  of  Horeb,  called  el-Leja,  parallel  to  that  in  which  the  con-
vent stands  ;  and  in  it  is  the  deserted  convent  el-Arba'in,  with
a  garden  of  olive  and  other  fruit  trees  not  visible  from  the  plain.
A  third  garden  hes  at  the  mouth  of  el-Leja,  and  a  fourth,  further
west  in  the  recess  just  mentioned.    The  whole  plain  is  called
Wady  er-Rahah  ;  and  the  valley  of  the  convent  is  known  to  the
Arabs  as  Wady  Shu'eib,  that  is,  the  vale  of  Jethro.    Still  ad-
vancing, the  front  of  Horeb  rose  like  a  wall  before  us  ;  and  one
can  approach  quite  to  the  foot  and  touch  the  mount.  Directly
before  its  base  is  the  deep  bed  of  a  torrent,  by  which  in  the
rainy  season  the  waters  of  el-Leja  and  the  mountains  around  the
recess,  pass  down  eastward  across  the  plain,  forming  the  com-
mencement of  Wady  esh-Sheikh,  which  then  issues  by  an  open-
ing through  the  cliff's  of  the  eastern  mountain,  a  fine  broad
Vol.  I.— 8*  i.  130. 131

90

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

valley,  affording  the  only  easy  access  to  the  plain  and  convent.
— As  we  crossed  the  plain  our  feelings  were  strongly  affected,  at
finding  here  so  unexpectedly  a  spot  so  entirely  adapted  to  the
Scriptural  account  of  the  giving  of  the  law.  No  traveller  has
described  this  plain,  nor  even  mentioned  it  except  in  a  slight  and
general  manner ;  probably  because  the  most  have  reached  the
convent  by  another  route  without  passing  over  it  ;  and  perhaps
too  because  neither  the  highest  point  of  Sinai  (now  called  Jebel
Musa),  nor  the  still  loftier  summit  of  St.  Catharine,  is  visible
from  any  part  of  it.'

As  we  approached  the  mountain  our  head  Arab,  Besharah,
became  evidently  quite  excited.  He  prayed  that  our  pilgrimage
might  be  accepted,  and  bring  rain  ;  and  with  great  earnestness
besought,  that  when  we  ascended  the  mountain,  we  would  open
a  certain  window  in  the  chapel  there,  towards  the  south,  which
he  said  would  certainly  cause  rain  to  fall.  He  also  entreated
almost  with  tears,  that  we  would  induce  the  monks  to  have  com-
passion on  the  people,  and  say  prayers  as  they  ought  to  do  for
rain.  When  told  that  God  alone  could  send  rain,  and  they
should  look  to  him  for  it,  he  replied  :  "Yes,  but  the  monks  have
the  book  of  prayer  for  it ;  do  persuade  them  to  use  it  as  they
ought."  ^  There  was  an  earnestness  in  his  manner  which  was
very  affecting,  but  cannot  be  described.  Just  after  crossing
Wady  esh-Sheikh,  we  passed  at  the  mouth  of  Wady  Shu'eib,
a  burial  ground  much  venerated  by  the  Arabs.  Here  Besharah
repeated  a  few  words  of  prayer,  the  first  time  we  had  known
him  or  any  of  our  Arabs  pray  since  leaving  Cairo.

From  the  Wady  esh-Sheikh  to  the  convent  is  a  distance  of
twenty-five  minutes,  by  a  difficult  path  along  the  rocky  bed  of
the  narrow  valley.  We  had  come  on  in  advance  of  the  loaded
camels,  and  reached  the  convent  at  half  past  5  o'clock.  Under
the  entrance  were  many  Arabs  in  high  clamour,  serfs  of  the  con-
vent, who  were  receiving  a  distribution  of  some  kind  of  provision
from  above  ;  we  did  not  learn  what.  The  only  regular  entrance
at  present  is  by  a  door  nearly  thirty  feet  (or  more  exactly  28
feet  9  inches)  from  the  ground  ;  the  great  door  having  been
walled  up  for  more  than  a  century.    On  making  known  our

'  Monconys  appears  to  have  come  by  rique,  p.  91.    These  notices,  nltlioughex-

the  same  route  in  A.  D.  1647,  "  par  un  a-  diaf  i  ly ;  p.  ()6  sq.  Hcissb.  des  heil.  Landes,

tiles  and  vermin."    15ut  de  Sucheni  in  p.  840.    William  of  BaWciiscl  (A.  D.

A.  D.  KJIiC-HO,  hoard  it  of  "  gnats,  wasps,  IIW(>)  professes  to  have  seen  them  die

and  fleas  ; "  though  without  any  proccs-  when  thus  brought  in,  with  his  owu  eyes.

i.  150,  151

Mar.  26.]

ASCENT  OF  JEBEL  MUSA.

103

priests  were  stationed  to  confess  pilgrims  on  their  way  up  the
mountain  ;  and  all  the  old  travellers  relate  that  no  J ew  could
pass  through  them.  At  this  point  we  saw  for  the  first  time  the
peak  of  Sinai  or  J ebel  Milsa  on  our  left,  and  the  higher  summit
of  St.  Catharine  in  the  southwest  beyond  the  deep  valley  el-Leja.
At  9  o'clock  we  reached  the  weU  and  taU  cypress  tree  in  the
plain  or  basin,  where  we  rested  for  a  time  ;  the  prior  distributing
to  all  a  portion  of  bread.  After  this  allowance,  the  Arab  chil-
dren who  had  thus  far  hung  about  us,  went  back.  Burckhardt
speaks  of  this  well  as  a  stone  tank,  which  receives  the  winter
rains.  We  understood  it  at  the  time  to  be  a  weU  of  living
water,  and  such  is  its  appearance,  being  of  very  considerable
depth  and  regularly  stoned  up  in  the  usual  form  of  a  deep  well.
Near  by  is  a  rock  with  many  Arabic  inscriptions,  recording  the
visits  of  pilgrims.  The  lone  cypress  tree  with  its  dark  foliage  is
quite  an  interesting  addition  to  this  wUd  spot.'

This  little  plain  is  about  twelve  or  thirteen  hundred  feet
above  the  valleys  below,  extending  quite  across  the  ridge  ;  and
from  it  towards  the  west  a  path  descends  to  the  convent  el-
Arba'in  in  Wady  el-Leja.  On  the  right,  clusters  of  rocks  and
peaks  from  two  to  four  hundred  feet  higher  than  this  basin,
extend  for  nearly  two  miles  towards  the  N.  N.  W.  and  termi-
nate in  the  bold  front  which  overhangs  the  plain  er-Eahah  north
of  the  convent.  This  is  the  present  Horeb  of  Christians.  On
the  left,  due  south  from  the  well,  rises  the  higher  peak  of  Sinai,
or  Jebel  Miisa,  about  seven  hundred  feet  above  the  basin  and
nearly  a  mile  distant.  A  few  rods  from  the  well,  where  the
ascent  of  Sinai  begins,  is  a  low  rude  building  containing  the
chapels  of  Elijah  and  Elisha.  Here  was  evidently  once  a  small
monastery  ;  and  the  older  travellers  speak  also  of  a  chapel  of
the  Virgin.  In  that  of  Elijah  the  monks  show  near  the  altar  a
hole  just  large  enough  for  a  man's  body,  which  they  say  is  the
cave  where  the  prophet  dwelt  in  Horeb,'*  Tapers  were  lighted
and  incense  burnt  in  both  these  chapels.  The  ascent  hence  is
steeper,  though  not  difficult.  There  are  steps  for  a  great  part
of  the  way,  merely  rough  stones  thrown  together  ;  and  in  no
part  of  the  ascent  of  the  whole  mountain  are  they  hewn,  or  cut
in  the  rock,  as  is  said  by  Burckhardt.'

In  Niebuhr's  time  there  were  here  two  ton,  bishop  of  Clogher,  in  a  Letter  to  the

large  trees;  and  the  Prefect  of  the  Fran-  Society  of  Antiquaries,  Lond.  1753.    It  is

ciscans  in  Cairo  in  1722,  mentions  also  also  appended  to  the  recent  editions  of

here,  "  two  cypress  trees  and  two  olive  MaundreU's  Journey  to  Jerusalem,  etc.

trees."    The  latter  also  speaks  of  the  well  '  1  Kings  19,  8.  9.    The  elevation  of

as  a  "  collection  of  water  made  by  the  this  building  above  the  convent  in  the  val-

winter  snows  and  rains."    The  journal  of  ley  below,  is  given  by  Schubert  at  1400

this  Prefect  is  first  mentioned  by  Pococke  Paris  feet.

(I.  p.  147.  fol.)  and  was  afterwards  trans-  ^  Page  565.
lated  into  English  and  published  by  Clay-

i.  151-153

104

MOUKT  SINAI.

[Skc.  m.

Leaving  the  chapels  at  half  past  9  o'clock,  we  ascended
slowly,  not  failing  to  see  the  track  of  Muhammed's  camel  in  the
rock  by  the  way  ;  and  reached  the  summit  of  Jebel  Musa  at
twenty  minutes  past  ten.  Here  is  a  small  area  of  huge  rocks,
about  eighty  feet  in  diameter,  highest  towards  the  east,  where  is
a  little  chapel  almost  in  ruins,  formerly  divided  between  the
Grreeks  and  Latins  ;  while  towards  the  S.  W.  about  forty  feet
distant  stands  a  small  ruined  mosk.  The  summit  and  also  the
body  of  this  part  of  the  mountain  are  of  coarse  gray  granite.'  On
the  rocks  are  many  inscriptions  in  Arabic,  Greek,  and  Armenian,
the  work  of  pilgrims.  In  the  chapel  are  the  names  of  many
travellers  ;  and  I  found  here  a  pencU  note  of  Eiippell's  observa-
tions, May  7th,  1831  ;  marking  the  time  12.15  ;  Barom.  21'
7.6"  ;  Therm.  13i°  R.  or  62°  F.  At  half  past  ten  o'clock  my
thermometer  stood  in  the  chapel  at  60°  F. — The  height  of  this
peak  above  the  sea,  according  to  the  observations  of  Riippell,
compared  with  simultaneous  ones  at  Tur,  is  7035  Paris  feet ;
and  its  elevation  above  the  convent  el-Arba'in  about  1670  feet.*
From  it  the  peak  of  St.  Catharine  bears  S.  44°  W.  a  thousand
feet  liigher  ;  and  Ras  es-Sufsafeh,  the  highest  among  the  peaks
near  the  front  of  Horeb,  N.  22°  W.^

My  first  and  predominant  feeling  while  upon  this  summit,
was  that  of  disappointment.  Although  from  our  examination  of
the  plain  er-Rahah  below,  and  its  correspondence  to  the  Scrip-
tural narrative,  we  had  arrived  at  the  general  conviction  that
the  people  of  Israel  must  have  been  collected  on  it  to  receive
the  law  ;  yet  we  still  had  cherished  a  lingering  hope  or  feeUng,
that  there  might  after  all  be  some  foundation  tor  the  long  series
of  monkish  tradition,  which  for  at  least  fifteen  centuries  has
pointed  out  the  summit  on  which  we  now  stood,  as  the  spot
where  the  ten  commandments  were  so  awfully  proclaimed.  But
Scriptural  narrative  and  monkish  tradition  are  very  different
things  ;  and  while  the  former  has  a  distinctness  and  definiteness,
which  through  all  our  journeyings  rendered  the  Bible  our  best

'  Pococke  correctly  remarks,  that  the
"  north  part  of  Sinai  [Jebel  Miisa]  is  of
red  granite  for  above  half  way  up ;  all  the
rest  being  a  granite  of  a  yellowish  ground,
with  small  black  grains  in  it,  and  the
mountain  at  a  distance  appears  of  two
colours  ;  "  I.  p.  147.  fol.  This  difierence
of  colour  is  especially  striking  as  seen  from
the  valley  el-Leja.

^  Uiippell's  Heise  in  Abyssinien,  I.  pp.
118,  124.  I  follow  here  RiippcU's  mea-
surement? throughout,  because  they  alone
are  founded  on  corresponding  observations
on  the  sea-coast  at  Tur.  Schut)ert  gives
the  heiglit  of  Sinai  at  6796.4  Paris  feet,
i.  153,  154

or  2071  feet  above  the  convent  in  Wady
Shu'oib ;  liussegger  at  7097  Paris  feet,  or
1982  feet  above  the  same  convent.

*  Other  bearings  from  Jebel  Mi'isa  were
as  follows:  Um  Lauz,  a  peak  beyond
Wady  Scba'iyeh,  N.  40'  K.  Um  'Alawy,
connected  with  smaller  peaks  running  to-
wards the  eastern  gnlf,  N.  73°  E.  Abu
Mas'ild,  west  of  Wady  Wa'rah  S.  36°  E.
Jebel  Humr,  S.  87'  W.  Jebel  Tiiiia,  or
Siimr  et-Tinia,  N.  62°  W.  Jebel  Eu-
reia',  north  end,  N.  23°  W.  Jebel  ed-
Deir  N.  21"  E.  Jebel  ez-Zebir,  east  end,
N.  Sli"  W.  el-Bcniit,  or  el-Jauzeli,  N.
45°  W.    Island  of  Tirin,  S.  31°  E.

Mab.26.]

SUMMIT  OF  JEBEL  MUSA.

105

guide-book,  vre  found  the  latter  not  less  usually  and  almost
regularly  to  be  but  a  baseless  fabric.  In  the  present  case,  there
is  not  the  slightest  reason  for  supposing  that  Moses  had  any
thing  to  do  with  the  summit  which  now  bears  his  name.  It  is
three  miles  distant  from  the  plain  on  which  the  Israelites  must
have  stood  ;  and  hidden  from  it  by  the  intervening  peaks  of  the
modern  Horeb.  No  part  of  the  plain  is  visible  from  the  summit  ;
nor  are  the  bottoms  of  the  adjacent  valleys  ;  nor  is  any  spot  to
be  seen  around  it,  where  the  people  could  have  been  assembled.
The  only  point  in  which  it  is  not  immediately  surrounded  by
high  mountains,  is  towards  the  southeast,  where  it  sinks  down  pre-
cipitously to  a  tract  of  naked  gravelly  hills.  Here,  just  at  its
foot,  is  the  head  of  a  small  valley,  Wady  es-Seba'iyeh,  running
toward  the  northeast  beyond  the  mount  of  the  Cross  into  Wady
esh-Sheikh  ;  and  of  another  not  larger,  called  el-Wa'rah,  run-
ning southeast  to  the  Wady  Nusb  of  the  gulf  of ' Akabah  ;  but
both  of  these  together  hardly  afford  a  tenth  part  of  the  space  con-
tained in  er-Rahah  and  Wady  esh-Sheikh.'  In  the  same  direc-
tion is  seen  the  route  to  Sherm  ;  and,  beyond,  a  portion  of  the
gulf  of  'Akabah  and  the  little  island  Tiran  ;  while  more  to  the
right  and  close  at  hand  is  the  head  of  el-Leja  among  the  hills.
No  other  part  of  the  gulf  of  'Akabah  is  visible  ;  though  the
mountains  beyond  it  are  seen.^

Towards  the  southwest  and  west  tower  the  ridges  of  St.  Catha-
rine and  Tinia,  cutting  off  the  view  of  the  gulf  of  Suez  and
the  whole  western  region  ;  so  that  neither  Serbal  on  the  right,
nor  the  loftier  Um  Shaumer  towards  the  left,  are  at  all  visible
from  this  peak  of  Sinai.  ^  Indeed  in  almost  every  respect  the
view  from  this  point  is  confined,  and  is  far  less  extensive  and
imposing  than  that  from  the  summit  of  St.  Catharine.  Only
the  table  land  on  the  mountain  of  the  Cross,  is  here  seen  nearer
and  to  better  advantage  across  the  narrow  valley  of  Shu'eib.
Neither  the  convent  from  which  we  had  come,  nor  that  of  el-
Arba'in,  both  lying  in  the  deep  valleys  below,  were  visible.  To
add  to  our  disappointment,  old  'Aid,  the  head-guide,  who  had
been  selected  expressly  in  order  to  tell  us  the  names  of  the

'  See  more  in  Note  XTV,  end  of  the  1839,  p.  420  sq.  Riippell  correctly  re-
volume,  marks  :  "  The  prospect  from  the  peak  of

'  Brown  speaks  of  having   seen  the  Sinai  is  limited  in  the  east,  south,  and

whole  length  of  the  gulf  of  'Akabah  from  west,  by  higher  mountains ;  and  only  to-

Sinai ;  but  this  is  an  impossibility.    Tra-  wards  the  north,  one  looks  out  over  a

vels,  chap.  XIV.  p.  179.  widely  extended   landscape  ; "   Reise  in

'  Yet  Laborde  professes  to  have  seen  AbyssLnien,  I.  p.  1 18.    Burckhardt  was

from  it  Serb  "J,  Um  Shaumer,  and  the  prevented  by  a  thick  fog  from  seeing  even

monntains  of  Africa  beyond.    It  must  the  nearest  mountains;   Travels,  etc.  p.

have  been  with  '  the  mind's  eye.'   Voyage  566. — The  statements  of  this  note  have

en  Arab.  Pet.  p.  68.  Engl.  p.  2.52.    A  sometimes  been  questioned ;  but  I  must

similar  exaggerated  account  is  given  by  again  assert  their  entire  accuracy,  which

Bussegger ;  see  Berghaus'  Annalen,  Marz  is  also  manifest  from  the  list  of  bearings.

i.  154,  155

106

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

mountains  and  objects  around,  proved  to  know  very  little  about
them,  and  often  answered  at  random.  In  short,  the  visit  to  the
summit  of  Jebel  Musa,  was  to  me  the  least  satisfactory  incident
in  our  whole  sojourn  at  Mount  Sinai.

We  remained  upon  the  summit  nearly  two  and  a  half  hours.
Leaving  it  at  12|  o'clock,  we  returned  to  the  cypress  tree  and
well  near  the  chapel  of  Elijah.  From  this  point  a  path  leads
south  of  west  over  the  little  plain,  and  descends  partly  by  steps
to  the  convent  el-Arba'in  in  Wady  el-Leja.  We  determined,
however,  to  visit  the  northern  brow  of  Horeb,  which  overlooks
the  plain  er-Rahah  ;  and  took  a  route  towards  the  N.  W.  in
order  to  reach  it.  As  we  left  the  well  for  this  purpose  at  1^
o'clock,  the  clouds  which  had  been  gathering  for  some  time,
threatened  to  drench  us  with  a  shower  of  rain.  The  drops  began
to  fall  thinly  but  heavily  ;  and  for  a  while  we  hoped  that
Besharah's  entreaties  for  rain  might  have  been  fulfilled  ;  even  at
the  expense  of  our  being  counted  as  prophets  by  the  Arabs,  and
getting  a  wet  skin  for  ourselves.  But  the  clouds  soon  passed
away,  and  the  desert  remained  parched  and  thirsty  as  before.

The  path  was  wild  and  rugged,  leading  over  rocks  and  wind-
ing through  ravines  among  low  peaks.  In  fifteen  minutes  we
came  to  a  small  round  basin  among  the  hills,  with  a  bed  of  soil
full  of  shrubs  ;  where  also  were  a  hollyhock  and  hawthorn,  and
evident  traces  of  an  artificial  reservoir  for  water,  which  was  said
formerly  to  have  been  carried  down  to  the  convent.  Here  stands
a  smaU  chapel  of  St.  John  the  Baptist.  "Sot  far  off  are  the
cells  of  several  anchorites  cut  in  the  rock.  Twenty  minutes
further  is  another  larger  basin,  surrounded  by  twelve  peaks,  and
the  bottom  enclosed  by  a  low  wall  ;  showing  that  it  was  once
tilled  as  a  garden.  At  2  o'clock  we  reached  a  third  basin,  stiU
deeper  and  more  romantic,  surrounded  by  a  hke  number  of  higher
peaks,  one  of  which  is  Eas  es-Sufsafeh,  the  highest  in  this  part
of  the  mountain.  A  narrow  fissure  runs  out  northward  from
this  basin  towards  the  plain,  through  which  the  mountain  may
be  ascended.  Here  a  wiUow  and  two  hawthorns  were  growing,
■with  many  shrubs  ;  and  in  all  this  part  of  the  mountains  were
great  quantities  of  the  fragrant  j^lant  Ja'deh,  wliich  the  monks
call  hyssop.  Here  is  a  smaU  chapel  dedicated  to  the  Virgin  of
the  Z  me.  Near  by  we  found  a  pair  of  horns  of  the  Beden  or
Ibex,  left  behind  perhaps  by  some  hunter.

While  the  monks  were  here  employed  in  ligliting  tapers  and
burning  incense,  we  determined  to  scale  the  almost  inaccessible
peak  of  es-SQfsafeh  before  us,  in  order  to  look  out  upon  the
plain,  and  judge  for  ourselves  as  to  the  adaptedness  of  this  part
of  the  mount  to  the  circumstances  of  the  Scrii)tural  history.
This  clitf  rises  some  five  hundred  feet  above  the  basin  ;  and  the

i.  150. 157

Mak.  26.]

RAS  ES-SUFSAFEH,

107

distance  to  the  summit  is  more  than  half  a  mile.  We  first  at-
tempted to  climb  the  side  in  a  direct  course  ;  but  found  the
rock  so  smooth  and  precipitous,  that  after  some  falls  and  more
exposures,  we  were  obliged  to  give  it  up,  and  clamber  upwards
along  a  steep  ravine  by  a  more  northern  and  circuitous  course.
From  the  head  of  this  ravine,  we  were  able  to  climb  around  the
ftice  of  the  northern  precipice  and  reach  the  top,  along  the  deep
hollows  worn  in  the  granite  by  the  weather  during  the  lapse  of
ages,  which  give  to  this  part,  as  seen  from  below,  the  appear-
ance of  architectural  ornament.

The  extreme  difficulty  and  even  danger  of  the  ascent,  was
well  rewarded  by  the  prosj^ect  that  now  opened  before  us.  The
whole  plain  er-Rahah  lay  spread  out  beneath  our  feet,  with  the
adjacent  Wadys  and  mountains  ;  while  Wady  esh-Sheikh  on
the  right,  and  the  recess  on  the  left,  both  connected  with,  and
opening  broadly  from  er-Rahah,  presented  an  area  which  serves
nearly  to  double  that  of  the  plain.  Our  conviction  was  strength-
ened, that  here  or  on  some  one  of  the  adjacent  cliffs  was  the
spot,  where  the  Lord  "descended  in  fire"  and  proclaimed  the
law.  Here  lay  the  plain  where  the  whole  congregation  might
be  assembled  ;  here  was  the  mount  that  could  be  approached  and
touched,  if  not  forbidden ;  and  here  the  mountain  brow,  where
alone  the  hghtnings  and  the  thick  cloud  would  be  visible,  and
the  thunders  and  the  voice  of  the  trump  be  heard,  when  the
Lord  "came  down  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people  upon  Mount
Sinai."  We  gave  ourselves  up  to  the  impressions  of  the  awful
scene  ;  and  read  with  a  feeling  that  •will  never  be  forgotten,  the
sublime  account  of  the  transaction  and  the  commandments  there
promulgated,  in  the  original  words  as  recorded  by  the  great
Hebrew  legislator.'

Between  es-Sufsafeh  and  the  plain  are  stiU  some  lower  peaks,
overhanging  the  latter  more  directly,  which  we  were  desirous  to
visit  ;  but  the  time  did  not  permit.  Descending  therefore  to
our  companions,  who  were  in  no  hurry,  we  returned  to  the  second
basin  above  mentioned,  and  thence  at  3.45  took  a  path  more  to
the  right.  At  4  o'clock  we  came  to  a  small  church  on  the
western  brow  of  the  ridge,  dedicated  to  St.  Panteleemon.  The
chapel  of  St.  Anne  mentioned  by  Pococke  and  other  travellers,
we  did  not  see.  Hence  a  long  and  in  some  parts  steep  descent,
about  southwest,  brought  us  at  a  quarter  past  5  o'clock  to  the
convent  el-Arba'in,  where  we  were  to  lodge.

This  monastery  is  said  to  have  received  its  name,  el-Arba'in,
"  the  Forty,"  from  the  circumstance  that  the  Arabs  once  took  it
by  surprise,  and  killed  the  forty  monks  who  were  its  inmates.
Hence  it  is  called  by  the  older  travellers  the  convent  of  the

'  Esod.  19,  9-25.   20,  12-1.

i.  157-159

108

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec,  m.

Forty  Saints  or  Martyrs.'  Tradition  has  forgotten  the  time
when  this  event  took  place  ;  hut  the  story  prohably  refers  to  the
massacre  of  forty  hermits  around  Sinai  near  the  close  of  the
fourth  century.^  A  large  plantation  of  olive  trees  extends  far
above  and  below  the  monastery  along  the  valley,  which  is  narrow
like  that  of  Shu'eib,  but  longer  and  less  desert.  Just  around
the  buildings  is  also  a  garden  of  other  fruit  trees,  in  which  apple
and  apricot  trees  were  in  blossom ;  and  not  far  off  is  a  small
grove  of  tall  poplars,  here  cultivated  for  timber.  In  this  garden
too  was  a  rUl  of  water  ;  which  however  was  lost  after  a  few  rods.
The  convent,  as  such,  has  been  deserted  for  several  centuries  ;
yet  two  or  three  of  the  monks  usually  reside  here  for  a  time
every  summer  ;  though  even  this  custom  had  been  neglected  for
the  last  three  years.  A  family  of  Jebeliyeh,  or  serfs,  was  here  to
keep  the  garden.  As  we  entered,  the  sweet  voice  of  a  prattling
Arab  chUd  struck  my  ear,  and  made  my  heart  thrill,  as  it  recalled
the  thoughts  of  home. — The  elevation  of  this  spot  above  the  sea,
was  found  by  Eiippell  to  be  5366  Paris  feet.'

A  large  room,  the  best  in  the  building,  though  lighted  only
by  the  door,  was  assigned  to  us,  in  which  our  beds  were  already
spread  on  a  layer  of  fragrant  herbs.  A  fire  was  lighted  in  a
corner  ;  and  we  found  it  quite  comfortable,  although  the  ther-
mometer stood  at  65°  F.  Indeed  an  Arab  has  no  idea  of  pass-
ing a  night  vdthout  fire  at  any  season.  The  superior  and  his
monks  occupied  a  room  in  another  part  of  the  building.  The
good  father  spent  the  evejiing  in  our  apartment,  and  was  very
social  and  communicative.  He  had  borne  the  walk  of  to-day  so
well,  that  he  was  determined  to  accompany  us  to-morrow  to  the
summit  of  St.  Catharine.  We  had  here  a  curious  instance  of
the  respect  in  which  he  is  held  by  liis  Arab  serfs.  He  had  pulled
off  his  shoes  and  was  sitting  with  bare  feet,  (for  he  like  the  other
monks  wore  no  stockings,)  when  the  old  guide  'Aid  came  in  to
bid  good  night,  and  perceiving  his  situation  suddenly  kneeled
down  and  kissed  his  toe.  Indeed,  it  seemed  to  be  quite  an  occa-
sion of  festivity  with  these  Arabs,  to  meet  the  patriarchal  old
man  so  far  abroad  out  of  the  convent  walls.

Tuesday,  March  21th.  We  started  from  our  fragrant  couch
at  early  dawn,  in  order  to  set  off  in  good  season  for  the  moun-
tain.   But  here,  as  in  so  many  other  cases  where  aught  was  de-

'  Quaresmins  II.  p.  996.  Tucher  of
Niirnberg  relates  this  story  in  A.  D.
1480;  as  also  Baumgarten  in  1507,  lib.  I.
c.  24.  Tliese  travellers  found  the  con-
vent deserted,  as  now,  except  by  two  or
threa  monks. — The  monks  themselves,  as
I  have  since  learned,  sometimes  refer  the
name  to  the  Forty  Martyrs  of  Armenia,
j.  15y.  I  GO

'  See  fiirther  on,  under  the  head  of
"  Sinai  in  the  early  Christian  ages."

°  Reise  in  Abyssinien,  I.  p.  124.  From
a  comparison  with  Schubert's  measure-
ments, it  would  appear  that  el-Arba'in
lies  about  400  Paris  f'>et  higher  than  the
other  convent.  This  difiference,  however,
seems  to  me  to  be  too  great.

Mar.  27.]

ASCENT  OF  ST.  CATHARINE.

109

pending  on  Arabs,  we  found  it  impossible  to  '  keep  tbe  word  of
promise '  to  our  hopes.  Old  'Aid,  the  guide,  gave  out  at  start-
ing ;  and  his  place  had  to  be  supplied  by  a  youth,  Salim,  who
overtook  us  on  the  way,  and  proved  a  better  guide  than  the  old
man.  We  thought  too  we  perceived  some  slight  symptoms  of
abatement  in  the  good  superior's  zeal  for  undertaking  the  more
arduous  task  which  awaited  us  to-day  ;  and  at  our  suggestion  he
concluded  to  remain  and  await  our  return.

At  length  we  issued  from  the  garden  at  ten  minutes  past
6  o'clock,  and  proceeded  S.  W.  by  S.  up  a  ravine  which  comes
down  from  the  side  of  St.  Catharine,  called  Shuk  Musa,  '  Cleft
of  Mo^es,'  from  a  deep  rent  in  the  mountain  at  its  head.  At  ten
minutes  from  the  convent  and  before  beginning  to  ascend,  the
path  passes  between  two  large  rocks,  both  having  Sinaite  in-
scriptions, and  one  of  them  quite  covered  with  them.  These
Burckhardt  did  not  see  ;  for  he  says  expressly,  that  there  are
none  in  el-Leja  higher  up  than  the  rock  of  Moses,  which  lies  at
some  distance  below  el-Arba'in.  We  found  none  afterwards.
The  ravine  soon  becomes  narrow  and  precipitous,  and  the  way
exceedingly  difficult ;  the  path  leading  over  stones  and  rocks  in
their  natural  state,  which  have  never  been  removed  nor  laid  more
evenly.  Indeed,  we  could  not  discover  all  day  the  slightest  trace,
that  any  path  had  ever  existed  here  with  steps,  or  laid  stones,
like  that  which  leads  up  Jebel  Musa.  At  7.25  we  reached  the
fine  cold  spring  called  Ma'yan  esh-Shunnar,  '  Partridge  foun-
tain ; '  it  ha\ang  been  discovered,  as  they  say,  by  the  fluttering
of  one  of  these  birds,  when  the  monks  were  bringing  down  the
bones  of  St.  Catharine  from  the  mountain.  It  is  on  a  shelf  of
rock  under  the  left-hand  precipice,  about  a  foot  in  diameter  and
depth,  with  fine  cold  water  never  increasing  nor  diminishing.
The  water  percolates  through  some  fissure  in  the  rock  into  a  na-
tural reservoir  below,  where  it  is  found  in  considerable  quantity.
Several  hawthorn  trees  (Arab.  Za'rur)  were  growing  in  the  vi-
cinity. Directly  above  this  spot  is  the  deep  cleft  properly
called  Shuk  Musa.  The  path  now  turns  S.  W.  by  W.  passing  up
a  very  steep  ascent  for  a  time  ;  and  then  across  loose  debris  to
the  top  of  the  main  ridge,  which  runs  up  towards  the  summit,
here  bearing  S.  S.  W.  This  ridge  we  reached  about  8^  o'clock  ;
and  here  the  view  opened  towards  the  west  over  the  deep  val-
leys below.

We  now  kept  along  the  western  side  of  the  ridge,  beneath
the  brow,  where  the  mountain  side  slopes  rapidly  down  into  the
depths  below,  and  is  covered  like  the  Wadys  with  tufts  of  herbs
and  shrubs,  furnishing  abundai^  pasturage  for  the  flocks  of  the
Bedawin,  as  well  as  for  the  troops  of  gazelles  and  mountain  goats
(Beden)  which  haunt  these  wild  retreats.    The  Ja'deh  or  hys-

VoL.  I.~10  i.  lGO-162

110

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  III.

sop  was  here  in  great  plenty  ;  and  especially  the  fragrant  Za'ter,
a  species  of  thyme,  Ocymum  zatarhendi  of  Forskal.'  This  vege-
tation extends  quite  up  to  the  foot  of  the  highest  peak,  an
immense  pile  of  huge  blocks  of  coarse  red  granite  thrown  pro-
miscuously together.  Climbing  this  mass  of  rocks  with  diffi-
culty on  the  south  side,  we  reached  the  summit  at  a  quarter
past  9  o'clock.  This  consists  of  two  small  knolls  or  elevations
of  the  rocks ;  one  towards  the  east  on  which  stands  a  rude
chapel ;  the  other  towards  the  west  a  few  feet  higher.  Accord-
ing to  the  latest  observations  of  Riippell,  similar  to  those  on
Sinai,  the  height  of  this  mountain  is  8063  Paris  feet  aboye  the
sea,  or  about  2700  feet  above  the  convent  el-Arba'in.'^  Its  ele-
vation therefore  is  1030  feet  greater  than  that  of  Jebel  Musa,
The  sky  was  perfectly  clear,  and  the  air  cool.  A  cold  northwest
wind  swept  fitfully  over  the  summit.  The  thermometer  stood
in  the  shade  at  43°  F.  In  the  sun  it  rose  at  first  to  52°  ;  but
as  the  gust  grew  strong,  it  sunk  to  48°  F,

During  the  ascent,  I  had  found  myself  unwell ;  and  reached
the  top  in  a  state  of  great  exhaustion.  While  my  companion
was  busy  in  cross-examining  the  guides  as  to  the  mountains  and
places  in  view,  I  sought  out  a  sunny  and  sheltered  spot  among
the  rocks,  where  I  lay  down  and  slept  sweetly  for  half  an  hour,
and  awoke  greatly  refreshed.

The  chief  motive  which  led  us  to  ascend  Jebel  Katherin,  was
the  hope  of  obtaining  a  more  distinct  and  extensive  view  of  the
region  of  Sinai  and  of  the  peninsula.  Nor  were  our  hopes  dis-
appointed. The  mountain  indeed  has  little  of  historical  inter-
est ;  there  being  not  the  slightest  probability  that  it  had  any  con-
nection with  the  giving  of  the  law  to  Israel.  But  the  prospect
is  wide  and  magnificent,  comprehending  almost  the  whole  penin-
sula. The  chief  interruption  of  the  view  is  by  Um  Shaumer,
bearing  S.  20°  W.,  a  sharp  granite  peak,  said  by  Burckhardt  to
be  inaccessible,  and  perhaps  the  highest  point  in  the  peninsula.
Jebel  Musa,  lying  N.  44^  E.  was  far  below  us,  and  appeared
only  as  an  inferior  peak.  Towards  the  southeast  the  large  Wady
Nusb  was  seen  (8.  62^  E.)  running  towards  the  eastern  gulf ;
of  which  also  a  much  larger  portion  was  visible  around  Sherm,
than  from  Jebel  Musa,  with  the  island  Tirfin  bearing  S.  35"  E.
The  northern  part  of  this  gulf  could  not  be  traced  ;  though  the
Arabian  mountains  beyond  it  were  very  distinct.  A  mountain
which  our  guides  called  Ras  Muhamnied,  bore  S.  9°  E.  in  the
general  direction  of  the  cape  of  that  name  ;  around  which,  and
to  the  right  of  Um  Shaumer,  almost  the  whole  course  of  the  gulf

*

•  Flora,  Mg.  Ar.  p.  lOi),  110.  rino  ut  8168  Pnris  foet.    Schubert  did  not

'  Ueise  in  Abyssiiiieu,  I.  pp.  121,  124.    asceud  this  mouutain.
Russegger  gives  the  height  ol'  St.  Catha-
i.  162,  1C3

Mar.  27.]

SUMMIT  OF  ST.  CATHARINE.

Ill

of  Suez  was  visible,  with  the  African  mountains  beyond  ;  a  sil-
very thread  of  waters  stretching  far  up  through  a  naked  desert.
Two  of  these  African  mountains  were  very  distinct ;  one,  ez-
Zeit,  bearing  S.  56°  W.  and  the  other  the  cone  of  Jebel  Gharib,
bearing  S.  77°  W.  called  by  our  guides  the  mountain  of  the
'Ababideh.  Between  the  western  gulf  and  the  mountains  of
Sinai,  the  great  plain  el-Ka'a  was  spread  out,  extending  beyond
Tur  ;  and  north  of  that  place  along  the  shore  was  seen  the  low
range  of  limestone  mountains,  among  which  lies  the  sounding
hill  Nakus.  Nearer  at  hand  were  many  dark  peaks  ;  and  among
them  that  of  Madsus,  just  beyond  the  gardens  of  Bughabigh,
bearing  N.  78°  W.  and  a  peak  of  Jebel  Haweit,  N.  45°  W.
Near  this  last  rises  Wady  Kibrin,  which  runs  off"  to  Wady  Hi-
bran.  More  distant  in  the  same  direction  rose  the  rugged  cliffs
of  Serbal,  lying  between  N.  57°  W.  and  N.  70°  W.  while  farther
to  the  right  were  seen  Sarbut  el-Jemel,  el-Benat,  and  ez-Zebir.
In  the  north,  the  great  sandy  plain  er-Kamleh  was  seen  stretch-
ing far  along  the  base  of  the  lugh  level  ridge  of  et-Tih  ;  and  we
were  shown  the  point  where  this  mountain  separates  into  two
parallel  ridges,  bearing  from  us  about  north.  Towards  the  east-
em  quarter,  between  us  and  the  whole  length  of  the  gulf  of
'Akabah,  the  eye  wandered  over  a  sea  of  mountains,  black,  abrupt,
naked,  weather-worn  peaks ;  a  fitting  spot  where  the  very  genius
of  desolation  might  erect  his  horrid  throne. — Below  us,  just  at
the  western  foot  of  St.  Catharine,  a  valley  called  Um  Kuraf
was  seen  running  northwards ;  while  another,  ez-Zuweitin,
having  a  succession  of  gardens,  passes  down  from  the  right  near
the  base  of  el-Humr,  to  join  it.  The  Wady  thus  formed  is
called  Tulah,  and  runs  down  between  the  mountains  of  Seru
N.  15°  W.  and  Tinia  N.  26°  W.  apparently  joining  the  Kudh-
wah  and  so  flowing  off  to  Wady  Solaf  Jebel  el-Humr  was  be-
low us  in  the  direction  N.  3°  E.  Jebel  Tinia  was  also  called  by
our  guides  Sumr  et-Tinia.'

We  found  that  our  guides  of  to-day  and  yesterday,  both  old
and  young,  knew  very  little  of  distant  mountains  and  objects  ;
while  they  were  familiarly  acquainted  with  those  near  at  hand.
It  was  only  after  long  and  repeated  examination  and  cross-ques-
tioning, that  my  companion  could  be  sure  of  any  correctness  as
to  more  remote  objects  ;  since  at  first  they  often  gave  answers  at

'  Other  bearings  from  Jebel  Knthenn  30°  E.    Zebir,  another  peak  of  St.  Catha-

^  were  the  following :   Jebel  ed-Deir,  N.  rine  near  at  hand,  S.  12°  E.  Muheirid

85°  E.    Um  Lauz,  N.  41°  E.  Um  'Alawy,  el-Kunas,  S.  6°  E.  and  el-'Odha,  S.  10°  W.

N.  62°  E.  el-Habeshj,  further  distant,  N.  both  connected  with  Um  Shaumer.  Fera'

66°  E.    Urk  ez-Zugherah,  a  long  ridge  Suweid,  S.  25°  W.  and  es-Sik,  S.  77°  W. ;

beyond  Um  'Alawy,  north  end,  N.  87°  E. ;  dark  peaks  nearer  St.  Catharine.  el-Be-

Bouth  end,  S.  80"  E.    Abu  Mas'iid,  be-  nat,  N.  45°  W.    ez-Zebir,  west  end,  N.

tween  the  Wadys  Nusb  and  Wa'rah,  S.  40°  W. ;  east  end,  I\,  31°  W.

1.  163-165

112

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

random,  whicli  they  afterwards  modified  or  took  back.  The
young  man  Salim  was  the  most  intelligent  of  the  whole.  After
all  our  pains,  many  of  the  names  we  obtained  were  different  from
those  which  Burckhardt  heard  ;  although  his  guides  apparently
were  of  the  same  tribe. — A  tolerably  certain  method  of  finding
any  place  at  will,  is  to  ask  an  Arab  if  its  name  exists.  He  is
sure  to  answer  Yes  ;  and  to  point  out  some  spot  at  hand  as  its
location.  In  this  way,  I  have  no  doubt,  we  might  have  found
Kephidim,  or  Marah,  or  any  other  place  we  chose  ;  and  such  is
probably  the  mode  in  which  many  ancient  names  and  places
have  been  discovered  by  travellers,  which  no  one  has  ever  been
able  to  find  after  them.'

Of  the  two,  the  ascent  of  St.  Catharine  is  much  to  be  prefer-
red to  that  of  J ebel  Mtisa.  The  view  is  far  more  extensive  and
almost  unlimited,  affording  to  the  spectator  a  good  general  idea  of
the  whole  peninsula  ;  of  which  he  learns  little  or  nothing  from.
Sinai.  The  ascent  indeed  is  longer  and  more  laborious  ;  but  it
also  repays  the  toil  in  a  much  higher  degree.  Our  whole  visit
here  to  day  was  one  of  satisfaction  and  gratification  ;  not,  as
yesterday,  of  disappointment.  The  time  generally  necessary  for
the  ascent  of  Jebel  Miisa  may  be  estimated  at  an  hour  and  a
half ;  and  for  St.  Catharine  from  two  and  a  half  to  three  hours.
We  were  longer  on  the  way.

After  remaining  for  two  and  a  half  hours  on  the  summit,  we
left  at  llf  o'clock,  and  reached  the  convent  of  the  Forty  Martyrs
at  a  quarter  past  one.  Here  we  found  the  superior  still  waiting
in  order  to  conduct  us  around  through  Wady  el-Leja  to  the  con-
vent, and  show  us  the  holy  places  on  the  way.  The  distance  is
reckoned  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  may  be  thus  divided  :  forty
minutes  to  the  mouth  of  el-Leja  ;  twenty-five  minutes  along
the  front  of  Horeb  to  Wady  Shu'eib  ;  and  twenty-five  minutes
to  the  convent  in  that  valley.  This  is  a  sort  of  household  path
for  the  monks,  which  they  have  travelled  for  centuries  ;  and
along  which,  as  a  matter  of  convenience,  they  have  gathered  to-
gether aU  the  holy  places  they  know  of  in  connection  with
Sinai.

After  stopping  about  half  an  hour  at  el-Arba'in,  we  proceeded
slowly  down  the  valley,  without  seeing  the  chapel  and  grot  of
St.  Onuphrius,  which  are  said  by  Pococke  to  be  near  the  north
end  of  the  olive  plantation.  In  about  twenty  minutes  we  came
to  the  rock  which  they  say  Moses  smote,  and  the  water  gushed
out.  As  to  this  rock  one  is  at  a  loss,  whether  most  to  admire  the
credulity  of  the  monks  or  the  legendary  and  discrepant  reports
of  tiavellers.    It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark,  that  there  is  not

'  So,  for  example,  Marah,  Capernaum,  Bethsaido,  Chorazia,  etc.
i.  1C5,  1C6

Mar.  27.]

WADY  EL-LEJA.  INSCRIPTIOKS.

113

the  slightest  ground  for  assuming  any  connection  between  this
narrow  valley  and  Eephidim  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  there  is  every
thing  against  it.  The  rock  itself  is  a  large  isolated  cube  of
coarse  red  granite,  which  has  fallen  from  the  eastern  mountain.
Down  its  front,  in  an  oblique  hue  from  top  to  bottom,  runs  a
seam  of  a  finer  texture,  from  twelve  to  fifteen  inches  broad,
having  in  it  several  irregular  horizontal  crevices,  somewhat  re-
sembling the  human  mouth,  one  above  another.  These  are  said
to  be  twelve  in  number  ;  but  I  could  taake  out  only  ten.  The
seam  extends  quite  through  the  rock,  and  is  \'isible  on  the  opposite
or  back  side  ;  where  also  are  similar  crevices,  though  not  so
large.  The  holes  did  not  appear  to  us  to  be  artificial,  as  is
usually  reported  ;  although  we  examir>ed  them  particularly.
They  belong  rather  to  the  nature  of  the  soam  ;  yet  it  is  possible
that  some  of  them  may  have  been  enlarged  by  artificial  means.
The  rock  is  a  singular  one  ;  and  doubtless  was  selected,  on  ac-
count of  this  very  singularity,  as  the  scene  of  the  miracle.

Below  this  point  are  many  Sinaite  inscriptions  along  the
rocks  in  the  valley.  Having  Burckhardt's  Travels  with  us,  we
compared  some  of  his  copies  with  the  originals,  and  found  them
tolerably  exact. '  Where  Wady  el-Leja  opens  out  into  the  recess
that  runs  in  west  from  the  plain  er-Kahah,  there  is  on  the  left  a
garden  ;  and  further  down  on  the  right  another,  having  a  great
number  and  variety  of  fruit  trees.  This  Burckhardt  says  is
called,  by  way  of  eminence,  el-Bostan,  '  the  Garden  ; '  a  name
which  we  did  not  hear.  These  gardens  mark  the  sites  of  former
convents,  now  fallen  to  ruin  ;  that  towards  the  west  once  bear-
ing the  name  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  and  the  other  that
of  St.  Mary  of  David.  Over  the  mountain  towards  the  west
among  the  gardens  which  we  saw  from  St.  Catharine  in  Wady
Zuweitin  or  Tulah,  was  formerly  another  small  convent  of  St.
Cosmas  and  Damian,  ^4sited  by  Pococke  but  of  which  we-
heard  nothing.  Overagainst  the  mouth  of  el-Leja,  in  the  north-
ern part  of  the  recess,  we,  like  all  travellers,  were  pointed  to  the
spot  where  the  earth  opened  and  swallowed  up  Korah,  Dathan
and  Abiram,  with  their  followers  ;  the  good  fathers  of  the  mon-
aster}', as  a  matter  of  convenience,  having  transferred  the  scene
of  that  event  from  the  vicinity  of  Kadesh  to  this  place.'

Farther  eastward  in  front  of  Horeb,  a  hole  in  a  granite  rock
level  with  the  sand,  is  shown  as  the  mould  in  which  Aaron  cast

'  Not  so  Pococke's  copies,  in  which  p.irt  of  the  sixth  century.    The  name  of

there  is  hardly  a  trace  of  resemblance  ;  the  valley  in  Greek  was  then  idwXa,  Thola.

nor  are  those  of  Niebuhr  much  better.  See  in  Max.  Biblioth.  vet.  Patmm,  Tom.

»  Travels,  I.  pp.  149,  153.  fol.    In  a  X.  p.  386  sq.    Acta  Sanctorum,  Jan.  Tom.

cell  or  perhaps  convent  in  this  valley,  the  I.  p.  963,  col.  1.

Abbot  Johannes  Climacns,  known  as  a  '  Num.  c.  16,  compared  with  Num.

writer,  lived  for  forty  years,  in  the  latter  13,  26.

Vol.  I.-10*  i.  166, 167

114

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  UL

the  golden  calf.  Burckhardt  has  exaggerated  this  story  a  little
at  the  expense  of  the  monks,  making  them  show  the  head  of  the
golden  calf  itself  transmuted  into  stone.  The  small  elevation  or
point  between  the  channels  of  the  Wadys  Sheikh  and  Shu'eib,
they  also  show  as  the  place  where  Aaron  was  standing,  when  the
people  danced  around  the  golden  calf  in  the  plain,  and  Moses
descended  behind  him  from  the  mountain.  Just  at  the  foot  of
the  adjacent  corner  of  Horeb  is  a  rock,  marking  the  spot  where
Moses  threw  down  and  broke  the  tables  of  the  law.  These  the
monks  and  Arabs  both  believe  are  stUl  huried  there  unto  this
day  ;  and  the  Arahs  often  dig  around  the  spot  in  the  hope  of
finding  them.*

As  we  advanced  up  the  valley  towards  the  convent,  we  were
followed  by  quite  a  throng  of  Arab  women  and  children  of  the
Jebehyeh,  begging  various  articles  of  the  superior,  and  kissing
his  hand  and  the  hem  of  his  garment,  as  if  rejoiced  to  meet  him
without  the  walls.  The  old  man  dealt  kindly  with  them,  and
distributed  his  little  gifts  with  patriarchal  dignity  and  grace.
We  reached  the  convent  at  4|  o'clock,  exceedingly  fatigued,  and
glad  to  find  a  quiet  home.  The  Ikonomos  undertook  to  pay  our
Arab  attendants  in  barley,  charging  us  at  the  rate  of  seven  pias-
tres a  day  for  each  guide.  As  the  poor  fellows  would  prohably
get  much  less  than  this  in  their  barley,  we  sent  them  a  trifling
bakhshish  or  present  in  money,  with  which  they  went  away  de-
lighted.

Wednesday,  March  28th.  We  had  fixed  on  Thursday  as
the  day  of  our  departure  ;  and  were  to-day  of  course  very  busy
with  our  journals  and  letters.  Besharah  arrived  in  the  afternoon,
saying  that  the  camels  would  be  here  at  night  or  in  the  morning  ;
and  that  TuweUeb  would  go  with  us  to  'Akabah,  according  to
the  contract.

The  good  superior,  Father  Neophytus,  continued  his  atten-
tions, although  it  was  a  day  on  which  he  was  peculiarly  occu-
pied in  the  duties  of  the  convent.  All  the  morning  imtU  12
o'clock  the  monks  were  at  prayers  ;  and  the  same  was  to  be  the
case  at  night  from  ten  o'clock  until  two  ;  this  being  a  ])articular
regulation  of  the  convent  during  certain  days  in  Lent.  After
dinner  we  were  invited  to  visit  the  superior  at  his  room.  We
found  him  in  the  midst  of  a  little  cstabhshmcnt  by  himself ;  a
small  court,  a  work-bench  with  a  few  joiner's  tools,  a  sitting-room,
kitchen,  and  two  or  three  small  chambers.  His  sitting-room,
like  the  one  we  occupied,  was  furnished  with  low  divans  and  car-
pets, rather  old  and  worn  ;  in  a  recess  stood  a  low  desk  and  trunk  ;
and  on  the  opposite  side  were  a  closet  and  cupboard.  Several

'  Burckhardt  has  transferred  this  legend  to  the  summit  of  Sinai;  p.  C67.
L  168,  169

Mab.28.]  visit  to  the  SUPERIOR.  MANNA.

115

Greek  books,  mostly  devotional,  were  scattered  on  a  slielf  and  in
the  window.  The  room  was  very  small.  Oranges  from  Egypt
sliced  with  sugar  were  presented  to  us  ;  and  also  coffee,  prepared
by  the  young  deacon.

As  this  was  to  be  our  last  day  at  the  convent,  the  superior
made  us  several  presents  as  memorials  of  our  visit  to  Sinai,  re-
markable rather  for  the  value  which  he  set  upon  them,  than  for
any  intrinsic  worth.  An  engraving  of  the  convent  and  mountain
was  curious  as  a  specimen  of  perspective  drawing  (or  rather  non-
perspective)  a  century  ago  ;  and  this  and  some  beautiful  white
corals  from  Tur,  and  a  skin  of  sweetmeats  for  our  journey,  were
the  chief  articles.  The  latter  contained  a  mixture  of  dates  and
almonds,  highly  prized,  and  usually  prepared  (he  said)  only  as
presents  to  Pashas  and  persons  of  rank.

In  accordance  with  a  former  promise,  the  old  man  likewise
put  into  our  hands  a  small  quantity  of  the  manna  of  the  penin-
sula, famous  at  least  as  being  the  successor  of  the  Israelitish
manna,  though  not  to  be  regarded  as  the  same  substance.  Ac-
cording to  his  account,  it  is  not  produced  every  year  ;  sometimes
only  after  five  or  six  years  ;  and  the  quantity  in  general  has
greatly  diminished.  It  is  found  in  the  form  of  shining  drops  on
the  twigs  and  branches  (not  upon  the  leaves)  of  the  Turfa,  Ta-
marix  Gallica  mannifera  of  Ehrenberg,  from  which  it  exudes
in  consequence  of  the  puncture  of  an  insect  of  the  coccus  kind,
Coccus  manniparus  of  the  same  naturaKst.'  What  falls  upon
the  sand  is  said  not  to  be  gathered.  It  has  the  appearance  of
gum,  is  of  a  sweetish  taste,  and  melts  when  exposed  to  the  sun
or  to  a  fire.  The  Arabs  consider  it  as  a  great  delicacy,  and  the
pUgrims  prize  it  highly  ;  especially  those  from  Russia,  who  pay
a  high  price  for  it.  The  superior  had  now  but  a  small  quantity
which  he  was  keeping  against  an  expected  visit  from  the  Russian
consul  general  in  Egypt.  Indeed,  so  scarce  had  it  become  of-
late  years,  as  to  bear  a  price  of  twenty  or  twenty-five  piastres
the  pound.

Of  the  manna  of  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  said  :  "When  the
dew  that  lay  was  gone  up,  behold,  upon  the  face  of  the  desert  a
small  round  thing,  small  as  the  hoar-frost  on  the  ground; — and  it
was  like  coriander  seed,  white  ;  and  the  taste  of  it  was  like
wafers  with  honey  f — And  the  people  gathered  it,  and  ground  it
in  miUs,  and  beat  it  in  a  mortar,  or  baked  it  in  pans,  and  made
cakes  of  it  ;  and  the  taste  of  it  was  as  the  taste  of  fresh  oil.
And  when  the  dew  fell  upon  the  camp  in  the  night,  the  manna
fell  upon  it." ^  Of  all  these  characteristics  not  one  is  applicable
to  the  present  manna.  And  even  could  it  be  shown  to  be  the
same,  still  a  supply  of  it  in  sufficient  abundance  for  the  daily

'  See  Note  XV,  end  of  the  volume.      »  Ex.  16,  14.  31.       •  Num.  11,  8.  9.

i.  169.  170

116

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

consumption  of  two  millions  of  people,  would  have  been  no  less
a  miracle.

The  superior  also  procured  for  me  a  pair  of  the  sandals  usu-
ally worn  by  the  Bedawin  of  the  peninsula,  made  of  the  thick
skin  of  a  fish  which  is  caught  in  the  Eed  Sea.  The  Arabs
around  the  convent  called  it  Tun ;  but  could  give  no  farther
account  of  it,  than  that  it  is  a  large  fish,  and  is  eaten.  It  is  a
species  of  Halicore,  named  by  Ehrenberg  Halicora  Hempricliii.^
The  skin  is  clumsy  and  coarse,  and  might  answer  very  well  for
the  external  covering  of  the  tabernacle,  which  was  constructed  at
Sinai  f  but  would  seem  hardly  a  fitting  material  for  the  ornamen-
tal sandals  belonging  to  the  costly  attire  of  high-born  dames  in
Palestine,  described  by  the  prophet  Ezekiel.'

It  will  not  be  supposed  that  all  these  things  were  presented
to  us  without  the  hope  of  a  recompense.  Indeed,  some  of  them,
as  the  manna  and  sandals,  were  a  matter  of  purchase  on  our
part ;  and  as  to  the  rest,  we  knew  very  well  that  a  present  of
money  was  expected  to  an  amount  greater  than  the  value  of  the
articles.

Thursday,  March  2^th,  Forenoon.  This  being  the  day  ap-
pointed for  our  setting  off",  we  held  ourselves  ready  at  an  early
hour  ;  but  it  was  nearly  eleven  o'clock  before  TuweUeb  arrived
with  the  camels.  After  a  long  talk  in  the  garden  in  presence  of
the  superior,  it  was  agreed,  that  as  Besharah  had  now  no  camel,
Tuweileb  shoiddtake  his  place  in  the  contract,  and  conduct  us  to
'Akabah.  Three  of  the  men  also,  who  had  come  with  us  from
Cairo,  concluded  to  go  no  further  ;  and  we  found  that  we  were
to  have  an  entirely  new  set  of  camels,  which  proved  to  be  better
than  the  former  ones.  The  190  piastres  to  be  paid  for  each
camel  from  Cairo  to  'Akabah,  the  Arabs  divided  among  them-
selves as  follows  :  40  from  Cairo  to  Suez  ;  80  from  Suez  to  the
convent  ;  and  70  from  the  convent  to  'Akabah.  Yet  there  would
seem  to  be  no  regular  price  for  any  of  these  routes ;  for  an
English  traveller  the  year  before  had  paid  at  the  rate  of  40  pias-
tres to  Suez  ;  100  thence  to  the  convent ;  and  60  firom  the  con-
vent to  'Akabah.

We  parted  from  Besharah  with  regret.  He  had  served  us
faithfully  and  well ;  was  ever  active  and  vigilant ;  and  had
always  manifested  some  independence  and  self-respect.  We
made  him  a  small  additional  present  on  account  of  the  camel  he
had  lost  in  our  service  ;  and  promised  to  put  him  into  our  book,
if  we  made  one.    As  he  said  he  shoidd  return  immediately  to

'  See  Ehi  enbcrg's  Symbola  Phys.  Mam-  "  Ex.  25,  6.    26,  14.  al.    The  Hebrew

malia,  Decas  II.  Text  fol.  K.    Also  ibid,  -word  is  WflP ,  usually  translated  badger;

Zootomica,  Dec.  I.  Tab.  3,  4,  5.    Accord-  tlioiigh,  as  it  would  seem,  without  suflS-

ing  to  this  writer,  the  Arabs  on  the  coast  cicnt  reason  in  this  case,

call  this  fish  Naka  and  Lottum.  •  Ez.  16,  10.
i.  171,  172

Mar.  29.]

EXPENSES.     TAKING  LEAVE.

117

Cairo,  we  entrusted  letters  to  his  care,  with  a  promise  of  reward
on  their  being  delivered  ;  but  it  was  many  months  ere  they
reached  the  places  of  their  destination.

Tuwedeb  was  an  older  man  than  Besharah  ;  he  had  travelled
more,  was  better  acquainted  with  the  routes  and  with  the  coun-
try in  general,  and  knew  more  of  the  habits  and  usual  wants  of
Frank  travellers.  He  was,  however,  less  active  ;  was  apparently
growing  old  ;  and  had  seen  his  best  days.  Yet  we  found  him
throughout  faithful,  trustworthy,"  and  kind ;  although  for  a
great  part  of  the  time  he  was  with  us,  he  was  labouring  under
ill  health.  We  cheerfully  add  our  testimony  in  his  favour,  to
that  of  former  travellers.

Our  residence  of  five  and  a  half  days  in  the  convent  turned
out  to  be  rather  an  expensive  one.  The  community  provided  us
with  various  articles  which  we  needed  on  our  farther  journey  ;  as
bread,  dried  fruits,  almonds,  candles,  and  the  hke  ;  but  would
set  no  price  upon  them.  These  we  could  estimate  ;  but  to  do
the  '  proper  thing '  as  to  our  lodgings  and  entertainment,  and  a
fit  '  remembrance '  to  all  the  inmates,  from  the  superior  down  to
the  servants,  was  a  matter  requiring  more  nicety  and  tact.  With
the  aid  of  our  Komeh,  who  was  skilled  in  these  matters,  we  made
out  to  get  through  the  business  to  the  apparent  satisfaction  of
all  parties,  except  the  good  superior.  He  had  exerted  himself
perhaps  unusually  to  pay  us  friendly  attentions  ;  and  possibly
he  expected  from  us  too  much  in  return.  His  manner  was  still
and  resigned  ;  but  his  countenance  was  fallen  and  beclouded.
A  civil  speech,  however,  with  the  dexterous  apphcation  of  a
couple  of  dollars  in  addition,  wrought  a  sudden  change  ;  the
cloud  cleared  away,  his  eyes  lighted  up,  and  his  whole  counte-
nance assumed  an  expression  of  more  than  wonted  benignity.

During  our  journey  to  the  convent,  it  had  been  a  part  of  our
plan,  or  rather  our  wish,  to  make  an  excursion  to  Jebel  Serbal,  in
order  to  examine  for  ourselves,  whether  this  mountain  has  any
claim  to  be  regarded  as  the  Sinai  of  Scripture  ;  as  Burckhardt
suggests  was  perhaps  anciently  the  case. '  But  after  we  reached
the  convent,  and  perceived  the  adaptedness  of  that  region  to  the
circumstances  of  the  historical  narrative,  tliis  wish  became  less
strong  ;  and  afterwards  the  want  of  time  and  the  information
given  us  by  Sheikh  Husein  and  TuweUeb  respecting  the  district
of  Serbal,  led  us  to  abandon  the  idea  of  visiting  it.  TuweUeb
had  spent  several  weeks  around  the  mountain  the  preceding  sea-
son ;  and  both  assured  us,  that  nowhere  in  the  \'icinity  of  it,  is
there  any  valley  or  open  spot  like  the  plain  er-Rahah,  or  even
like  Wady  esh-Sheikh.  From  the  northeast  side  of  Serbal  the
Wadys  run  down  to  Wady  Feiran  ;  but  they  are  comparatively

Travels,  etc.  page  609.

172;  173

118

MOUNT  SMAI.

[Sec.  m.

narrow  and  rocky.  On  its  southwest  side  still  narrower  Wadys  run
out  to  the  great  plain  el-Ka'a,  at  the  distance  of  an  hour  or
more.  There  is  water  in  plenty  on  both  sides  of  the  mountain  ;
and  a  path,  laid  in  part  with  steps,  leads  along  the  eastern  and
southern  sides  to  the  summit.  The  route  from  the  convent  to
Serbal  goes  down  Wady  Sheikh  ;  or  else  hy  the  Nukh  Hawy
and  down  Wady  Solaf  The  distance  from  the  convent  to  Fei-
ran  near  the  foot  of  Serbal  by  this  latter  route,  is  nine  or  ten
hours.  The  mountain  itself  is  a  long  ridge  with  five  principal
peaks.  Burckhardt  ascended  the  easternmost,  which  with  the
one  adjacent  he  supposed  to  be  the  highest.  Eiippell  in  1831
ascended  the  second  from  the  west,  by  a  path  along  the  north-
em  side  of  the  mountain ;  he  regards  this  as  the  highest,  and
took  observations  upon  it  to  ascertain  its  elevation.  From  these
its  height  was  found  to  be  6342  Paris  feet  above  the  sea  ;  or
976  feet  higher  than  the  convent  el-Arba'in.'  Hence  it  txirns
out  that  Serbal  is  more  than  1700  feet  lower  than  St.  Catharine  ;
although  as  it  rises  alone  and  magnificently  from  the  midst  of
far  inferior  ridges,  its  apparent  elevation  is  not  much  less  than
that  of  the  former  mountain.

On  both  the  summits  ascended  by  Burckhardt  and  Eiippell,
these  travellers  found  inscriptions  in  the  usual  unknown  charac-
ter ;  and  also  in  the  vaUeys  leading  to  the  mountain.  In  a
Wady  on  the  southwest  side  of  the  ridge,  near  its  eastern  end,  are
the  remains  of  a  large  and  well  built  convent,  from  which  a  path
is  said  to  lead  up  the  mountain.  These  circumstances  would
seem  to  indicate,  that  Serbal  was  anciently  a  place  of  pilgrimage
of  some  kind  ;  but  whether  because  it  was  perhaps  regarded  as
the  Sinai  of  Scripture,  or  only  in  connection  with  this  convent
and  the  episcopal  see  of  Pharan ;  or  more  probably  as  a  sacred
place  of  the  heathen  inhabitants  of  the  peninsula  ;  it  may  be
now  difficult  to  determine.*

The  weather  during  our  residence  at  the  convent,  as  indeed
during  all  our  journey  through  the  peninsula,  was  very  fine  ;
with  the  slight  exception  already  mentioned  on  Jebel  Milsa.
At  the  convent,  the  thermometer  ranged  only  between  47°  and
67°  F.  The  winter  nights  are  said  here  to  be  cold  ;  water
freezes  as  late  as  February ;  and  snow  often  falls  upon  the
mountains.  But  the  air  is  exceedingly  pure,  and  the  climate
healthy  ;  as  is  testified  by  the  great  age  and  ^^gour  of  many  of
the  monks.  And  if  in  general  few  of  the  Arabs  attain  to  so
great  an  age,  the  cause  is  doubtless  to  be  sought  in  the  scanti-

'  Reise  in  Abyss.  I.  pp.  128,  124.  sinien,  I.  p.  12,'>  sq. — See  more  in  Note

'  Se"  ge.ieraily,  Burckhardt's  Travels,  XVI,  end  of  the  volume,
etc.  p.  006  sq.    Ruppell's  Reise  in  Abys-
i.  174,  175

SKcin.]  SERBAL.     CLIMATE.  119

ness  of  their  fare  and  their  exposure  to  privations ;  and  not  in
any  injurious  influence  of  the  climate.

In  closing  this  Section  of  our  Journal,  I  throw  together  here
all  that  remains  to  be  said  upon  the  Sinai  of  the  Old  Testament,
Sinai  in  the  earlj^  Christian  ages,  the  present  convent,  and  also
upon  the  Arab  inhabitants  of  the  peninsula.

SINAI  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.

We  came  to  Sinai  with  some  incredulity,  wishing  to  investi-
gate the  point,  whether  there  was  any  probable  ground  beyond
monkish  tradition,  for  fixing  upon  the  present  supposed  site.
The  details  of  the  preceding  pages  will  have  made  the  reader
acquainted  with  the  grounds,  which  led  us  to  the  conviction,  that
the  plain  er-Rahah  above  described  is  the  probable  spot  where
the  congregation  of  Israel  were  assembled,  and  that  the  moun-
tain  impending  over  it,  the  present  Horeb,  was  the  scene  of  the
awful  phenomena  in  which  the  law  was  given.  We  were  satis-
fied after  much  examination  and  inquiry,  that  in  no  other  quarter
of  the  peninsula,  and  certainly  not  around  any  of  the  higher
peaks,  is  there  a  spot  corresponding  in  any  dergee  so  fully  as  this
to  the  historical  account,  and  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case.
I  have  entered  above  more  fully  into  the  details,  because  former
travellers  have  touched  upon  tliis  point  so  slightly  ;  *  and  because,
even  to  the  present  day,  it  is  a  current  opinion  among  scholars,
that  no  open  space  exists  among  these  mountainst''  We  too
were  surprised  as  well  as  gratified  to  find  here,  in  the  inmost
recesses  of  these  dark  granite  cliffs,  this  fine  plain  spread  out
before  the  mountain  ;  and  I  know  not  when  I  have  felt  a  thrill
of  stronger  emotion,  than  when  in  first  crossing  the  plain,  the
dark  precipices  of  Horeb  rising  in  solemn  grandeur  before  us,  we
became  aware  of  the  entire  adaptedness  of  the  scene  to  the
purposes  for  which  it  was  chosen  by  the  great  Hebrew  legislator.
Moses  doubtless,  during  the  forty  years  in  which  he  kept  the
flocks  of  Jethro,  had  often  wandered  over  these  mountains,  and
was  weU  acquainted  with  their  valleys  and  deep  recesses,  like  the
Arabs  of  the  present  day.  At  any  rate,  he  knew  and  had  visited
the  spot  to  which  he  was  to  conduct  his  people  this  adytum
in  the  midst  of  the  great  circular  granite  region,  with  only  a
single  feasible  entrance  ;  a  secret  holy  place  shut  out  from  the
world  amid  lone  and  desolate  mountains.

'  Comp.  above,  pp.  104-107, 117.   See       '  Compare  Winer's  Bibl.  Eealworterb.
also  more  in  Notes  XIV,  XVI,  at  the  end  of   art.  Sinai.
the  volume.  '  Ex.  3  1.

i.  175, 176

120

MOUlfT  SnTAI.

[Skc  hl

The  Israelites  probably  approached  Sinai  by  the  "Wady  Fei-
ran  ;  and  entered  the  plain  through  the  upper  part  of  \Vady
esh-Sheikh.  At  least  there  is  no  conceivable  reason,  why  they
should  have  passed  to  the  south  of  Mount  Serbal,  and  taken  the
circuitous  and  more  difficult  route  near  Tur,  and  through  the
Wady  Hibran,  as  has  sometimes  been  supposed.  From  the  desert
of  Sin,  -which  I  have  above  taken  to  be  the  great  plain  along  the
shore,  to  Sinai,  three  stations  are  marked,  Dophkah,  Alush,  and
Eephidim, '  equivalent  to  four  days'  journey  for  such  a  host ;  and
this  accords  well  with  the  distance  of  twenty-six  to  twenty-
eight  hours  as  usually  travelled  by  camels.*

The  names  of  Horeb  and  Sinai  are  used  interchangeably  in
the  Pentateuch,  to  denote  the  mountain  on  which  the  law  was
given  ;  and  this  circumstance  has  naturally  occasioned  difficulty
to  commentators.  The  most  obvious  and  common  explanation
is,  to  regard  one  (Sinai)  as  the  general  name  for  the  whole
cluster,  and  the  other  (Horeb)  as  designating  a  particular  moun-
tain ;  much  as  the  same  names  are  employed  by  the  Christians
at  the  present  day.^  So  too  the  Arabs  now  apply  the  name
Jebel  et-Tur  to  the  whole  central  granite  region ;  while  the
different  mountains  of  which  it  is  composed,  are  called  Jebel
Katherin,  Jebel  Musa,  etc.  On  looking  at  the  subject  during
our  sojourn  at  the  convent,  I  was  led  to  a  similar  conclusion  ;
applying  the  names  however  differently,  and  regarding  Horeb
as  the  general  name,  and  Sinai  as  the  particular  one.  Two  cir-
cumstances seem  to  favour  this  conclusion.  One  is,  that  before
and  during  the  march  of  the  Israelites  from  Egypt  to  the  place
where  the  law  was  given,  the  latter  is  called  only  Horeb  ;  just
as  the  Arabs  now  speak  of  going  from  Cairo  to  Jebel  et-Tiir ;
while  during  the  sojourn  of  the  Hebrews  before  the  mountain,
it  is  spoken  of  (with  one  exception)  only  as  Sinai ;  and  after
their  departure,  it  is  again  referred  to  exclusively  as  Horeb.
The  other  and  main  fact  is,  that  while  the  Israelites  were  en-
camped at  Rephidini,  Moses  was  commanded  to  go  on  vnth.  the
elders  before  the  people,  and  smite  the  rock  in  Horeb,  in  order
to  obtain  water  for  the  camp.  The  necessary  inference  is,  that
gome  part  of  Horeb  was  near  to  Eephidim  ;  while  Sinai  was  yet
a  day's  march  distant.*

The  position  of  Rephidim  itself  can  be  conjectured  only
from  the  same  passages  to  which  reference  has  just  been  made.
If  we  admit  Horeb  to  be  the  general  name  for  the  central  cluster
of  mountains,  and  that  the  Israelites  approached  it  by  the  great

•  Num.  33,  12-15.  UI.  p.  115.  Winer's  BibL  Realworterb.
»  Bnrckhardt's  Travels,  pp.  598,  602,    art.  Horeb.

618,621,622.  *  Ex.  17,  1.  5.  6.    19,1.2.     See  also

*  Gesenius'  Notes  to  Burckhardt's  Trav-    'Sole  XVII,  eod  of  the  Tolume.
eU,  p.  1078.    Rosenmiiller  BibL  Geogr.

L  17()-178

See.  nL]

HOREC.  KEPHIDIM.

121

Wadv  esh-Sheikh,  then  Rephidim  must  have  been  at  some  point
in  this  vallev  not  far  from  the  skirts  of  Horeb,  and  about  a
day's  march  from  the  particular  mountain  of  SinaL  Such  a
point  exists  at  the  place  where  Wady  esh-Sheikh  issues  from
the  high  central  granite  cliffs.  We  did  not  visit  the  spot  ;  but
Burckhardt  in  ascending  Wady  esh-Sheikh  towards  the  convent,
thus  describes  it :  "'We  now  approached  the  central  simimits
of  Movmt  Sinai,  which  we  had  had  in  view  for  several  days.
Abrupt  cliffs  of  granite  from  six  to  eight  himdred  feet  in  height,
whose  surface  is  blackened  by  the  sun,  surround  the  avenues
leading  to  the  elevated  platform  to  which  the  name  of  Sinai  is
specilically  applied.  These  cliffs  enclose  the  holy  moimtain  on
three  side's,  leaving  the  east  and  northeast  sides  only,  towards  the
gulf  of  'Akabah,  more  open  to  the  view.  We  entered  these
cliffs  bv  a  narrow  defile  about  forty  feet  in  breadth,  with  per-
pendiciilar  granite  rocks  on  both  sides.  [In  this  defile  is  the
Seat  of  Moses,  so  called.]  Beyond  it  the  valley  opens,  the
mountains  on  both  sides  diverge,  and  the  Wady  esh-Sheikh
continues  in  a  south  direction  with  a  slight  ascent." '  The
entrance  to  this  defile  from  the  west,  is  five  hours  distant  from
the  point  where  Wady  esh-Sheikh  issues  from  the  plain  er-
Rahak  This  would  correspond  well  to  the  distance  of  Rephidim;
and  then  these  blackened  cMs  would  be  the  outskirts  of  Horeb.
I  am  not  aware  of  any  objection  to  this  view,  except  one  which
applies  equally  to  every  part  of  Wady  esh-Sheikh  and  the  ad-
jacent district,  viz.  that  neither  here  nor  in  all  this  tract  is  there
at  the  present  day  any  special  want  of  water.  There  is  a  well
near  the  defile  itself  ;  and  an  hour  above  it  a  spring  called  Abu
Suweirah,  which  we  visited  ;  besides  others  in  various  quarters.
This  diificulty  I  am  not  able  to  solve  ;  except  by  supposing,  that
as  the  people  appear  to  have  remained  for  some  time  at  Re-
phidim, the  small  supply  of  water  was  speedily  exhausted.

It  was  during  the  encampment  at  Rephidim  that  Amalek
came  and  fought  with  Israel.*  It  is  not  necessary  here  to  look
for  a  wide  open  plain,  on  which  the  battle  might  take  place  ac-
cording to  the  rules  of  modern  warfare.  The  Amalekites  were
a  nomadic  tribe,  making  an  irregular  attack  upon  a  multitude
probably  not  better  trained  than  themselves  ;  and  for  such  a
conflict  the  low  hills  and  open  country  around  this  pan  of  Wady
esh-Sheikh  would  afford  ample  space.

After  the  departure  of  the  Israelites  from  Mount  Sinai,
there  is  no  account,  either  in  Scripture  or  elsewhere,  of  its
having  been  visited  by  any  Jew  ;  except  by  the  prophet  Elijah,
when  he  fled  from  the  machinations  of  Jezebel.'    This  is  the

'  Trarels,  etc  p.  488.  '  Ex.  17,  8.  '  1  Kings  19,  3-3.

Vol,  I.— 11  i,  178,  179

122  MOUNT  SINAI.  [Sec.  m.

more  remarkable  ;  as  this  region  had  been  the  seat  of  the  revela-
tion of  their  law,  to  which  they  clung  so  tenaciously  ;  and
because  from  the  splendour  and  terrors  of  that  scene,  the  in-
spired Hebrew  poets  were  wont  to  draw  their  sublimest  images.

SINAI  IN  THE  EARLY  CHRISTIAN  AGES.

No  very  distinct  notices  of  Sinai  appear  in  the  earliest  Chris-
tian writers.  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  about  A.  D.  250,  men-
tions, that  these  mountains  were  the  refuge  of  Egyptian  Chris-
tians in  times  of  persecution ;  where  they  were  sometimes
seized  as  slaves  by  the  Saracens  or  Arabs.'  The  legend  of  St.
Catharine  of  Alexandria,  who  first  fled  to  Sinai,  and  whose  body
after  martyrdom  at  Alexandria  is  said  to  have  been  carried  by
angels  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain  that  now  bears  her  name,
is  laid  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  or  fourth  century,  about
A.  D.  307.^  In  the  third  and  fourth  centuries  also,  ascetics  and
anchorites  took  their  rise  in  Egypt ;  and  were  soon  followed  by
communities  of  monks  in  desert  places.  There  is  no  mention
of  the  first  introduction  of  these  holy  persons  and  communities
into  the  peninsula  of  Mount  Sinai ;  but  it  is  natural  to  suppose,
that  a  region  with  so  many  historical  associations,  and  so  well
adapted  to  their  purposes  by  its  loneliness  and  desolation,  would
not  be  overlooked  by  them,  nor  long  remain  untenanted.

Accordingly  we  find,  from  various  writings  preserved  among
the  remains  of  monastic  piety  and  learning,  that  during  the
fourth  century  this  mountain  was  already  the  seat  of  many
anchorites ;  who,  although  residing  in  separate  cells,  had  regular
intercourse  with  each  other,  and  gathered  in  small  communities
around  the  more  distinguished  ascetics  and  teachers.  The
earliest  of  these  fathers  of  whom  I  find  mention  at  Sinai,  was
the  Abbot  Silvanus,  an  Egyptian  anchorite,  who  retired  for  some
years  to  this  mountain  apparently  about  A.  D.  365 ;  and  went
afterwards  to  Gerar,  where  he  became  the  head  of  a  large  com-
munity of  ascetics.^  At  Sinai  he  had  a  garden  which  he  tilled
and  watered ;  and  although  he  was  the  superior  of  several
anchorites,  yet  he  is  said  to  have  lived  alone  with  only  his  dis-
ciple Zacharias.^

A  fuller  notice  of  Sinai  about  the  same  period,  is  found  in
the  little  tract  of  Ammonius,  a  monk  of  Canopus  in  Egypt ;
who,  after  visiting  the  holy  places  in  Palestine,  returned  by  way
of  Mount  Sinai,  in  company  with  other  Christians  who  made

'  Euseb.  Hist.  Ecc.  6.  42.  teller  Ecclesise  Graecas  Monumenta,  I.  p.

'  liaronius  Annal.  A.  D.  307.  xxxiii.  563  sq.

*  Tillemont   MCmoircs   pour  scrvir  i\       *  Tillemont  1.  c.  p.  451.    Cotelier  1.  c.

I'Histoire  Ecclesiast.  \.  p.  448  sq.    Co-  p.  080.

i.  IcSO.  181

Sec.  nr.]]

EARLY  CHRISTIAN  AGES.

123

the  same  pilgrimage.  They  reached  Sinai  in  eighteen  days  from
Jerusalem  by  way  of  the  desert.  This  visit  appears  to  have
taken  place  in  or  about  A.  D.  373. '  The  pilgrim  found  many
anchorites  living  here  under  a  superior  named  Doulas,  a  man  of
uncommon  piety  and  meekness.  They  subsisted  only  on  dates,
berries,  and  other  like  ftuits,  without  wine,  or  oil,  or  even  bread.
Yet  for  the  sake  of  strangers  and  guests,  a  few  loaves  were  kept
by  the  superior.  They  passed  the  whole  week  in  the  silence
and  solitude  of  their  cells,  until  the  evening  of  Saturday ;  when
they  assembled  in  the  church  and  continued  all  night  together
in  prayer.  In  the  morning  of  the  Lord's  day  they  received  the
sacrament,  and  then  returned  to  their  cells.

A  few  days  after  the  arrival  of  Ammonius,  the  Saracens,
whose  chief  had  lately  died,  made  an  attack  upon  these  holy
men.  Doulas  and  those  with  him  retired  into  a  tower ;  but  all
who  could  not  reach  this  place  of  safety,  were  killed.  .The
Saracens  attacked  the  tower,  and  were  near  to  take  it ;  when,
according  to  Ammonius,  the  top  of  the  mountain  appeared  aU
in  flame,  and  frightened  the  barbarians  from  their  purpose.
They  fled ;  and  the  fathers  descended  to  seek  and  bury  the
slain.  They  found  thirty-eight  corpses ;  twelve  of  which  were
in  the  monastery  Gethrabbi,*  and  others  in  Chobar  and  Codar.
Two  hermits,  Isaiah  and  Sabbas,  were  found  still  alive,  though
mortally  woimded ;  making  up  in  all  the  number  of  forty  killed.'
At  the  same  time,  a  similar  massacre  of  Christian  anchorites
took  place  at  Raithou,  situated  on  the  coast  of  the  Red  Sea,
two  days'  distance  from  Sinai.  This  place  was  regarded  as  the
Elim  of  the  Scriptures;  and  corresponds  to  the  modern  Tur.*

Somewhat  more  definite  and  equally  mournful,  is  the  narra-
tive of  NUus ;  who  himself  resided  many  years  at  Sinai  from
about  A.  D.  390  onwards,  and  was  present  at  a  second  massacre
of  the  ascetics  during  a  similar  incursion  of  the  Saracens.^  He

'  This  tract  of  Ammonius  is  found  in
the  work  of  Combefis,  lUustrium  Ckristi
Martyruin  lecti  Triumphi,  Paris  1660.
8vo.  p.  88  sq.  A  very  exact  abstract  of  it
is  given  by  TLllemout,  Memoires  pour  ser-
vir  a  I'Hist.  Ecc.  VII.  p.  573  sq.  The
date  given  in  the  text  is  that  assigned  by
TUlemont,  1.  c.  p.  782  sq.

Nilus  writes  this  name  Bethramhe ;
Nili  Opera  quaed.  p.  89.  Is  the  Chobar
(Xo^ij))  in  the  text  perhaps  a  corruption
for  Hvreb  I

'  The  Greeks  and  Latins  solemnize  the
14th  of  January  as  the  day  on  which  these
martyrs  were  killed  ;  see  Acta  Sanctorum,
Jan.  Tora.  L  p.  961.  Tillemont,  L  c.
VII.  p.  573. — It  was  perhaps  from  these
forty  martyrs,  that  the  convent  el-Arba'in,

'  the  Forty,'  received  its  name.  Not  im-
probably it  may  have  been  the  Gethrabbi
of  the  text.  Comp.  Quaresmins  Elucid.
Terr.  Sanct.  H.  p.  996.

*  Raithou  QVoii^ov)  is  also  mentioned
by  Cosmas  Indicopleustes,  (about  A.  D.
635,)  as  the  probable  site  of  Elim ;  To-
pogr.  Christ,  in  Montfaucon's  Coll.  nov.
Patrum,  11.  p.  195.  The  place  occupied
by  the  convent  near  Tur  is  still  called
Jiaithu  by  the  Greeks;  Riippell's  Reisen
in  Nubien,  etc.  p.  181.  Sicard  in  Nouv.
Mem.  des  Miss,  dans  le  Levant,  1715.
Tom.  I.  p.  20.

'  NUus  himself  wrote  an  account  of  this
massacre  in  Greek  ;  see  iVi/i  Opera  quce-
dam,  ed.  P.  Possino,  Gr.  et  Lat.  Paris,
1639.    The  Latin  version  is  also  piinted

i.  181  182

124

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  in.

relates,  that  these  holy  men  had  fixed  their  cells  upon  the  moun-
tain at  the  distance  of  a  mile  or  more  from  each  other,  in  order
to  avoid  mutual  interruption  during  the  week ;  although  they
occasionally  visited  each  other.  On  the  eve  of  the  Lord's  day
they  descended  to  the  holy  place  of  the  Bush,  where  was  a
church  ^nd  apparently  a  convent ;  or"  at  least  a  place  where
stores  were  laid  up  for  the  winter.  Here  they  spent  the  night
at  prayers ;  received  the  sacrament  in  the  morning  of  Simday ;
and  after  passing  some  time  in  spiritual  conversation  returned
to  their  ceUs.  One  morning,  the  14th  of  January,  as  they  were
ahout  to  separate,  they  were  attacked  by  a  party  of  Saracens,
who  drove  them  all  into  the  church,  while  they  plundered  the
repository  of  stores.  Then,  bringing  them  out,  the  barbarians
killed  the  superior  Theodulus  and  two  others  outright ;  reserved
several  of  the  younger  men  as  captives ;  and  suffered  the  rest
to  escape  up  the  sides  of  the  mountains.  Among  these  last  was
Nilus  ;  his  son  Theodulus  was  among  the  captives.  The  Sara-
cens now  withdrew,  taking  the  captives  with  them,  and  killing
eight  other  anchorites  in  various  places.  Nilus  and  his  com-
panions in  flight  descended  at  night  and  buried  the  dead  bodies;
and  afterwards  retired  to  Pharan  (Feiran).  The  council  or
senate  of  this  city  immediately  sent  messengers  to  the  king  of
the  Saracens ;  who  disavowed  the  outrage  and  promised  repara-
tion. Meantime  Theodulus  had  been  sold  and  brought  to  Elusa;
where  he  was  redeemed  by  the  bishop  of  that  city,  and  ulti-
mately recovered  by  his  father.

In  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century,  we  find  a  letter  from  the
emperor  Marcian  to  the  bishop  Macarius,  the  archimandrites,
and  monks  in  Mount  Sinai,  "  where  are  situated  monasteries
beloved  of  God  and  worthy  of  all  honour,"  warning  them  against
the  dangerous  tenets  and  practices  of  the  heretic  Theodosius,
who  had  fled  to  these  mountains,  after  the  council  of  Chalcedon,
A.  D.  451.'  Nearly  a  century  later.  A.  D.  536,  among  the  sub-
scriptions at  the  council  of  Constantinople,  appears  the  name  of
Theonas,  a  presbyter  and  legate  of  the  holy  Mount  Sinai,  the
desert  Raithou  (Tur),  and  the  holy  church  at  Pharan.*

The  tradition  of  the  present  convent  relates,  that  it  was  es-
tabhshed  by  the  emperor  Justmian  A.  D.  527,  on  the  place
where  a  small  church  had  been  built  by  Helena  long  before.
The  main  fact  of  this  tradition,  the  building  of  the  great  church,
is  supported  by  the  testimony  of  Procopius  the  historian,  who

in  the  Acta  Sanctonim,  Jan.  Tom.  I.  p.       '  Hnrduin  .\cta  Concilior.  II.  col.  666,

953  sq.    See  too  a  very  complete  summiiry  compared  w  itli  col.  085.
of  this  tract  of  Nilus,  iu  Tillemoiit  Me-       '  iiarduiu  Acta  Cone.  II.  col.  1281,

moires  pour  survir  a  I'liistoire  Eccl.  Tom.  1304.
XIV.  p.  189  sq.
i.  183,  1«4

Sec.  in.]

THE  EARLY  CONVENT.

125

flourished  about  the  middle  of  the  same  century.  He  relates
that  Mount  Sinai  was  then  inhabited  by  monks,  "  whose  whole
life  was  but  a  continual  preparation  for  death  ; "  and  that  in
consideration  of  their  holy  abstinence  from  all  worldly  enjoy-
ments, Justinian  caused  a  church  to  be  erected  for  them,  and
dedicated  it  to  the  holy  Virgin. '  This  was  placed  not  upon  the
summit  of  the  mountain,  but  far  below  ;  because  no  one  could
pass  the  night  upon  the  top,  on  account  of  the  constant  sounds
and  other  supernatural  phenomena  which  were  there  percepti-
ble.* At  the  foot  or  outmost  base  of  the  mountain,  according  to
Procopius,  the  same  emperor  built  a  strong  fortress,  with  a  se-
lect garrison,  to  prevent  the  inroads  of  the  Saracens  from  that
quarter  into  Palestine.

More  explicit  is  the  testimony  of  Eutychius,  patriarch  of
Alexandria  in  the  latter  half  of  the  ninth  century  ;  which  ap-
parently as  yet  has  never  been  referred  to,  but  which  shows  that
the  present  tradition  has  come  down  with  little  variation  since
that  age.  He  relates  that  Justinian  caused  a  fortified  convent
to  be  erected  for  the  monks  of  Sinai,  including  the  former  tower
and  chapel,  in  order  to  protect  them  from  the  incursions  of  the
Ishmaelites.  This  accords  with  the  appearance  of  the  building
at  the  present  day  ;  and  is  probably  tbe  same  work  which  Pro-
copius has  confounded  with  a  fortress.'

Towards  the  close  of  the  same  (sixth)  centuiy,  Sinai  was
visited  by  Antoninus  Martyr  ;  who  found  in  the  recently  erected
convent  three  abbots,  who  spoke  the  Syrian,  Greek,  Egyptian
and  Besta  (Arabic  ?  )  languages.  A  chapel  was  already  built
upon  the  summit,  and  the  whole  region  was  full  of  the  ceUs  and
dwellings  of  hermits.  On  a  part  of  Mount  Horeb  or  mountain
of  the  Cross,  the  Saracens  or  Ishmaelites  (Antoninus  calls  them
by  both  names)  at  that  time  venerated  an  idol,  apparently  con-
nected with  the  worship  of  the  morning  star,  which  was  common
among  the  Saracens. — It  appears  then,  that  these  Saracens,  the

'  This  is  doubtless  the  church  now
gtauding ;  which,  however,  bears  the  name
of  the  Transfiguration.

"  Procop.  de  JSditiciis  Justiniani,  5.  8.
We  did  not  notice  the  Greek  inscription
over  the  gate  leading  to  the  garden,  givea
by  M.  Letronne  in  the  Journal  des  Sa-
vans,  Sept.  1836,  p.  358.  Burckhardt
speaks  only  of  one  in  modern  Arabic
characters,  with  the  same  contents.  Both
•.uscriptions  refer  the  building  of  the  con-
vent to  Justinian  in  the  thirtieth  year  of
his  reign,  A.  D.  527.  But  in  that  year
Justinian  first  ascended  the  throne  ;  and
the  inscription  is  doubtless  therefore  the
work  of  a  later  age,  and  founded  on  a  false
Vol.  1.— li*

tradition.  As  to  the  chapel  said  to  have
been  built  by  Helena,  there  is  not  the
slightest  historical  hint  that  she  was  ever
in  the  region  of  Mount  Sinai,  or  caused
any  church  to  be  erected  there. — A  copy
of  both  inscriptions  is  given  by  Lepsius ;
Briefe,  p.  440  and  Plate.

Eutychii  Annales,  ed.  Pocockc,  II.  p.
160.  The  whole  passage  is  so  curious,
that  a  full  translation  of  it  is  given  in
Note  XX,  at  the  end  of  the  volume.  Not
improbably  the  "  Arabic  document "  men-
tioned by  Burckhardt,  (p.  545,)  as  pre-
served in  the  convent,  may  be  a  manu-
script of  the  work  of  Eutychius.

i.  184,  185

126

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  in.

supposed  descendants  of  the  Nabatheans,  had  continued  to  in-
habit the  peninsula,  notwithstanding  the  intrusion  of  the  monks
and  Christians.  They  differed  probably  in  few  respects  from  the
Arabs  of  the  present  day.

During  the  earlier  centuries  of  this  monastic  possession  of  the
peninsula,  the  seat  of  the  bishop  appears  to  have  been  at  Pharan
or  Faran,  the  present  Feiran  ;  where  was  likewise  a  Christian
population  and  a  senate  or  council  so  early  as  the  time  of  Nilus,
about  A.  D.  400.  About  this  time  too  Naterus  or  Nathyr  is
mentioned  as  its  bishop.  The  bishop  Macarius  spoken  of  above
probably  had  his  seat  there  ;  and  before  the  middle  of  the  sixth
century  there  is  express  mention  of  Photius  as  bishop  of  Pharan.'
About  the  same  time,  A.  D.  535,  Pharan  is  mentioned  by  Cos-
mas  as  the  location  of  Rephidim.'  Theodoras  of  the  same  see
was  famous  in  the  Monothelitic  controversy,  and  was  denounced
by  two  councils  ;  that  of  the  Lateran,  A.  D.  649,  and  that  of
Constantinople,  A.  D.  680.  The  town  of  Faran  or  Feiran  was
situated  in  the  Wady  of  that  name,  opposite  to  Jebel  Serbal.
Riippell  found  here  the  remains  of  a  church,  the  architecture  of
which  he  assigns  to  the  fifth  century  ;  and  Burckhardt  speaks
of  the  remains  of  some  two  hundred  houses,  and  the  ruins  of
several  towers  visible  on  the  neighbouring  hills.  ^  With  the
episcopal  city  the  monasteries  around  Serbal  and  Sinai  stood  of
course  in  intimate  connection  ;  until  at  length  the  growing  im-
portance and  influence  of  the  convent  established  by  Justinian,
appears  to  have  superseded  the  claims  of  Faran,  and  to  have
caused  the  chief  episcopal  seat  to  be  transferred  within  its  own
walls,  at  least  before  the  close  of  the  tenth  century.  The  death
of  Jorius,  "  bishop  of  Mount  Sinai,"  is  recorded  in  A.  D.  1033.*
At  this  time  Sinai  as  an  episcopal  see  stood  directly  under  the
patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  as  an  archiepiscopate  ;  that  is,  without
the  intervention  of  a  metropolitan  ;  and  although  the  name  of
Faran  still  appears  as  a  bishopric,  yet  all  further  notices  of  its
importance  are  wanting.'

After  the  Muhammedan  conquests,  when  the  Saracens  of  the
peninsula  would  seem  to  have  exchanged  their  heathen  worship
for  the  tenets  of  the  false  prophet,  the  anchorites  and  inmates
of  the  monasteries  appear  to  have  continued  to  live  on  in  the

'  Le  Quien  Oriens  Christ.  III.  col.  753.  *  Le  Quien,  1.  c.  col.  754.

Comp.  Tillemont  Meraomis,  etc.  X.  p.  453.  '  See  the  Kotitia  rcclesiaMica  of  Nilus,

'  Cosraas  Indicopl.  Topogr.  Christ,  in  A.D.  1151,  uiid  that  appended  to  the  his-

MoiittUucon  Coll.  nov.  Patruiii,  II.  p.  195.  tory  of  Williiiin  of  Tyre,  (Jesta  Dei  per

'  Uuppell's  lieisen  in  Nubien,  etc.  p.  2G3.  Francos,  p.  1045.    These  are  i^iven  in  lull

Burckhardt's  Travels,  etc.  p.  61(5;   also  by  Kelun  i,  I'aliMt.  pp.  219,  L'20,  228. —

Lepsias'  BriL^fe,  p.  333  sq.    Bartlett,  Forty  .lacob  de  Vitry  in  the  beginjiiiig  of  the

Days  in  the  Desert,  p.  53  sq.    See  more  twelfth  century  speaks  of  Sinai  as  the  only

on  I  harun  in  Note  XVIII,  at  the  end  of  suffragan  see  under  the  niotroj)olitan  of

the  volume.  Petra,  i.e.  Kerak ;  Uesta  Dei,  etc.  p.  1077.

i.  li<5-187

Sec.  in.]

PHARAN.     THE  INSCRIPTIONS.

127

same  state  of  inquietude,  and  sometimes  perhaps  of  danger.
Near  the  close  of  the  sixth  century,  and  during  the  seventh,  the
well  known  monkish  writers,  Johannes  Climacus  and  Anastasius
Sinaita,  flourished  here.  About  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century
the  monks  of  Sinai  are  reported  to  have  all  fled  for  their  lives  to
a  mountain  called  Latrum. '  In  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh
century,  the  convent  was  again  in  a  flourishing  state,  and  was
visited  by  great  numbers  of  pilgrims.  At  this  time  the  cele-
brated St.  Simeon  resided  here  as  a  monk  ;  who  understood  the
Egyptian,  Syriac,  Arabic,  Greek,  and  Latin  languages  ;  and  who
in  A.  D.  1027  came  to  Europe  and  was  hospitably  entertained
by  Richard  II,  duke  of  Normandy.  He  brought  with  him  relics
of  St.  Catharine,  and  collected  alms  for  the  convent ;  but  after-
wards founded  an  abbey  in  France,  where  he  died.''  In  A.  D.
1116,  King  Baldwin  I.  of  Jerusalem  made  an  excursion  to  the
gulf  of  'Akabah,  and  expressed  the  intention  of  visiting  Mount
Sinai ;  he  was  persuaded  not  to  do  so  by  messengers  from  the
monks,  in  order  that  they  might  not  by  his  visit  be  exposed  to
suspicion  and  danger  from  their  Mussulman  masters.^

All  the  circumstances  hitherto  detailed,  seem  to  render  it
probable,  that  from  about  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century
onwards  a  veiy  considerable  Christian  population  existed  in  the
peninsula.  The  remains  of  the  many  convents,  chapels,  and
hermitages,  which  are  still  visible  in  various  quarters,  go  to
show  the  same  thing  ;  and  add  weight  to  the  tradition  of  the
present  convent,  that  at  the  time  of  the  Muhammedan  conquest,
six  or  seven  thousand  monks  and  hermits  were  dispersed  over
the  mountains.*  That  pilgrimages  to  these  holy  spots,  so
sacred  in  themselves,  and  as  the  abodes  of  holy  men,  should
then  be  frequent,  was  in  that  age  almost  a  matter  of  course  ;
and  these  are  continued  more  or  less  even  to  the  present  day.

With  these  early  pilgrimages  the  celebrated  Sinaite  inscrip-
tions have  been  supposed  to  stand  in  close  connection.  Several
of  them  have  been  mentioned  above  as  occurring  on  our  way  to
Sinai ;  and  they  are  found  on  aU  the  routes  which  lead  from  the
west  towards  this  mountain,  as  far  south  as  Tur.  They  extend
to  the  very  base  of  Sinai,  above  the  convent  el-Arba'm  ;  but  are
found  neither  on  Jebel  Musa,  nor  on  the  present  Horeb,  nor  on
St.  Catharine,  nor  in  the  valley  of  the  convent  ;  while  on  Serbal
they  are  seen  on  its  very  summits.  Not  one  has  yet  been  found
to  the  eastward  of  Sinai.    But  the  spot  where  they  exist  in  the

^  Baronius  Annal.  A.D.  956,  viii.  =  Albert.  Aq.  12.  22,  in  Gesta  Dei  per

"  See  Mabillon  Acta  Sanotor.  Ord.  Bene-  Francos.  Wilkeu  Gesch.  der  Kreuzziige,
diet.  Sajc.  VI.  P.  I.  p.  374.    Ejusd.  An-    II,  p.  403.

nales  Ord.  St.  Benedict,  lib.  56.  c.  35,  30.  Burckhardt's  Travels,  etc.  p.  546.

Hist.  Literaire  de  France,  Tom.  VII.  p.  67.

i.  187,  188

128

MOUKT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

greatest  number  is  the  Wady  Mul?atteb,  '  "Written  Valley,'
through  which  the  usual  road  to  Sinai  passes  before  reaching
Wady  Feiran.  Here  they  occur  by  thousands  on  the  rocks,
chiefly  at  such  points  as  would  form  convenient  resting-places
for  travellers  or  pilgrims  during  the  noon-day  sun  ; '  as  is  also
the  case  with  those  we  saw  upon  the  other  route.  Many  of  them
are  accompanied  by  crosses,  sometimes  obviously  of  the  same
date  with  the  inscription,  and  sometimes  apparently  later  or
retouched.  The  character  is  everywhere  the  same  ;  but  until
recently  it  has  remained  undeciphered,  in  spite  of  the  eflforts  of
the  ablest  paleographists.  The  inscriptions  are  usually  short  ;
and  most  of  them  exhibit  the  same  initial  characters.  Some
Greek  inscriptions  are  occasionally  intermingled.

These  inscriptions  are  first  mentioned  by  Cosmas,  about
A.  D.  535.  He  supposed  them  to  be  the  work  of  the  ancient
Hebrews  ;  and  says  certain  Jews,  who  had  read  them,  explained
them  to  him  as  noting  "  the  journey  of  such  an  one,  out  of  such
a  tribe,  in  such  a  year  and  month  ; "  much  in  the  manner  of
modem  travellers.^  Further  than  this,  the  most  recent  de-
cipherers have  as  yet  hardly  advanced.  When  the  attention  of
European  scholars  was  again  turned  upon  these  inscriptions  by
Clayton,  bishop  of  Clogher,  about  the  middle  of  the  last  cen-
tury,^ they  were  still  attributed  by  him  and  others  to  the
Hebrews  on  their  journey  to  Sinai.  Since  that  time  they  have
usually  been  regarded  as  probably  the  work  of  Christian  pilgrims
on  their  way  from  Egypt  to  Mount  Sinai,  during  the  fourth  cen-
tury. At  any  rate,  the  contents  of  them  were  already  unknown
in  the  time  of  Cosmas  ;  and  no  tradition  appears  to  have  existed
respecting  their  origin.  As  to  the  character,  Gesenius  supposed
it  to  belong  to  that  species  of  the  Phenician,  or  rather  Aramaean,
which,  in  the  first  centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  was  extensively
employed  throughout  Syria,  and  partially  in  Egypt ;  having
most  aifinity  with  that  of  the  Palmyrene  inscriptions.  Prof.
Beer  of  Leipzig,  on  the  other  hand,  who  has  quite  recently  de-
cii)hered  these  inscriptions  for  the  first  time,  regards  them  as
exhibiting  the  only  remains  of  the  language  and  character  once
pecuhar  to  the  Nabathaeans  of  Arabia  Petraea  ;  and  supposes,
that  if  at  a  future  time  stones  with  the  writing  of  the  country
shall  be  found  among  the  ruins  of  Petra,  the  character  wUl  prove
to  be  the  same  with  that  of  the  inscriptions  of  Sinai  Accord-

'  Borckhardt's  Tr«veU,  etc.  620.  etc.    Lond.  1753.    ITiis  is  the  Journal  of

*  Cosmas  Indicopl.  Topogr.  Christ,  in  the  Prefect  of  the  KranciscaDS  in  Cairo,
Montfaacou's  Collect,  nov.  fatrum,  II.  p.  already  referred  to.  The  bishop  ofiers  in
205.  his  letter,  to  bear  any  proper  portion  of

•  See  his  Letter  to  the  Society  of  Anti-  the  expense  which  might  arise  I'rom  send-
qoaries,  published  under  the  title  :  "  Jour-  ing  a  person  to  copy  these  inscriptiona,
nal  from  Grand  Cairo  to  Mount  Sinai,"  p.  4.

i.  188-190

1

Sec.  in.]

INSCRIPTIONS.     THE  CONVENT.

129

ing  to  this  view,  they  may  not  improhably  turn  out  to  have  been
made  by  the  native  inhabitants  of  the  mountains.' — Still,  it
cannot  but  be  regarded  as  a  most  singular  fact,  that  here  in
these  lone  moimtains  an  alphabet  should  be  found  upon  the  rocks,
which  is  shown  by  the  thousands  of  inscriptions  to  have  been
once  a  very  current  one,  but  of  which  perhaps  elsewhere  not  a
trace  remains.''

THE  MODERN  CONVENT.

After  the  times  of  the  crusades,  the  first  notices  of  Mount
Sinai  and  the  present  convent  are  from  Sir  John  Maundeville,
William  de  Baldensel,  and  Ludolf  de  Suchem,  who  all  visited
this  region  in  the  first  half  of  the  fourteenth  century.  The
latter  traveller  (A.  D.  1336-50)  found  here  more  than  four
hundred  moiiks,  under  an  archbishop  and  prelates  ;  including  lay
brethren,  who  did  hard  labour  among  the  mountains,  and  went
with  camels  from  Elim  to  Babylon  (Tur  to  Fostat),  carrying
charcoal  and  dates  in  large  quantities  to  market.  In  this  way
the  convent  obtained  a  scanty  support  for  its  own  inmates,  and
for  the  strangers  who  came  to  visit  them.^

Burckhardt  found  among  the  archives  of  the  convent  the
original  of  a  compact  between  the  monks  and  the  Bedawin,
made  in  the  year  A.  H.  800  or  A.  D.  1398  ;  from  which  it  ap-
pears that  at  that  time,  besides  the  great  convent,  six  others
were  still  existing  in  the  peninsultv,  exclusive  of  a  number  of
chapels  and  hermitages.  In  the  fifteenth  century  there  was  an
inhabited  convent  at  Feiran.  From  another  document  two  and
a  half  centuries  later  (A.  H.  1053,  A.  D.  1643)  it  appears,  that
aU  these  minor  establishments  had  been  already  abandoned,  and
that  the  great  convent  alone  remained  ;  still  holding  property
at  Feiran,  Tur,  and  in  other  fertile  valleys.*  This  accords  with
the  testimony  of  travellers  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centu-
ries, who  speak  only  of  deserted  convents  besides  that  of  Sinai.^
In  this  monastery  in  A.  D.  1484,  Felix  Fabri  relates,  that  there
were  then  said  to  be  eighty  monks,  although  he  did  not  see  half
that  number.  In  Belon's  time,  about  A.  D.  1546,  the  number
was  reduced  to  sixty  and  Helfi'rich,  in  A.  D.  1565,  found  the
convent  temporarily  abandoned.    A  century  later  Von  Troilo

*  Such  is  now  (1856)  understood  to  be  serfs  were  never  entrusted  with  such  mat-
actually  the  case.  ters.    See  Geschichte  des  Petr.  Arabiens,

'  See  more  in  Note  XIX,  end  of  the  in  Abhandl.  der  Berl.  Acad.  1824,  Hist,

volume.  phil.  CI.  p.  222.

'  Itin.  Terr.  Sanct.  p.  65.    Reissb.  des  '  Burckhardt's  Travels,  etc.  p.  547  sq.

heil.  Landes,  Ed.  2,  p.  839.— Hitter  refers  617.

this  passage  to  the  Jebeliyeh  or  serfs  of  '  So  Tucher,  A.  D.  1479 ;  Breydenbach

the  convent.    Bat  it  speaks  expressly  and  and  Fabri,  1484  ;  and  many  others,

only  of  lay  brothers;  and  moreover  the  '  Observatt.  Paris  1588,  p.  282.

i.  190,  191

130

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec  m.

found  seventy  monts.  At  present  the  number  varies  between
twenty  and  thirty  ;  though  we  found  only  twenty-one,  of  whom
six  were  priests,  and  fifteen  lay  brethren ;  but  two  or  three  new
members  apparently  arrived  with  us.  The  present  inmates  are
chiefly  from  the  Greek  islands  ;  and  remain  here  for  the  most
part  only  a  few  years.  The  affiliated  or  branch  convent  at  Cairo
has  a  prior  and  forty  or  fifty  monks. '

All  the  earlier  travellers  to  Sinai  without  exception  speak  of
this  as  the  convent  of  St.  Catharine  ;  and  of  the  monks  as  be-
longing to  the  order  of  St.  Basil.  Burckhardt  on  the  other
hand  says  the  monastery  is  dedicated  to  the  Transfiguration ;
which  is  at  least  true  of  the  church.  Eiippell  again  calls  it  the
convent  of  the  Annunciation,  on  what  authority  I  know  not.
Nor  am  I  able  to  affirm  which  of  all  these  statements  is  most
correct.

The  last  archbishop  who  resided  in  the  convent,  is  said  to
have  been  Kyrillos,  who  died  here  in  A.  D.  1760.*  Since  that
time  it  has  been  found  advisable  for  this  prelate  to  pass  his  life
abroad,  in  order  to  avoid  the  rapacious  exactions  of  the  Arabs
on  the  occasion  of  his  accession  and  entrance  into  the  convent.
Long  before  that  period  the  great  gate  of  the  convent  had  been
walled  up  in  self-defence,  being  opened  only  to  admit  a  new
archbishop  ;  and  even  this  seems  not  to  have  taken  place  since
A.  D.  1722.'  The  present  archbishop  is  the  ex-patriarch  of
Constantinople  ;  and  were  he  to  visit  the  convent,  the  great
gate  (it  was  said)  would  have  to  be  thrown  open  and  remain  so
for  six  months  ;  during  which  time  the  Arabs  would  have  the
right  to  come  at  will  and  eat  and  drink ;  and  many  thousand
dollars  would  not  cover  the  expense.

The  archbishop  is  elected  by  a  council  of  the  monks,  which
manages  in  common  the  affairs  of  this  convent  and  the  branch
at  Cairo.  This  prelate  is  always  selected  from  the  priests  of  the
monastery  ;  and  having  then  been  consecrated  as  bishop  by  the
patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  (in  consequence  of  the  ancient  connec-
tion,) he  becomes  one  of  the  four  independent  archbishops  of  the

'  It  is  tliis  branch  convent  that  gives  seems  to  be  the  first,  who  speaks  of  the
letters  of  introduction  to  travellers  visiting  traveller's  being  drawn  up  to  the  high  door
Sinai  from  Cairo.    For  want  of  such  a  or  window.    The  same  is  mentioned  by
letter,  Niebuhr  in  1762  was  refused  ad-  Van  Kgmond  and  Heyman  about  the  same
mission  to  the  convent  at  Sinai  ;  but  we  time.    Von  Troilo,  A.  1).  1606,  describes
w^erc  there  told  that  a  letter  is  not  now  the  entrance  as  low.  and  defended  by
indispensable,  all  who  come  being  received,  double  iron  doors,  which  were  kept  fast-
Still  it  is  better  to  have  one.    See  Nie-  ened  night  and  day.    He  likewise  men-
buhr's  Ueiscbeschr.  I.  p.  244.  tions  a  high  window,  through  which  the
'  Burckhardt,  p.  549.  monks  let  down  food  in  a  basket  for  the
'  liurckliardt  says  not  since  A.  P.  1709;  Arabs  by  a  cord,  but  gives  no  hint  that
but  the  Prei'cct  of  the  Franciscans,  wlio  travellers  were  drawn  up  the  same  way.
■was  here  in  1722,  relates  that  it  had  been  Heisebeschreibung,  Uresd.  1676,  pp.  379.
open  that  very  year.     This  writer  also  880.
i.  1!)1-193

skc.  m.]

CONVENT  AND  MONKS.

131

Greek  church  ;  the  others  being  at  Cyprus,  Moscow,  and  Ochrida
in  Roumely.  Were  he  present,  he  would  have  but  a  single  voice
in  the  management  of  the  affairs  of  the  convent,  as  a  membei
of  the  council.  While  residing  at  a  distance,  he  has  no  author-
ity or  connection  with  it,  except  to  receive  money  and  presents
from  its  revenues. — The  prior  or  superior,  both  here  and  at
Cairo,  is  elected  in  like  manner  by  the  council.  The  present
superior  at  Sinai,  Father  Neophytus,  was  originally  from  Cyprus,
and  had  been  here  eighteen  years.

The  monks  of  Sinai  lead  a  very  simple  and  also  a  quiet  life,
since  they  have  come  to  be  on  good  terms  with  their  Arab  neigh-
bours. Five  centuries  ago  Ludolf  de  Suchem  describes  their
life  in  terms  which  are  equally  applicable  to  them  at  the  present
day.  "  They  follow  very  strict  rules  ;  live  chaste  and  modestly  ;
are  obedient  to  their  archbishop  and  prelates  ;  drink  not  wine
but  on  high  festivals  ;  eat  never  flesh  ;  but  live  on  herbs,  pease,
beans,  and  lentiles,  wliich  they  prepare  with  water,  salt,  and
vinegar  ;  eat  together  in  a  refectory  without  a  table  cloth  ;  per-
form their  offices  in  the  church  with  great  devotion  day  and
night  ;  and  are  very  diligent  in  all  tilings  ;  so  that  they  fall
little  short  of  the  rules  of  St.  Antony."'  To  this  day  the  same
rules  continue  ;  they  eat  no  flesh  and  drink  no  wine  ;  but  their
rules  were  made  before  the  invention  of  distilled  liquors,  and
therefore  do  not  exclude  date  brandy.  Yet  they  all  seem
healthy  and  vigorous  ;  and  those  who  remain  here,  retain  their
faculties  to  a  great  age.  The  lay  brother  who  waited  on  us,  had
seen  more  than  eighty  years  ;  one  of  the  priests  was  said  to  be
over  ninety  ;  and  one  had  died  the  year  before  at  the  age  of  one
hundred  and  six.  A  great  portion  of  their  time  is  nominally
occupied  in  religious  exercises.  They  have  (or  should  have)
regularly  the  ordinary  prayers  of  the  Greek  ritual  seven  times  in
every  twenty-four  hours.  Every  morning  there  is  a  mass  about
7  o'clock  ;  and  on  Saturdays  two,  one  at  3  A.  M.  and  the  other
at  the  usual  hour.  During  Lent  the  exercises  on  certain  days
are  much  increased ;  on  the  Wednesday  which  we  spent  there,
the  monks  were  at  prayers  all  the  morning  untU  12  o'clock  ;  and
again  during  the  night  from  10  till  4  o'clock.

The  pilgrims  have  of  late  years  greatly  fallen  off" ;  so  that
not  more  than  from  twenty  to  sixty  now  visit  the  convent  annu-
ally. These,  according  to  the  superior,  are  chiefly  Greeks,  Rus-
sians, and  English  ;  a  few  Armenians  and  Copts  ;  and  only  now
and  then  a  Mussulman.  The  good  father  probably  regards  all
visitors  as  pilgrims.  Yet  so  late  as  the  last  century,  regular
caravans  of  pilgrims  are  said  to  have  come  hither  from  Cairo  and
from  Jerusalem  ;  and  a  document  preserved  in  the  convent,

"  Itin.  Teme  S.  p.  63.    Reissbuch,  Ed.  2,  p.  839.

i.  193, 194

132

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Skc.  ra.

mentions  the  arrival  in  one  day  of  eight  hundred  Armenians
from  Jerusalem,  and  at  another  time,  of  five  hundred  Copts  from
Cairo.'

Besides  the  branch  at  Cairo,  the  convent  has  many  metochia
or  farms,  in  Cyprus,  Crete,  and  elsewhere.  The  Greek  parish  in
Tur  is  also  a  dependency  ;  but  not  that  of  Suez.  The  convent
has  one  priest  in  Bengal,  and  two  in  Golconda,  in  India.  The
gardens  and  olive  groves  in  the  vicinity  all  belong  to  it  ;  as  also
extensive  groves  of  palm  trees  near  Tur  ;  but  its  chief  revenues
are  derived  from  the  distant  metochia.  The  gardens  and
orchards  in  the  peninsula  are  not  now  robbed  by  the  Arabs  ;  but
owing  to  the  great  drought  of  the  two  preceding  years,  they  were
less  productive.  In  a  few  weeks  the  convent  would  have  con-
sumed all  the  productions  of  its  own  gardens,  and  expected  to
become  dependent  on  Egypt  for  every  thing.  Their  grains  and
legumes  they  always  get  from  Egypt.  Of  these  they  were  now
consuming  at  the  rate  of  about  one  thousand  ardehs  ^  a  year,  or
nearly  double  the  common  rate,  in  consequence  of  the  drought
and  scarcity,  which  rendered  the  Arabs  much  more  dependent
than  usual  upon  the  convent  for  bread.  The  date  gardens  near
Ttlr  commonly  bring  them  in  about  three  hundred  ardebs  of
fruit  ;  and  if  properly  managed,  might  yield  five  hundred.

The  inmates  of  the  convent  have  now  for  many  years  lived
for  the  most  part  in  peace  and  amity  with  the  Bedawin  around
them.  Occasional  interruptions  of  the  harmony  indeed  occur  ; '
but  of  late,  and  especially  since  the  time  of  scarcity  and  famine,
the  consideration  and  influence  of  the  monks  among  the  Arabs
would  seem  to  be  greatly  on  the  increase.  This  is  further  en-
hanced by  the  awe  in  which  the  latter  stand  of  the  Pasha  of
Egypt ;  and  the  certainty,  that  any  injustice  practised  by  them
against  the  convent,  would  in  the  end  recoil  upon  their  own
heads.

Among  the  tribes  or  clans  of  the  Tawarah,  three  are  by  long
custom  and  perhaps  compact,  Gha/irs,  or  protectors  of  the  con-
vent ;  and  hold  themselves  responsible  for  its  safety  and  that  of
every  thing  which  belongs  to  it.  These  are  the  Dhuheiry,
'Awarimeh,  and  'Aleikat.  In  return,  the  individuals  of  these
clans  are  entitled  to  a  portion  of  bread  whenever  they  visit  the
convent.  They  formerly  received  also  a  cooked  dish  on  such
occasions  ;  besides  five  and  a  half  dollars  each  in  money  annu-

'  Burckhardt,  p.  552.  Bedawy  from  the  rocks  above  the  convent ;

'  The  ardf  b  is  equivalent  very  nearly  to  Voyage,  etc.  p.  67.     Engl.  p.  243.  A

five  bushels  English.    Lane's  Mod.  Egypt,  monk  who  accompanied  the  prefect  of  the

IL  p.  371.  ed.  1.  Franciscans  to  the  top  of  Sinai  in  1722,

*  .So  late  as  A.  D.  1828,  during  La-  was  seized  and  beaten  by  the  Arabs.  The

horde's  visit,  a  pilgrim  was  wounded  in  older  travellers  are  full  of  similar  accounts,

the  thigh  by  a  ball  aimed  at  a  mouk  by  a  and  speak  of  the  Arabs  only  as  monstera
i.  194-1'JG

9kc.  UL]

CONTENT.     THE  ARABS.

133

ally,  and  a  dress  for  each  male  ;  but  all  these  are  no  longer
given.  When  in  Cairo,  they  are  likewise  entitled  to  receive  from
the  branch  convent  there,  two  small  loaves  every  morning  and  a
cooked  dish  every  day  at  noon  ;  and  formerly  they  had  in  addi-
tion four  loaves  every  evening,  which  however  had  been  stopped
the  present  year.  Besides  all  this,  they  have  the  exclusive  privi-
lege of  conveying  travellers  and  pilgrims  to  and  from  the  convent.

It  may  be  well  supposed,  that  to  satisfy  all  these  claims  in
addirion  to  the  partial  support  of  their  own  serfs,  must  draw
largely  upon  the  temporal  resources  of  the  convent.  Yet  the
monks  find  it  advisable  to  stop  these  many  Arab  mouths  with
bread,  rather  than  expose  themselves  to  their  noisy  clamour,  and
perhaps  to  the  danger  of  sudden  reprisals.  The  bakehouse  of
the  convent  is  of  course  upon  a  large  scale.  At  the  time  of  our
visit,  they  complained  of  not  being  able  to  obtain  camels  to
bring  their  suppHes  of  grain  from  Tilr ;  and  from  this  cause,
perhaps,  the  best  bread  we  saw  was  coarse  and  mingled  with
barley.  That  distributed  to  the  Arabs  is  always  of  a  very  inferior
quality.  Their  date  brandy  was  said  to  be  no  longer  distilled  in
tiie  convent,  as  was  formerly  the  case.

ABABS  OF  THE  PEXIN3ULA.

The  following  account  of  the  Bedawin  who  inhabit  the  penin-
Bula  of  Sinai,  was  derived  chiefly  from  themselves  ;  and  if  it  be
less  complete  than  that  of  Burckhardt,  it  may  yet  serve  to  fill
out  the  notices  given  by  that  traveller.'

The  tribes  reckoned  to  the  proper  Tawarah,  the  Bedawin  of
Jebel  Tur  or  Sinai,  are  the  following  :

I.  The  Saicalihah,  the  largest  and  most  important  of  all  the
divisions  of  these  Arabs,  and  comprising  several  branches  which
themselves  constitute  tribes  ;  viz.  1.  The  Dhuheiry  ;  of  whom
again  a  subdivision  or  clan  are  the  Aulad  Sa'id  or  Sa'idiyeh,  to
whom  our  guides  belonged.  The  AuMd  Sa'id  occupy  the  best
valleys  among  the  mountains,  and  are  respected,  and  seem  to
have  most  connection  with  the  convent.  Their  present  Sheikh
Husein  has  been  mentioned  above.  2.  The  'Aicdrimeh.  3.  The
Kurrashy,  whose  head  Sheikh  Salih  has  long  been  the  principal
Sheikh  of  the  Tawarah  m  all  foreign  relations,  being  the  person
to  whom  the  Pasha  addresses  his  orders  relative  to  the  peninsula.
The  Sawalihah  for  the  most  part  occupy  the  country  west  and
northwest  of  the  convent.  The  pasturing  places  of  the  tribe  are
in  general  common  to  all  its  branches  ;  but  the  valleys  where
date  trees  grow  and  tillage  exists,  are  said  to  be  the  property  of
individuals.    They  consider  themselves  as  the  oldest  and  chief

'  Trayels,  etc.  p.  557  sq.
Vol.  L— 12  L  196  197

134

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

inhabitants  of  tlie  peninsula.  All  the  branches  regard  each  other
as  cousins,  and  intermarry.  Their  tradition  is,  that  their  fathers
came  hither  from  the  borders  of  Egypt  about  the  time  of  the
Muhammedan  conquest.  The  Kurrashy,  however,  are  said  to  be
descendants  of  a  few  families,  who  early  came  among  them  as
fugitives  from  the  Hejaz.  Hence  it  is,  perhaps,  that  the  two
first  branches  are  Ghafirs  of  the  convent  ;  and  the  Kurrdshy
not. — Each  of  the  branches  is  subdivided  into  smaller  clans.
Burckhardt  speaks  of  the  Bahamy  as  a  branch  ;  but  they  were
not  named  to  us.

II.  The  'Aleikdt  are  also  an  old  tribe  ;  but  much  weaker
than  the  Sawalihah,  being  indeed  few  in  number.  Intermarriages
occasionally  take  place  between  them  and  the  latter  tribe  ;  but
they  are  not  in  general  approved  of  The  'Aleikat  are  also  Gha-
firs of  the  convent.  They  encamp  chiefly  around  the  western
Wady  Nusb  ;  and  extend  their  pasturage  as  far  as  to  the  Wadys
Ghurundel  and  Wutah.

III.  The  3Iuzeiny  came  into  the  peninsula  at  a  later  period  ;
and  are  still  regarded  as  intruders  by  the  Sawalihah,  who  do  not
intermarry  with  them.  Our  Arabs  of  the  Aulad  Sa'id  held  them
in  great  contempt.  The  story  of  their  introduction  to  the  penin-
sula, as  related  by  our  guides,  was  as  follows  :  The  whole  terri-
tory of  the  Tawarah  originally  belonged  to  the  Sawalihah  and
'Aleikat,  and  was  equally  divided  between  them  ;  the  former
having  possession  of  the  western  part  of  the  peninsula,  and  the
latter  of  the  eastern.  During  a  famine,  a  war  arose  between  the
two  tribes,  in  which  the  former  in  a  night  attack  near  Tur,  killed
all  but  seven  men  of  the  'Aleikat.  To  celebrate  this  victory,
they  assembled  around  the  tomb  of  Sheikh  Salih  in  Wady  esh-
Sheikh,  and  sacrificed  a  camel.  Just  at  this  time,  seven  men  of
the  Muzeiny  came  to  them  from  their  country  Harb  on  the  road
to  the  Hejaz,  and  proposed  to  settle  with  them  in  the  peninsula
on  equal  terms  ;  saying  they  had  fled  from  home  because  they
had  shed  blood,  and  feared  the  avenger.  The  Sawahhah  replied,
that  if  they  would  come  as  serfs,  they  were  welcome  ;  if  not,  they
might  depart.  They  chose  to  depart ;  and  on  their  way  fell  in
with  the  remnant  of  the  'Aleikat.  Forming  a  league  with  these,
they  together  fell  upon  the  Sawalihah  at  night,  as  they  were
assembled  among  the  Turfa  trees  to  feast  upon  the  camel  ;
and  a  great  slaughter  was  the  consequence.  The  war  continued
for  many  years  ;  but  at  last  peace  was  made  between  the  con-
tending parties  by  foreign  mediation.  The  'Aleikat  now  gave
to  the  Muzeiny  half  of  their  portion  of  the  peninsula  ^nd  of  their
general  rights  ;  and  admitted  them  to  intennarriage.  Those
rights  the  Muzeiny  still  enjoy  ;  but  having  increased  very  much
in  number,  whUe  the  'Aleikat  have  remained  few  and  feeble,  they

i.  197-199

skc.  m.]

TRIBES  OF  THE  TAWARAH.

135

now  occupy  all  the  eastern  part  of  the  peninsula  and  the  whole
Tawarah  portion  of  the  shore  of  the  gulf  of  'Akabah,  hving  very
much  by  fishing  ;  while  the  'Aleikat,  as  is  said  above,  have  with-
drawn to  the  vicinity  of  the  western  Wady  NQsb.  The  Muzeiny
stand  in  no  connection  with  the  convent.'

IV.  Aulad  Suleiman,  consisting  of  only  a  few  families  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Tur.

V.  Beni  Wasel,  also  only  a  few  families  dwelling  among  the
Muzeiny  in  and  around  Sherm.

These  five  tribes  constitute  the  proper  Bedawin  of  Mount
Sinai  or  Jebel  Tur,  whence  their  name  Tawarah  in  the  plural,
from  the  form  Tury  in  the  singular.  They  stand  connected
under  one  head  Sheikh  ;  at  present  Sheikh  Salih  of  the  Kur-
rashy,  as  said  above.  They  form  a  single  body  when  attacked
by  other  Bedawin  from  abroad  ;  but  have  occasionally  bloody
quarrels  among  themselves.

VI.  To  the  Arab  inhabitants  of  the  peninsula  must  also  be
reckoned  the  Jeheliyeh,  or  serfs  of  the  convent.    The  Tawarah
do  not  of  course  acknowledge  them  as  Bedawin  ;  but  call  them
.Fellahs  and  slaves.    Their  very  existence  was  almost  unknown

out  of  the  peninsula,  until  the  fuU  account  which  Burckhardt
for  the  first  time  gave  of  them.'^

The  tradition  of  the  convent  respecting  these  vassals,  as  re-
lated to  us  by  the  superior,  is  as  follows  :  When  Justinian  built
the  convent,  he  sent  two  hundred  Wallachian  prisoners,  and  or-
dered the  governor  of  Egypt  to  send  two  hundred  Egyptians,  to
be  the  vassals  of  the  monastery,  to  serve  and  protect  it.  In
process  of  time,  as  the  Arabs  came  in  and  deprived  the  convent
of  many  of  its  possessions,  the  descendants  of  these  vassals  be-
came Muslims,  and  adopted  the  Arab  manners.^  The  last
Christian  among  them,  a  female,  the  superior  said,  died  about
forty  years  ago  in  the  convent  of  the  Forty  Martyrs.*  These
serfs  are  under  the  entire  and  exclusive  control  of  the  convent,
to  be  sold,  or  punished,  or  even  put  to  deatli,  as  it  may  deter-
mine. They  are  not  now  to  be  distinguished  in  features  or  man-
ners from  the  other  Bedawin.    A  portion  of  them  still  encamp

'  The  Muzeiny  and  Sawalihah  are  said  Suchem  has  been  noted  above,  p.  129,
to  have  since  become  reconciled,  and  now  note  3.  The  testimony  of  Eutychius  men-
act  together.  tioned  in  the  next  note,  has  been  hitherto

'  Most  of  the  early  travellers  appear  to  entirely  overlooked,
have  known  nothing  of  these  JebeLyeh.  The  substance  of  this  tradition  is  cor-

Belon  merely  mentions  the  '  slaves'  of  the  roborated  as  far  back  as  the  ninth  century

convent ;    Obser\-att.  p.  286.      Paulus'  by  the  testimony  of  Eutychius,  patriarch

Saramlung,  etc.  I.  p.  221.    Van  Egmond  of  Alexandria ;  Annales  11.  p.  167  sq.

and  Heyman,  (about  A.  D.  1720,)  give  a  The  passage  is  curious,  and  is  translated

short  but  correct  account  of  them ;  Reizen,  at  length  in  Note  XX,  at  the  end  of  the

II.  p.  165.    This  was  copied  by  Basching,  volume.    Compare  p.  125,  above.
Erdbeschr.  XI.  L  p.  606.     Hitter's  con-       *  Or,  as  Burckhardt  was  told,  in  A.  D.

•tniction  of  the  language  of  Ludolf  de  1750.    P.  564.

i.  199,  200

136

MOtTNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

among  the  mountains  in  the  vicinity  of  the  convent  ;  and  have
charge  of  its  gardens  in  the  neighbourhood.  Some  of  them  also
attend  by  turns  in  the  convent  itself ;  where  they  perform  menial
offices,  and  lodge  in  the  garden.  Most  of  those  who  thus  Hve
around  the  convent,  are  in  a  great  measure  dependent  upon  it
for  support.  When  they  work  for  the  convent,  as  they  often  do
in  the  garden  and  elsewhere,  they  are  paid  at  a  certain  rate,
usually  in  barley.  They  too  have  the  exclusive  privilege  of  con-
ducting visitors  to  the  summits  of  the  neighbouring  mountains  ;
for  which  they  are  paid  in  the  same  manner.  But  this  right
does  not  extend  to  conducting  strangers  on  their  journey  to  and
from  the  convent.  Every  other  day,  those  who  apply,  receive
bread  ;  each  man  five  small  loaves  about  as  large  as  the  fist,  and
of  the  coarsest  kind  ;  each  woman  less  ;  and  children  one  or  two
loaves.  Of  course  none  can  regularly  apply,  except  such  as  Uve
quite  near.  The  young  and  middle  aged  men  looked  well  and
hardy  ;  but  there  were  old  men  and  sick  persons  and  children,
who  came  around  the  convent,  the  very  pictures  of  famine  and
despair.  These  miserable  objects,  nearly  naked,  or  only  half
covered  with  tatters,  were  said  to  Uve  very  much  upon  grass  and
herbs  ;  and  even  this  food  now  failing  from  the  drought,  they
were  reduced  to  mere  skeletons.

Other  portions  or  clans  of  these  vassals  are  distributed
among  the  gardens  which  the  convent  has  now,  or  formerly  had,
in  possession  in  different  parts  of  the  peninsula.  Thus  the  Tebna
are  settled  in  the  date  gardens  of  Feiriin  ;  the  Bezia  in  the  con-
vent's gardens  at  Tiir ;  and  the  Sattla  in  other  parts.

On  inquiring  of  the  superior  as  to  the  number  of  these  vas-
sals, he  said  he  covdd  not  teU  ;  but  would  give  us  the  estimate
he  had  formed  about  seven  years  before,  when  he  had  an  oppor-
tunity to  see  them  all  together.  At  that  time  Sheikh  SaUh  of
the  Kurrashy,  the  head  Sheikh  of  the  Tawarah,  who  has  always
shown  himself  unfriendly  to  the  convent,  laid  claim  to  the
Jebeliyeh  as  his  serfs,  and  undertook  to  enforce  obedience  to  his
demands.  They  were  all  greatly  aft'righted,  and  fled  to  a  ren-
dezvous in  the  mountains  of  et-Tih,  a  distance  of  five  days*
journey.  The  superior  went  thither  in  person  with  another
monk,  to  invite  them  back  ;  but  they  refused  to  come  without
security  against  further  molestation.  He  then  went  and  laid
the  matter  before  the  governor  of  Suez,  producing  the  Firmans
of  the  convent  (of  which  they  have  many)  containing  express
mention  of  the  Jebeliyeh  as  their  serfs.  Sheiiih  Salih  was  now
summoned,  but  could  bring  forward  no  authority  whatever  in
8upi)ort  of  his  claim.  The  result  was,  that  he  was  thrown  into
prison  and  lined  ;  and  tlio  Jebeliyeh  returned  to  their  former
mode  of  life.    At  that  time,  the  superior  said,  he  judged  the

Sec.  m.]  THE  JEBELIYEH.     ALLIED  TRIBES.

137

whole  number  collected  to  be  between  fifteen  hundred  and  two
thousand  souls.    But  this  estimate  is  probably  by  far  too  large.

Within  a  few  years,  the  superior  had  baptized  two  of  these
serfs,  who  had  embraced  Christianity  ;  and  no  objection  had  been
made  by  any  one.

The  Arabs  of  the  Tawarah  pretend  to  claim  the  whole  ter-
ritory of  the  peninsula  as  far  north  as  to  the  Haj  road  leading
from  Suez  to  'Akabah  ;  but  they  are  in  actual  possession  only
of  the  part  lying  south  of  the  chain  of  the  Tib.  The  tract  north
of  this  chain,  including  the  northern  desert  ,  is  inhabited  by  the
Terdbin,  the  Tiydhah,  and  the  Hahvdt,  allied  tribes,  who  to-
gether are  stronger  than  the  Tawarah.  The  Terabin  have  been
already  mentioned  as  occupying  the  mountains  er-Rahah  and
encamping  around  Taset  Sudr  ;  and  connecting  towards  the
north  with  the  tribe  of  the  same  name  near  Gaza.  A  small
branch  of  them  also  occupy  the  eastern  coast  of  the  peninsula,
along  the  gulf  of  'Akabah,  between  the  ridges  of  et-Tih.  The
Haiwat  encamp  upon  the  eastern  part  of  the  higher  plateau
north  of  et-Tih,  towards  'Akabah.  The  Tiyahah  roam  over  the
district  intervening  between  the  Haiwat  and  western  Terabin,
and  extend  their  wanderings  northward  towards  Gaza.  The
pastures  of  the  Wadys  along  the  northern  side  of  et-Tih  are  said
to  be  good,  and  extend  quite  across  the  peninsula.  Between
the  Tawarah  and  the  Terabin,  Tuweileb  said,  there  is  an  oath
of  friendship,  to  endure  as  long  as  there  is  water  in  the  sea,
and  no  hair  grows  in  the  palm  of  the  hand."

In  former  times  and  down  to  the  last  century,  the  convent
had  also  its  protectors  among  all  these  northern  tribes,  and  like-
wise among  the  'Alawin,  Haweitat  and  other  tribes  towards
Gaza  and  Hebron.  In  those  days  many,  if  not  most,  of  the
pilgrims  came  by  way  of  Gaza ;  and  none  but  the  protectors
had  the  right  of  conveying  them.  But  as  most  visitors  now
come  only  from  Egypt,  this  right  has  become  restricted  to  the
Tawarah;  the  connection  with  other  protectors  has  been  dropped;
and  visitors  arriving  from  any  other  quarter  may  bring  with
them,  as  guides,  Arabs  of  any  tribe.  But  they  may  depart  only
with  guides  from  the  Tawarah.

The  Tawarah  are  regarded  as  among  the  poorest  of  aU  the
Bedawin  tribes ;  nor  can  it  well  be  otherwise.  Their  mountains
are  too  desolate  and  sterile  ever  to  furnish  more  than  the  scanty
means  of  a  precarious  existence.  Their  flocks  and  camels  are
comparatively  few,  and  the  latter  feeble;  asses  are  not  common;
horses  and  neat  cattle  are  entirely  unknown,  and  could  not  sub-
sist in  their  territory.  Their  scanty  income  is  derived  from  their
flocks,  from  the  hire  of  their  camels  to  transport  goods  and  coals
between  Cairo  and  Suez,  and  from  the  sale  of  the  little  charcoal

Vol.  I.— 12*  i.  202,  203

138

MOUXT  SINAI.

[Sec,  m.

whicli  tliey  bum,  and  the  gum  arabic  whicb  they  gather  and
bring  to  market,  together  with  their  dates  and  other  fruits.
But  this  is  scarcely  sufficient  to  buy  clothing  and  provisions  for
their  families ;  since  all  their  grain  must  be  purchased  in  Egypt,
not  a  particle  being  raised  in  the  peninsula.  And  when,  as
now,  the  rains  fail,  and  dearth  comes  upon  the  land,  and  their
camels  die  off,  then  indeed  despair  and  famine  stare  them  in
the  face.

The  entire  population  of  the  peninsula,  as  far  north  as  to
the  Haj  route,  is  estimated  by  Burckhardt  at  not  over  four
thousand  souls.  The  calculation  made  out  by  Ktippell  amounts
to  about  seven  thousand,  which  he  regards  as  at  least  a  fourth
part  too  large.  I  am  not  able  to  add  any  new  data  for  an  esti-
mate ;  but  should  regard  that  of  Burckhardt  as  more  probably
correct.  ^

I  have  remarked  above,  that  only  two  of  the  divisions  of  the
Sawalihah,  viz.  the  Dhuheiry  and  'Awarrmeh,  together  with  the
tribe  'Aleikat,  stand  in  the  relation  of  Ghaf irs  or  protectors  to
the  convent ;  while  the  other  dinsion  of  the  former  tribe,  the
Kurrashy,  as  also  the  tribe  Muzeiny,  do  not  enjoy  this  privilege.
Yet  the  tradition  is,  that  long  ago  the  Kurrashy  shared  in  this
right  by  sufferance,  although  not  fully  entitled  to  it ;  or,  as  our
Arabs  said,  "  not  written  in  the  book  of  the  convent."  But
they  lost  the  privilege  in  the  following  manner,  according  to
the  Arab  story.  One  night  seven  of  their  leaders  entered  the
convent  secretly  by  a  back  way  ;  and  in  the  morning  presented
themselves  armed  to  the  monks,  demanding  to  be  "written  in
the  book."  The  monks,  affrighted,  said  :  "  Very  well ;  but  it
must  be  done  in  the  presence  of  witnesses  from  among  the  other
protectors."  Witnesses  were  sent  for;  and  on  their  arrival,
being  ordered  to  put  aside  their  arms,  were  drawn  uj)  into  the
convent.  By  a  private  understanding  with  the  monks,  however,
they  had  arms  concealed  in  the  bags  they  brought  with  them.
The  monks  were  secretly  armed ;  and  upon  a  given  signal,  all
fell  upon  the  Kurrashy  and  killed  six  outright.  The  remaining
one  was  thrown  from  the  convent  walls  and  killed.  iSince  that
time  the  Kurrashy  have  had  no  claim  to  any  connection  with  the
convent.

Still,  it  is  obvious,  that  privileges  like  those  which  the  pro-
tectors enjoy,  must  ever  be  an  object  of  longing  and  jealousy  to
tribes  of  half  savage  Bedawin,  who  can  see  no  reason  why  they
should  be  excluded  from  them.  Hence  the  Kurrashy  and  Mu-
zeiny are  often  in  league  against  the  convent  and  its  protectors  ;
and  at  all  times  cherish  towards  them  an  unfriendly  spirit.  An
instance  of  this  kind  occurred  no  longer  ago  than  the  preceding

*  Burckhardt,  p.  6G0.    Ruppell'sReisen  in  Nubien,  p.  198.
i.  203-205

8BCIIL]

BKDAWiy  FEUIML

139

year,  in  reference  to  Lord  Lindsar  and  his  party  on  their  depart-
ure fiom  the  c^>nrent.  His  L-jrdship  has  jdluded  to  the  circum-
stance in  his  Letters  ;  and  I  therefore  feel  at  lihertr  to  relate
the  story  as  we  heard  it  from  the  Arabs  on  the  spot.  The  Kur-
idshr  and  Muzeiny.  wishing  to  break  down  the  monopoly  of  the
protectors,  applied  to  carry  the  party  from  the  convent  to  Aka-
bah.  As  soon  as  this  became  known,  the  three  tribes  of  the
protectors  assembled  in  "Wady  Seheb  (near  Wady  esh-Sheikh)
mider  their  Sheikhs  Miisa  and  Muteir ;  while  the  two  former
tribes  also  collected  in  Wady  el-Akhdar  xmder  their  Sheikhs
Salih  and  Kiudeir.  The  decision  of  the  travellers  was  waited
for  with  anxiety.  If  they  concluded,  to  take  those  who  were  not
protectors,  it  was  to  be  the  signal  for  the  protectors  to  fall  upon
the  others  in  deadly  conflict.  But  they  decided  for  the  protec-
tors, and  then  the  other  party  declared,  that  they  would  ap-
peal to  the  Pasha.  Here,  however,  the  convent  in  Cairo  inter-
fered, and  the  appeal  was  never  made.  Subsequently  to  this  a
French  traveller  took  one  of  the  Muzeiny  as  guide  to  'Akabah,
against  the  cotmsel  and  influence  of  the  convent ;  the  Arab  hav-
ing gained  over  the  dragoman  of  the  traveller  by  a  present.  But
by  the  advice  of  the  convent,  the  protectors  took  no  further  re-
venge, than  to  procure  for  him  a  sound  drubbing  at  'Akabah.

There  seems,  however,  a  strong  probability,  that  this  matter
will  not  be  definitely  settled  without  blxd  :  tor  the  two  tribes
above  mentioned  are  contintially  renewing  their  attempts  to  share
in  the  privileges  of  the  protectors.  We  ourselves  came  near  fell-
ing into  the  hands  of  the  Mtizeiny  at  Cairo,  while  we  were  yet
ignorant  of  the  whcde  subject.  By  some  oversight,  Khudeir  their
Sheikh  was  introduced  to  tis  at  the  British  cjusulate,  to  furnish  us
with  camels  for  our  journey  to  the  convent ;  but  he  failed  to  come
at  the  time  appointed,  in  consequence  (as  we  understood)  of  the
interference  of  the  branch  convent.

In  such  quarrels  among  the  Bedawin.  the  Pasha  of  Egypt
does  not  interfere,  tmless  he  is  appealed  to.  Abi-ut  thirty  years
during  a  war  between  the  Tawarah  and  the  Ma'azeh  inhab-
iting the  moxmtains  west  of  the  Eed  Sea.  a  party  of  the  former
of  about  forty  tents  were  encamped  in  Wady  Sudr.  The  Ma'azeh
made  up  an  expedition  of  two  hundred  dromedaries,  nine  horse-
men, and  a  company  of  fifty  Mughreby  horsemen,  to  plunder  this
encampment.  Passing  Suez  in  the  night,  they  fotmd  the  Tawa-
rah had  removed  to  Wady  Wardan  ;  and  fell  upon  them  as  the
day  dawned.  Most  of  the  men  escaped  :  the  women,  as  is  the
Bedawin  costom,  were  left  untouched  :  and  only  two  men,  in-
cluding the  Sheikh,  were  killed.  The  Sheikh,  an  old  man,  seeing
eacspe  impoasiUe,  sat  down  by  the  fire  ;  when  the  leader  of  the
Ma'azeh  came  up,  and  cried  out  to  him  to  throw  down  his  tur-

i2a5..2u6

i

140  MOUNT  SINAI.  [Sec.  ra.

ban  and  his  life  should  be  spared.  The  spirited  Sheikh,  rather
than  do  what,  according  to  Bedawin  notions,  would  have  stained
his  reputation  ever  after,  exclaimed  :  "  I  shall  not  uncover  my
head  before  my  enemies ; "  and  was  immediately  killed  by  the
thrust  of  a  lance.  Fifteen  dromedaries,  many  camels,  some
slaves,  and  much  clothing  and  furniture  were  carried  off ;  for  the
encampment  was  rich.'  The  Tawarah  waited  three  months  ;
and  then  collected  a  company  of  five  hundred  dromedaries  and
one  hundred  footmen,  making  in  all  a  party  of  six  hundred
armed  men.  Passing  Suez  secretly,  they  surprised  the  Ma'azeh
in  the  night,  killed  twenty-four  men  including  the  Sheikh,  and
took  seventy  dromedaries,  one  hundred  camels,  and  much  other
booty.  The  Sheikh  was  killed  by  mistake  ;  for  they  had  agreed
to  spare  him,  because  he  was  a  good  and  generous  man,  and  had
not  been  consenting  to  the  expedition  against  them.  Two  other
expeditions  against  the  Ma'azeh  followed  ;  in  which  more  than
twenty  men  were  killed,  and  a  great  booty  taken.  The  Ma'azeh
then  sent  a  present  of  three  dromedaries  to  Shedid,  Sheikh  of  the
Haweitat  residing  at  Cairo,  begging  him  to  bring  about  a  peace
with  their  enemies.  He  laid  the  case  before  Muhammed  'Aly  ;
who,  sending  for  the  two  parties,  made  peace  between  them,
which  has  continued  ever  since.

The  Tawarah  regard  the  'Ababideh  of  Upper  Egypt  as  ene-
mies ;  and  used  formerly  to  cross  the  gulf  in  boats  and  steal
camels  from  them.  At  present  nothing  of  the  kind  is  done  ;  but
the  enmity  continues.  A  short  time  since,  one  of  the  Tiyahah
went  by  land  to  the  country  of  the  'Ababideh,  and  stole  fifteen
dromedaries  ;  but  the  Pasha  compelled  him  to  restore  them.

The  Tawarah  never  go  to  law  before  the  Egyptian  tribunals.
The  Sheikh  of  each  tribe  or  division  acts  as  judge,  in  the  true
style  of  ancient  patriarchal  simplicity.  Minor  quarrels  are  gene-
rally settled  by  the  parties  between  themselves.  But  when  not,
they  bring  the  case  before  the  judge,  each  putting  into  his  hands
a  pledge  ;  and  he  who  loses  the  cause,  forfeits  his  pledge  to  the
judge  as  his  fee  ;  while  that  of  the  other  party  is  restored.
When  the  judge  has  given  his  decision,  the  party  who  gains,  exe-
cutes the  sentence  for  himself.  Their  mode  of  trial  was  described,
both  by  the  Arabs  and  by  the  superior,  as  being  wonderfully  just.
Bribery  and  partiality  are  unknown  among  them. — If  two  per-
sons quarrel,  a  third  may  step  in  and  make  them  kiss  each  other.
Thenceforward  they  are  to  all  appearance  friends  as  before  ;  al-
though the  case  may  still  remain  to  be  tried  ;  and  perhaps  months
may  elapse  before  it  is  brought  to  an  issue.

The  following  are  some  of  the  peculiarities  of  Bedawin  law  ;

■  This  story  is  in  part  related  by  Bijrckhardt,  p.  471.  Tlie  incident  of  the  Sheikh's
death  is  derived  from  him.

i.  206-208

■

Sec.  ni.]  BEDAVIK  LAW.  141

a  law  not  of  statute  but  of  prescription,  and  as  binding  as  the
common  law  of  England.  If  a  Bedawy  owes  another,  and  refuses
to  pay,  the  creditor  takes  two  or  three  men  as  witnesses  of  the
refusal.  He  then  seizes  or  steals,  if  he  can,  a  camel  or  something
else  belonging  to  the  debtor,  and  deposits  it. with  a  third  person.
This  brings  the  case  to  trial  before  the  judge  ;  and  the  debtor
forfeits  the  article  seized. — The  Bedawin  in  their  quarrels  avoid
beating  each  other  with  a  stick  or  with  the  fist,  as  disreputable  ;
this  being  the  punishment  of  slaves  and  children,  and  a  great
indignity  to  a  man.  K  it  takes  place,  the  sufferer  is  entitled  to
very  high  damages.  Their  code  of  honour  allows  blows  to  be
given  only  with  the  sword  or  with  a  gun  ;  and  by  these  the
sufferer  feels  himself  far  less  aggrieved.  In  a  quarrel  of  this
kind,  where  swords  have  been  used,  if  the  case  be  brought  to
trial,  a  fine  is  imposed  upon  the  party  least  wounded,  lai^
enough  to  cotinterbalance  the  excess  of  blows  or  injury  received
by  the  other  party.  The  degree  of  offence,  or  provocation,  or
claim,  is  of  no  account  ;  it  being  taken  for  granted  that  nothing
can  justify  a  quarrel,  and  that  aU  such  occurrences  must  be  tried
on  their  own  simple  merits.

If  one  person  assaults  and  wounds  another,  who  remains  pas-
sive, fiiends  step  in  and  act  as  mediators.  They  fijst  persuade
the  wounded  man  to  agree  to  a  truce  of  a  month  or  more,  during
which  time  the  parties  leave  each  other  in  quiet.  At  the  expira-
tion of  this  term,  the  mediators  on  examination  fix;  upon  the
sum  which  the  injured  man  ought  to  receive  as  damages  ;  for
example,  two  thousand  piastres.  This  he  agrees  to  accept,  on
condition  that  one  of  them  becomes  surety  for  it.  But  now  one
fiiend  comes  after  another,  and  entreats  him  to  remit  for  his
sake  a  certain  portion  of  this  sum.  In  this  way  the  fine  wOl  be
reduced  perhaps  to  two  himdred  piastres.  The  parties  are  now
brought  together  ;  and  the  injured  man  gives  up  to  the  offender
perhaps  one  htmdxed  more.  In  this  way  he  actually  receives  not
more  than  one  hundred  piastres  :  and  if  the  reconciliation  be
sincere,  he  may  very  probably  give  up  even  that.  If  both  par-
ties happen  to  be  wotinded,  a  balance  of  injuries  is  struck.  The
instnmient  of  offence  is  forfeited  by  law  to  the  person  injured.

If  in  such  quarrels,  or  in  any  other  way,  a  person  be  killed,
it  is  the  right  and  duty  of  the  nearest  relative  of  the  deceased,  to
slay  the  murderer  or  his  nearest  relative,  wherever  he  may  be
found.  But  in  general,  those  who  are  likely  to  suffer  in  this
way,  flee  the  country  for  a  year  or  two  ;  and  in  the  mean  time
persons  of  influence  interfere  to  appease  the  relatives  of  the  de-
ceased, and  induce  them  to  accept  a  considerable  sum  of  money
from  the  offender,  as  the  fine  of  blood.  The  feud  is  then  usually
made  up,  and  the  offender  is  free  to  return.    This  is  the  ancient

L208,  209

142

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  m.

blood-revenge  of  tlie  Hebrews,  which  was  so  firmly  fixed  in  all
their  habits  of  life,  that  even  the  inspired  lawgiver  did  not  choose
to  abolish  it  directly  ;  but  only  modified  and  controlled  its  influ-
ence by  establishing  cities  of  refuge.  Nothing  of  this  kind  exists
among  the  Arabs.'

The  simplest  form  in  which  these  rules  appear,  is  in  their
application  to  the  same  clan  or  tribe.  But  the  same  principles
are  also  applied  to  quarrels  and  murders  which  take  place  be-
tween individuals  of  different  tribes  ;  unless  the  tribe  of  the
aggressor  take  his  part  and  adopt  the  quarrel  as  their  own.  In
that  case  war  ensues.

The  strict  honesty  of  the  Bedawin  among  themselves  is  pro-
verbial; however  Httle  regard  they  may  have  to  the  right  of
property  in  others.  If  an  Arab's  camel  dies  on  the  road,  and  he
cannot  remove  the  load,  he  only  draws  a  circle  in  the  sand  round
about,  and  leaves  it.  In  this  way  it  will  remain  safe  and  un-
touched for  months.  In  passing  through  Wady  Sa'l  on  our  way
to  'Akabah,  we  saw  a  black  tent  hanging  on  a  tree  ;  TuweUeb
said  it  was  there  when  he  passed  the  year  before,  and  would
never  be  stolen.  Theft,  he  said,  was  held  in  abhorrence  among
the  Tawarah  ;  but  the  present  year  the  famine  was  so  great,  that
individuals  were  sometimes  driven  to  steal  food.  He  had  just
returned  from  Egypt  with  a  camel  load  of  grain  for  his  family,
which  he  had  put  into  one  of  their  magazines  as  a  place  of  safety  ;
but  it  had  all  been  stolen.  Burckhardt  relates,  that  he  was
shown  in  Wady  Humr  a  point  upon  the  rocks,  from  which  one
of  the  Tawarah,  a  few  years  before,  had  cast  down  his  son  head-
long, bound  hand  and  foot,  for  an  olfence  of  the  very  same  kind.*

The  following  trait  was  communicated  to  us  by  the  siiperior
of  the  convent.  If  a  Bedawy  discovers  his  wife  or  his  daughter
in  illicit  intercourse,  he  turns  away  and  conceals  the  fact  from
every  one,  not  even  letting  the  guilty  parties  know  that  he  has
seen  them.  Months  afterwards  he  will  marry  off  his  daughter  ;
or  after  a  longer  time  perhaps  divorce  his  wife  ;  Hving  with  them
mean  time  as  if  nothing  had  happened,  and  assigning  some  other
reason  for  the  measure  he  adopts.  One  motive  for  this  conceal-
ment is,  to  avoid  personal  disgrace  ;  and  another,  to  prevent  the
impossibility  of  the  offender's  ever  being  married.

We  made  many  inquiries  in  the  peninsula  and  among  the
tribes  which  we  feU  in  with  further  north,  but  could  never  hear
of  a  Bedawy  among  them  all,  who  was  able  to  read.  Even
Sheikh  S;ilih,  the  head  Sheikh  of  all  the  Tawarah,  has  not  this
power ;  and  whenever  a  letter  is  addressed  to  him,  or  an  order

'  The  cliief  passages  in  the  Old  Tes-  Deut.  19,  4  sq.    Josh.  20,  1  sq.    See  al-

tament  respecting  the  Hebrew  blood-re-  so  .Joseph.  Ant.  i.  7.  4.
vengo  are:  Kx.  21,  13.    Num.  So,  9  sq.       '  Page  47i>.
i.  2U9-211

Sec.  m.]

BEDAWIN  LAW.  RELIGION.

143

from  the  government,  he  is  obliged  to  apply  to  the  convent  to
have  it  read.  Among  the  Tawarah  this  ignorance  seems  rather
to  be  the  result  of  habit  and  want  of  opportunity ;  but  among
the  tribes  of  the  northern  deserts,  we  found  it  was  accounted
disreputable  for  a  Bedawy  to  learn  to  read.  They  rejoice  in
the  wild  liberty  of  their  deserts,  as  contrasted  with  towns  and
cities ;  and  in  like  manner  take  pride  in  their  freedom  from  the
arts  and  restraints  of  civilized  life.

The  Muhammedanism  of  all  these  sons  of  the  desert,  sits
very  loosely  upon  them.  They  bear  the  name  of  followers  of
the  false  prophet ;  and  the  few  religious  ideas  which  they  pos-
sess, are  moulded  after  his  [)recepts.  Their  nominal  religion  is
a  matter  of  habit,  of  inheritance,  of  national  prescription ;  but
they  seemed  to  manifest  little  attachment  to  it  in  itself,  and
live  in  the  habitual  neglect  of  most  of  its  external  forms.  We
never  saw  any  among  them  repeat  the  usual  Muhammedan
prayers,  in  which  other  Muslims  are  commonly  so  punctual;  and
were  told  indeed  that  many  never  attempt  it ;  and  that  very
few  among  them  even  know  the  proper  words  and  forms  of
prayer.  The  men  generally  observe  the  fast  of  Ramadan,  though
some  do  not ;  nor  do  the  females  keep  it.  Nor  is  the  duty  of
pilgrimage  more  regarded  ;  for  according  to  Tuweileb,  not  more
than  two  or  three  of  all  the  Tawarah  had  ever  made  the  jour-
ney to  Mecca. — The  profaneness  of  the  Bedawin  is  excessive
and  almost  incredible.  "  Their  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  ;  "  and
we  were  hardly  able  to  obtain  from  them  a  single  answer  that
did  not  contain  an  oath.

We  asked  the  superior  of  the  convent  whether  the  Bedawin
would  feel  any  objection  to  professing  Christianity  ?  His  reply
was  :  "  None  at  all  ;  they  would  do  it  to-morrow,  if  they  could
get  fed  by  it."  It  is  this  indifference  of  dark  and  unregulated
minds,  that  lies  in  the  way  of  all  moral  and  intellectual  im-
provement among  them.  The  convent  might  exert  an  immense
influence  over  them  for  good,  if  it  possessed  in  itself  the  true
spirit  of  the  Gospel.  Were  a  missionary  to  go  among  the
Tawarah  and  perhaps  other  tribes,  speaking  their  language  and
acquainted  with  their  habits,  he  would  doubtless  be  received
with  kindness  ;  and  were  he  to  live  as  they  Hve,  and  conform  to
their  manners  and  customs  in  unimportant  things,  he  would  soon
acquire  influence  and  authority  among  them.  In  all  our  inter-
course with  them,  we  found  them  kind,  good  natured,  and  accom-
modating ;  although,  as  might  be  expected,  great  beggars.  But
no  very  permanent  impression  can  well  be  hoped  for  upon  them,
so  long  as  they  retain  their  wandering  and  half  savage  life ;  and
this  mode  of  life  must  necessarily  continue,  so  long  as  the  desert
is  their  home.    To  introduce  civilization  among  them,  their  in-

i.  211,  212

144

MOUNT  SINAI.

[Sec.  in.

veterate  predilection  for  the  desert  and  its  wild  fascinations  must
first  be  overcome ;  and  they  then  be  transplanted  to  a  kindlier
soil,  where  they  may  become  wonted  to  fixed  abodes,  and  to  the
occupations  of  a  more  regular  life.  But  it  may  be  doubtful,
whether  such  a  course  is  possible  through  any  mere  human
agency  ;  at  least,  it  would  be  no  light  matter,  thus  to  overturn
habits  and  a  mode  of  life,  which  have  come  down  to  them
through  nearly  forty  centuries  unchanged,
i.  213

SECTION  lY.

FROM   MOUNT    SINAI   TO  'AKABAH.

Thursday,  3Iarch29th,  1838.  Afternoon.  About  noon  our
luffsao-e  and  then  ourselves  were  let  down  from  the  hi  Wady  Rahab  of  Burckhardt,  p.  496.

i.  224,  225

Apr.  2.]

WADY  KUWEIHIBIYEH.

153

changed ;  and  it  was  evident  that  we  had  passed  the  southern
range  of  the  Tih.  We  were  now  among  another  net  of  Wadys,
which  drain  the  naountainous  region  between  the  two  parallel
ridges  of  that  mountain.  The  most  central  and  frequented  spot
in  this  region  is  the  fountain  and  Wady  called  el-'Ain,  lying
several  hours  distance  to  the  northwest  of  our  present  encamp-
ment ;  where  there  is  living  water  and  a  brook  and  luxuriant
vegetation,  resembhng  apparently  Wady  Feiran,  though  with-
out cultivation.'  The  water  is  said  not  to  be  so  good  as  that  of
el-Hiidhera.  From  that  point  the  great  Wady  Wetir  runs  down
eastward  by  a  winding  course  to  the  gulf,  forming  the  great
drain  into  which  all  the  Wadys  of  the  region  from  the  north  and
south  empty  themselves.  A  road  already  mentioned  leads  from
the  convent  to  el-'Ain,  crossing  the  southern  Tih  at  a  point  con-
siderably further  west  than  our  route,  and  then  following  down
Wady  Zidakah.  From  'Ain  a  route  goes  off  northwards  to  Graza
and  Hebron,  crossing  the  northern  ridge  of  the  Tih  ;  and  another
keeps  down  Wady  Wetir  to  the  gulf,  and  so  along  the  coast  to
'Akabah.

Sunday,  April  1st.  We  remained  all  day  encamped.  In
the  afternoon  I  wandered  away  into  a  lone  side  valley  and  wrote
a  letter.  Scarcely  ever  have  I  had  such  a  sense  of  perfect  soK-
tude.  No  human  eye  w.as  there ;  and  no  sound  save  that  of  the
wind  among  the  rocks.  Just  as  I  was  about  to  return,  a  wild
looking  Arab  with  his  gun  stood  suddenly  before  me.  I  might
have  been  startled,  had  I  not  recognised  him  at  once  as  one  of
our  own  men,  a  good  natured  fellow,  who  had  come  to  look  for
me  on  account  of  my  long  absence.

Monday,  April  2d.  We  started  at  5^  o'clock.  The  morn-
ing was  bright  and  beautiful ;  the  sky  serene  ;  and  the  air  of  the
desert  fresh  and  invigorating.  We  proceeded  up  the  valley  N.
E.  by  E.  A  little  bird  sat  chirping  on  the  topmost  twig  of  one
of  the  Seyal  trees ;  and  reminded  me  strongly  of  the  notes  of
the  American  robin  on  my  own  green  native  MUs.  What  a  con-
trast to  this  desert !  in  which  we  had  ordy  once  seen  a  blade  of
grass  since  we  left  the  region  of  the  NUe.  In  twenty  minutes
we  came  out  on  an  open  plain  at  the  head  of  Wady  er-Euwei-
hibiyeh.  This  plain  consists  of  sandstone  only  partially  covered
with  earth ;  the  surface  declines  slightly  towards  the  northeast
and  its  waters  flow  off  in  that  direction  to  Wady  es-Sumghy.
At  6.25  we  struck  a  small  Wady  descending  northeast  along  the
northwestern  extremity  or  base  of  Jebel  Sumghy.  The  rocks
here  stiU  exhibited  alternate  specimens  of  sandstone,  grtinstein,
and  granite.  Twenty-five  minutes  further,  the  Wady  entered
very  obliquely  among  the  cliffs,  which  on  this  side  form  the

'  RiippeR's  Reisen  in  Nubien,  p.  255  sq.

i.  225-227

154  FROM  MOUNT  SINAI  TO  'aKABAH.  [Sec.  IV.

commencement  of  the  mountainous  tract  extending  without
much  change  of  character  to  the  coast.  The  chffs  were  dark ;
and  as  we  advanced,  seemed  to  be  chiefly  of  gray  granite,  with
an  occasional  intermixture  of  poqihyry  and  griinstein.  Nothing
could  be  of  a  more  barren  and  uninviting  aspect.  At  a  quarter
past  7  o'clock  we  left  the  Wady  running  on  in  the  same  direc-
tion to  join  Wady  es-Sumghy  further  down,  and  turned  at  right
angles  into  a  branch  Wady  coming  from  the  southeast.  Here
we  ascended  gradually  for  a  few  minutes,  and  then  crossing  the
low  water-shed  descended  fowards  Wady  Siimghy,  which  we
reached  at  8  o'clock.  This  is  a  wide  valley  coming  from  the
southwest.  It  is  joined  at  this  point  from  the  south  by  another
broad  Wady  or  plain  called  el-Mukrih ;  and  the  united  valley
flows  off  N.  N.  E.  It  is  quite  wide,  and  has  many  Seyal  trees,
from  which  gum  arable  is  collected  in  summer.  AU  the  trees  of
this  species  which  we  had  seen  since  leaving  the  convent,  were
larger  than  those  on  the  western  side  of  the  peninsula,  and  might
compare  with  apple  trees  of  a  moderate  size.

Our  course  now  lay  down  Wady  Sumghy  N.  N.  E.  The
cliffs  on  each  side  are  high  and  irregvdar,  and  occasionally  capped
with  sandstone.  After  half  an  hour  we  had  a  distant  view  of
the  northern  ridge  of  the  Tib,  in  which  a  high  point  bore  N.  15°
E.  The  shrubs  in  this  valley  were  greener  than  we  had  seen
before  ;  indicating  that  more  rain  had  fallen  in  this  quarter  than
elsewhere.  At  9.40  we  left  the  Sumghy,  and  turned  short  to-
wards the  right  into  a  side  valley,  which  after  a  rather  steep
ascent  of  forty  minutes  brought  us  at  10.20  by  a  narrow  pass  to
the  top  of  a  sharp  ridge.  Here  is  the  head  of  Wady  es-Sa'deh,
which  runs  under  the  same  name  quite  down  to  the  sea.'  We
now  followed  down  this  valley  on  a  general  course  E.  N.  E.  be-
tween abrupt  cliffs,  alternately  of  granite  and  griinstein,  from
three  hundred  to  five  hundred  feet  in  height,  sometimes  tipped
with  sandstone.  The  cKfi's  grew  higher  as  we  advanced,  and
contracted  the  valley  more  and  more,  often  presenting  at  the
frequent  turns  grand  and  imposing  bulwarks.  For  a  moment  at
11.10  we  had  a  distant  glimpse  of  the  sea  for  the  first  time  ;
but  it  speedily  vanished.  Fifteen  minutes  further  a  large  tribu-
tary came  in  from  the  right ;  and  at  11.35  the  whole  vaUey
was  contracted  between  enormous  masses  of  rock  to  the  width  of
only  ten  or  twelve  feet.  Tliis  romantic  pass  is  called  el-Abweib,
"  the  little  door."  At  12^  o'clock  Wady  cs-Sa'deh  at  length
opened  from  the  mountains  towards  the  shore  upon  a  large  bed
of  gravel,  apparently  brought  down  by  its  torrents.    Here,  just

'  Tlio  short  valley  by  wliicli  we  ascended  name ;  but  reckoned  the  whole  to  Wady

is  the  Wady  Boszeyra  (Bi'iseiriih)  of  I$urck-  es-Sa'deh.
hardt.     Our  Arabs  did  not   know  this
i.  227,  228

Apr.  2.]

GULF  OF  'aKABAH.

155

at  the  left,  is  a  thin  ridge  or  stratum  of  chalk.  The  shore  is
still  nearly  a  mile  distant ;  and  near  it,  directly  in  front,  is  the
brackish  fountain  en-Nuwcibi'a,  with  a  few  low  palm  trees,  be-
longing to  the  Muzeiny.  The  descent  towards  the  shore  over
the  bed  of  gravel  is  very  considerable.'

The  first  view  of  the  gulf  and  its  scenery  from  the  spot
where  we  now  stood,  if  not  beautiful,  (for  how  can  a  desert  be
beautiful  ?)  was  yet  in  a  high  degree  romantic  and  exciting.
The  eastern  gulf  of  the  Red  Sea  is  narrower  than  the  western ;
but  it  is  the  same  long  blue  line  of  water,  running  up  through
the  midst  of  a  region  totally  desolate.  The  mountains  too  are
here  higher  and  more  picturesque  than  those  that  skirt  the  gulf  of
Suez  ;  the  valley  between  them  is  less  broad ;  and  there  is  not
the  same  extent  of  wide  desert  plains  along  the  shores.  Towards
the  south  the  gulf  seemed  to  -be  some  ten  geographical  miles  in
breadth.  Immediately  at  our  left,  a  broad  gravelly  plain,  having
also  drift  sand  upon  it,  extended  out  into  the  sea  for  a  great  dis-
tance ;  while  on  the  opposite  coast  a  like  projection  appeared  to
reach  out  to  a  less  extent ;  so  that  between  the  two  the  breadth
of  the  gulf  at  this  point  was  very  much  diminished.  Further
north  it  widens  again,  as  before.  The  western  mountains  are
mostly  precipitous  clilfs  of  granite,  perhaps  eight  hundred  feet
in  height,  and  in  general  a  mile  or  more  distant  from  the  shore ;
though  bays  occasionally  set  quite  up  to  their  foot.  From  them
a  slope  of  gravel  usually  extends  dowTi  to  the  sea.  Opposite  to
Wady  es-Sa'deh  the  mountains  of  the  eastern  coast  are  higher
than  those  of  the  western ;  but  further  north  they  are  lower.
The  general  line  of  the  western  coast .  runs  N.  N.  E.  as  far  as  to
the  remarkable  cape  Ras  el-Burka',  which  terminates  the  view
in  that  direction.

We  now  turned  to  the  left  along  the  coast,  descending  grad-
ually to  the  gravelly  plain  above  mentioned ;  and  passing  along
it  half  way  between  the  mountain  and  the  sea.  We  found  it
everywhere  much  cut  up  by  water-courses  and  gullies  from  Wady
Wetir,  which  spread  themselves  widely  over  the  plain,  as  the
waters  of  the  rainy  season  rush  from  that  Wady  towards  the
shore.  This  important  Wady,  the  mouth  of  which  we  passed  at
a  quarter  past  one,  serves  (as  I  have  said  above)  to  drain  the
whole  region  between  the  two  ridges  of  the  Tih ;  and  brings
down  occasionally  immense  volumes  of  water,  as  is  evident  from
the  traces  left  upon  the  plain.  Here  for  the  first  time  we  saw
trunks  of  trees  thus  brought  down.  The  road  taken  by  Riippell
and  Laborde  in  going  from  'Akabah  to  Sinai,  passes  up  this

'  This  point  of  the  coast  was  reached    wards  along  the  shore  of  the  gulf.  Zach's
by  Seetzen  in  A.  D.  1810,  by  nearly  the    Monatl.  Corresp.  XXVII.  p.  64.
same  rente.    Hence  he  proceeded  south-

i.  228-230

156

FROM  MOUNT  SINAI  TO  'akABAH.

[Sec.  17.

valley  to  el-'Ain,  about  a  day  and  a  half  distant ;  and  thence
through.  Wady  Zulakah  to  the  convent.

At  1^  o'clock  we  were  opposite  to  el-Wasit,  a  small  fountain
near  the  shore,  with  a  number  of  palm  trees,  marking  the  boun-
dary between  the  Muzeiny  and  the  few  families  of  Terabin  who
inhabit  this  region.  Having  crossed  the  projecting  plain,  we
came  at  a  quarter  past  two  o'clock  to  a  small  grove  of  palm
trees  on  the  slope  near  the  shore,  and  a  well  called  Nuweibi'a  of
the  Terabin,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  other.  Here  were  traces
of  a  recent  encampment  of  these  people ;  and  we  expected  to
find  at  least  some  fishermen  who  frequent  the  coast ;  but  none
appeared.  Traces  of  former  dwellings,  or  perhaps  magazines,
were  also  visible,  formed  of  rude  stones  laid  together  without
cement ;  such  as  are  not  unfrequent  among  the  Arabs  of  the
peninsula.  Every  three  or  four  of  the  palm  trees  are  enclosed
by  a  mound  forming  a  reservoir,  into  which  the  torrents  from
the  mountains  had  been  turned.  The  well  is  eight  or  ten  feet
deep  ;  the  water  naturally  brackish ;  and  now,  from  long  stand-
ing, it  emitted  an  odour  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  The  camels
were  watered  here,  and  seemed  thirsty.  The  Arabs  also  filled
their  water  skins,  saying  we  should  find  no  more  water  so  good
until  we  reached  'Akabah.  The  shrub  Ghurkud  grows  here  in
abundance. — After  a  detention  of  an  hour,  we  again  set  off.
Many  heaps  of  large  shells  were  seen  as  we  passed  along ;  show-
ing how  very  abundant  shell-fish  must  be  upon  tliis  coast.  After
three  quarters  of  an  hour,  we  encamped  at  4  o'clock  on  the  shore,
at  the  head  of  a  bay  which  sets  up  near  to  the  mountains.

Tuesday,  April  Sd.  Our  road  for  the  whole  day  lay  along
the  shore,  with  high  mountains  at  our  left,  composed  chiefiy  of
dark  gray  granite  with  now  and  then  a  crest  of  sandstone  upon
the  top  of  the  ridge.  We  were  mounted  and  upon  our  way  at
half  past  5  o'clock.  The  rising  sun  threw  his  mellow  beams
upon  the  transparent  waters  of  the  gulf ;  and  the  eastern  moun-
tains, lighted  up  by  his  rays,  presented  a  fine  picture  of  dark
jagged  peaks  and  masses.  At  the  end  of  an  hour  the  path
passed  close  to  the  rocks,  which  are  here  sandstone.  Ten  min-
utes further  a  small  Wady  came  down  from  the  mountains,  for
which  our  guides  knew  no  name ;  around  it  were  low  hills  of
conglomerated  granite.  At  7^  o'clock  we  passed  the  small  Wady
Um  Hash  of  Burckliardt ;  a  line  of  chalk  was  visible  at  the  foot
of  the  hills,  which  were  crested  with  sandstone.  Just  at  the
edge  of  the  water  is  an  isolated  rock  called  Murbiit  Ka'ud  el-
Wasileh,  on  which  in  former  times  a  watcliman  was  stationed  to
observe  all  comers  from  the  north.  On  seeing  any  one,  it  was
his  duty  to  ride  to  Nuweibi'a  and  make  report.    Half  an  hour

i.  230,  231

Apr.  3.]

SHORE  OF  THE  GULF.

157

further  we  passed  the  mouth  of  another  Wady,  called  Muwa-
lih  by  Burcldiardt,  with  a  wide  plain  of  gravel  at  its  mouth.

We  now  had  before  us  the  high  ridge  running  from  south-
west to  northeast,  which  terminates  in  the  cape  Kas  el-Burka'
or  Abu  Burka',  the  "  Veil  cape,"  so  called  from  its  white  appear-
ance when  seen  at  a  distance.  Along  the  southern  side  of  this
ridge  lies  a  wide  bay,  to  the  shore  of  which  we  came  at  ten  min-
utes past  8  o'clock.  At  9^  o'clock,  we  neared  the  southwest
end  of  the  ridge  of  the  promontory ;  and  at  10  o'clock  doubled
the  point  of  the  cape,  where  it  juts  into  the  sea  and  only  admits
a  very  narrow  path  along  its  base.  This  point  is  considerably
lower  than  the  ridge  further  back  ;  it  is  a  hill  covered  with  drifts
of  white  sand,  apparently  driven  up  from  the  sea,  and  looking  at
a  distance  like  a  chalky  cliff.  After  passing  the  cape,  we  saw
immediately  the  northern  branch  of  the  Tib,  presenting  the  same
general  appearance  of  a  wall  of  horizontal  strata  as  the  southern
branch,  and  terminating  in  a  high  headland  which  Burckhardt
calls  Ras  Um  Haiyeh ;  though  Tuweileb  knew  no  other  name
for  it  than  et-Tih.  As  far  as  to  this  headland,  the  general  course
of  the  shore  was  still  N.  N.  E.

We  now  had  a  fine  beach  on  our  right,  and  recreated  our-
selves by  walking  along  the  shore  and  picking  up  the  curious
shells,  which  everywhere  abound.  The  transparent  green  of  the
water  was  very  inviting ;  indeed,  nothing  could  look  purer  than
the  waves  as  they  rolled  in  over  the  clean  white  sand.  I  could
not  resist  the  temptation ;  and  lingering  behind  the  company,
took  a  hasty  but  very  refreshing  bath.  The  mountains  here  re-
treat a  little,  leaving  a  plain  of  some  width  between  them  and
the  water.  At  11-^  o'clock  we  came  to  a  well  of  bad  brackish
water,  marked  by  a  few  palm  trees,  and  called,  like  so  many
others,  Abu  Suweirah.  From  this  point  we  began  to  approach
more  nearly  the  end  of  the  northern  Tih  ;  which  comes  tumbling
down  towards  the  sea  in  immense  masses  apparently  of  yellow
sandstone ;  but  is  intercepted  by  a  range  of  granite  chtfs  be-
tween it  and  the  shore,  running  from  S.  S.  W.  to  N.  N.  E.  which
again  are  capped  with  red  sandstone.  We  reached  the  south-
west end  of  these  cliifs  at  1  o'clock.  A  steep  slope  of  gravel
extends  from  them  down  to  the  water  ;  on  a  part  of  wliich  three
gazelles  were  feeding,  which  on  seeing  us  bounded  off  fleetly  and
gracefully.

At  half  past  two  o'clock  Wady  el-Muhash  came  down
through  the  cliffs,  having  before  it  an  immense  bed  of  gravel.
Looking  up  through  its  gap,  we  could  see  the  masses  of  the  Tih
on  the  right  beyond.  This  is  probably  the  spot  where  Burck-
hardt's  guide,  old  'Aid,  so  resolutely  went  for  water.*    An  hour

'  Travels,  p.  503.

Vol.  I.— 14  i.  231-233

158

FROM  MOUKT  SIXAI  TO  'aKABAH.

[Skc.  IV.

afterwards,  at  3^  o'clock,  we  were  opposite  the  end  of  tlie  Tih,
or  Eas  Um  Haiyeli,  which  does  not  project  into  the  sea,  though
a  bay  flows  np  to  its  foot.  Its  height  is  about  the  same  as  the
cliffs  near  Nuweibi'a.  Further  north  the  mountains  become
lower.  We  now  entered  again  upon  a  wide  gravel  slope  lying
before  "Wady  Mukiibbeleh  north  of  et-Tih,  the  mouth  of  which
we  passed  at  4  o'clock.  It  is  here  broad  ;  but  one  can  look  up
through  it  far  into  the  mountains,  where  it  is  quite  narrow.
Three  quarters  of  an  hour  further  on,  a  rocky  promontory  at  the
head  of  a  bay  (the  Jebel  Sherafeh  of  Burckhardt)  presented  a  very
narrow  and  difficult  pass  ;  in  traversing  which  one  of  the  camels
fell  and  came  near  rolling  into  the  sea.  The  animal  had  to  be
unloaded  in  order  to  rise ;  and  several  of  the  things  were  wet.
Meantime  we  had  gone  on  and  encamped  at  5  o'clock  in  the
broad  Wady  el-Huweimirat,  which  here  comes  down  from  the
northwest,  and  was  full  of  herbs.

The  shore  during  the  whole  journey  of  to-day,  was  strewed
with  innumerable  shells  of  every  variety  and  size,  from  the
smallest  up  to  those  weighing  several  pounds.  They  were  how-
ever mostly  broken  and  of  no  further  value.  Occasionally  the
sandy  beach  was  paved  or  rather  incrusted,  with  a  conglomerate
of  debris  and  shells,  evidently  formed  by  the  action  of  the  sea-
water.  The  shore  was  everywhere  dotted  with  small  tracks,
which  the  Arabs  said  were  made  by  a  species  of  shell-fish,  that
comes  upon  the  land  every  night  and  returns  to  the  sea  in  the
morning.  We  afterwards  saw  many  crabs  of  various  species
running  briskly  upon  the  shore.  One  curious  little  animal  was
very  frequent ;  a  species  of  shrimp  or  minute  lobster,  that  had
taken  possession  of  convolute  shells,  in  which  he  had  made  him-
self at  home ;  and  protruding  his  head  and  legs,  ran  about  in
great  numbers,  carrying  his  shell  with  him.  He  was  evidently
a  foreigner ;  for  though  his  body  had  grown  to  the  shape  of  the
shell,  yet  the  shells  were  all  old  and  some  of  them  broken.  The
Kttle  fellow  was  not  in  any  way  attached  to  his  shell ;  and  when
drawn  out,  would  run  away.    Some  also  had  outgrown  their  shells.

From  the  headland  of  the  Tih  northwards,  the  general
direction  of  the  western  coast  is  northeast  to  its  extremity.
This  of  course  contracts  the  breadth  of  the  gulf  more  and  more
the  nearer  it  approaches  'Akabah ;  as  the  eastern  coast  ap-
parently continues  nearly  on  a  straight  line.  Immediately
beyond  the  valley  in  which  we  encamped,  are  two  promontories
running  out  for  some  distance  into  the  sea ;  not  high,  but  ter-
minating in  rocks ;  so  that  loaded  camels  cannot  easily  pass
around  them.  The  southernmost,  called  el-Mudareij,  is  the
shortest  and  most  dithcult ;  and  between  them  is  a  broad
vaUey.

i.  233,  23i

Apr.  i.]

SHELLS,     WADY  EL-HUWEIMIRAT.

159

The  mountains  on  the  opposite  or  eastern  coast,  were  here
low ;  and  a  narrow  sloping  plain  seemed  to  intervene  between
them  and  the  sea.  A  place  called  Hakl,  the  first  station -of  the
Haj  after  'Akabah  (mentioned  also  by  Edrisi)  was  visible  near
the  coast,  bearing  S.  E.^S.  It  is  in  a  Wady  called  el-Mebruk,
having  many  palm  trees.  Here  the  route  of  the  Haj  turns  more
inland.  The  tract  of  mountains  between  Hakl  and  'Akabah  is
inhabited  by  the  Arabs  'Amran ;  while  those  further  south  are
the  seat  of  the  tribe  called  Mesa'id,  a  subdivision  (Fendeh)  of
the  Haweitat.

Wednesday,  April  4th.  The  promontories  before  us  com-
pelled us  to  take  a  back  route,  so  as  to  cross  their  ridges  higher
up.  We  set  off  at  a  quarter  after  six,  passing  up  Wady  el-
Huweimirat  for  ten  minutes  N.  N.  W.  and  then  turning  into  a
narrower  side  Wady  on  a  course  northeast.  Twenty  minutes
more  brought  us  to  the  foot  of  a  steep  pass  leading  over  to  the
next  valley.  The  path  is  very  narrow,  ascending  along  the  face
of  the  sandstone  rock,  and  seemed  to  be  in  part  artificial.  One
camel  again  fell,  and  began  to  give  out.  We  reached  the  top
at  6.50,  and  descended  gradually  to  the  broad  valley  between
the  two  promontories ;  where  we  stopped  at  a  quarter  past  7
for  twenty  minutes,  to  adjust  the  loads,  and  leave  the  tired
camel  free.  The  poor  animal  was  however  too  far  gone,  and
died  the  same  night.

This  Wady  our  Arabs  called  also  el-Huweimirat,  although
not  connected  with  the  former  one  of  that  name.'  It  descends
rapidly  to  the  sea,  which  is  not  far  off";  and  Burckhardt  appears
to  have  followed  down  this  valley  and  passed  around  the  second
promontory,  which  he  describes  as  composed  of  black  basaltic
cliff's,  into  which  the  sea  has  worn  several  small  creeks  like  little
lakes,  full  of  fish  and  shells.  Here  Laborde  found  a  bed  of
oysters.  It  seems  also  to  have  been  in  this  valley,  that  Burck-
hardt on  his  return  was  attacked  by  robbers.  Our  guides  pre-
ferred to  avoid  this  promontory  also  by  a  back  route.  Crossing
therefore  the  Wady,  we  continued  on  the  same  course  up  a  side
vaUey  ;  and  came  at  7.55  to  the  top  of  another  pass,  from  which
the  descent  was  more  steep  and  rugged  than  anything  we  had
yet  met  with.  This  brought  us  at  8|-  o'clock  into  Wady  Me-
rakh,*  which  we  followed  down  E.  N.  E.  to  the  sea.  It  is  broad
and  barren  ;  and  further  down  another  large  branch  joins  it  from
the  northwest  bearing  the  same  name.  The  two  open  broadly
together  upon  the  sea,  over  an  immense  slope  of  gravel,  forming
quite  a  promontory.    We  came  out  upon  the  slope  at  half  past

'  In  like  manner  Burckhardt  appa-  '  Wady  Emrag  of  Riippell ;  the  name
reatly  gives  the  name  Mezarik  to  both ;  being  less  corrupted  than  is  often  the  case
though  incorrectly.  with  that  traveller.

i.  234-236

160

FROM  MOUNT  SINAI  TO  'aKABAH.

[Sec.  IV.

nine.  Towards  the  sea  is  a  palm  tree,  and  a  little  further  north
another.  There  was  said  also  to  he  hrackish  water  in  the
vicinity.  Here  some  fishermen  were  encamped  in  two  or  three
black  tents,  with  a  few  goats.  One  of  them  brought  iis  a  Beden
(as  he  called  it)  which  he  had  shot ;  we  bought  it  for  five
piastres,  instead  of  the  twenty  which  he  asked  ;  but  it  turned
out  to  be  a  gazelle.  We  were  now  in  the  territory  of  the
Haiwat ;  that  of  the  Tawarah  and  Terabin  extending  only  to
the  northern  Tib.

Tliis  is  doubtless  the  spot  where  Burckhardt  was  stopped
on  his  way  to  'Akabah,  and  compelled  to  turn  back.  As  seen
from  here,  every  thing  corresponds  to  his  description  ; '  the  line
of  date  trees  around  the  castle  of  'Akabah  bearing  N.  E.  by  E. ;
the  promontory  of  Bus  Kureiyeh  (as  he  calls  it)  ;  and  the  little
island  with  ruins  which  his  guides  told  him  of,  but  which  he
did  not  see ;  having  probably  looked  for  it  (as  I  did  at  first)
further  out  in  the  gulf,  while  it  hes  close  in  near  the  shore  and
directly  under  the  eye.  Burckhardt  however  calls  the  place  not
Wady  Merakh,  but  Wady  Taba' ;  and  in  general  the  names  he
mentions  in  this  vicinity  are  so  different  from  those  we  heard,  or
so  differently  applied,  that  for  a  long  time  we  knew  not  what  to
make  of  it.  We  knew  that  old  'Aid,  Burckhardt's  guide,  must
have  been  well  acquainted  with  the  country ;  and  as  there  was
no  reason  to  suspect  any  deception  on  his  part,  we  were  inclined
to  distrust  the  accuracy  of  TuweUeb's  information.  On  men-
tioning the  discrepancy  to  TuweUeb,  he  said  at  once  that  'Aid
knew  better  than  he,  and  would  not  tell  a  He.  Yet  on  his  in-
quiring in  our  presence  of  the  Arabs  encamped  on  the  spot,  fhey
confirmed  the  account  which  TuweUeb  had  already  given.  I
am  inclined  therefore  to  charge  the  error  to  Burckhardt  himself,
or  rather  to  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed ;  for  he
says  expressly,  that  for  the  two  days  he  was  in  these  parts  he
found  no  opportunity  to  take  any  notes.'  It  is  not  surprising,
that  in  such  a  multitude  of  new  names,  not  noted  at  the  time,
some  should  have  been  forgotten  and  others  apphed  to  wrong
places.  We  here  took  leave  for  the  present  of  this  accomplished
and  lamented  traveller ;  whose  book  hitherto  had  been  our  con-
stant companion.^

Turning  now  to  the  left  we  descended  obliquely  on  a  north-
east ppurse  across  the  gravel  slope,  and  at  9.40  reached  the  shore
•^of  fj*- little  bay  with  a  sandy  beach.    At  10  o'clock  we  were  op-

'    '  Page  509.  faithful  and  intrepid  attendant  of  Burck-

.'   "  Page  517.  hardt,  who  was  of  their  clan,  the  Aulad

*  Old  'Aid,  it  seems,  was  qu'te  a  noted  Sa'id.    He  was  still  living  as  a  poor  man

character  in  the  peninsula.    Tuweilch  had  in  Cairo;  where  he  made  it  his  busuiess

known  him,  and  all  our  Arabs  had  heard  to  procure  fodder  for  camels,
of  him.    'I'hey  also  knew  Uamd,  the  other
i.  230,  237

Apb.4.]

ISLAND  EL-KUREIYEH.

161

posite  the  little  island  above  mentioned,  wliicih  we  judged  to  be
a  good  quarter  of  a  mile  distant  from  the  shore.  It  is  merely  a
narrow  granite  rock  some  three  hundred  yards  in  length,  stretch-
ing from  northwest  to  southeast  with  two  points  or  hillocks,  one
higher  than  the  other,  connected  by  a  lower  isthmus.  On  it  are
tlie  ruins  of  an  Arabian  fortress  with  a  battlemented  wall  running
around  the  whole,  having  two  gateways  with  pointed  arches.
This  is  without  any  doubt  the  formeijpitadel  of  Ailah,  mentioned
by  Abulfeda  as  lying  in  the  sea.  In  A.  D.  1182  it  was  unsuc-
cessfully besieged  with  ships,  by  the  impetuous  Rainald  of
Chatillon ;  and  in  Abulfeda's  time  (about  A.  D.  1300)  it  was
already  abandoned,  and  the  governor  transferred  to  the  castle  on
the  shore.'  The  ruins  therefore  cannot  w§ll  be  referred  to  a
period  later  than  the  twelfth  century.  Our  Arabs  called  this
island  only  el-Kurey,  or  el-Kureiyeh  ;  the  diminutive  of  a  word
which  signifies  a  village,  but  which  they  also  apply  to  the  ruins
of  such  a  place.  The  Arabs  of  the  eastern  coast,  according  to
Lieut.  Wellsted,  give  it  the  name  of  Jezirat  Far'on,  '  Pharaoh's
Island.'     From  the  castle  of  'Akabah  it  bears  W.  S.  W.

Continuing  our  course  we  came  in  twenty  minutes  to  the
little  Wady  el-Kureiyeh,  coming  down  from  the  left,  so  caUed
from  the  island  before  it.  Then  followed  the  sand  and  stones  of
Wady  el-Mezarik,  which  we  passed  at  lOf  o'clock.  Here  low
hills  of  sandstone  and  chalk  interrupted  the  granite  for  a  time.
Further  on,  in  the  broad  plain  of  Wady  Taba',  we  came  at  half
past  11  o'clock  to  a  brackish  well,  with  many  palm  trees.
Among  the  latter  was  one  tree  of  the  species  called  Dom,  the
The'ban  palm,  so  frequent  in  Upper  ?5gypt.  Here  was  also  a
large  square  hole  dug  in  the  ground,  walled  up  with  rough
stones,  Uke  a  cellar ;  in  it  had  once  been  a  well,  but  the  bottom
was  now  covered  with  young  palm  trees.  Higher  up  in  the  val-
ley there  was  said  to  be  better  water.

Beyond  this  valley  or  plain,  the  granite  rocks  come  down  to
the  shore  again,  forming  a  long  black  promontory,  called  by
Burckhardt  Ras  Kureiyeh,  and  by  our  guides  Elteit ;  but  the
Arabs  at  'Akabah  gave  it  the  name  of  Ras  el-Musry,  and  said
that  Elteit  was  the  name  of  a  valley  on  the  eastern  coast.  Ten
minutes  brought  us  to  the  side  of  this  promontory  running  E.  N.
E.  Our  way  led  along  its  base  ;  and  we  turned  the  extremity
at  a  quarter  past  noon.    Hence  the  little  island  bore  S.  65°  W.

'  Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kreuzziige  III.  ii.  '  This  island  has  been  described  by
p.  222.  Abulfed.  Arab,  in  Geogr.  vet.  Lieut.  Wellsted,  Travels,  II.  pp.  140,  142
Scriptores,  ed.  Hudson,  Oxon.  1712.  Tom.  sq. ;  also  by  Laborde  and  by  Kiippell,  Rei-
ni.  p.  41.  Schultens  Ind.  Geogr.  in  Vit.  sen  in  Nubien,  p.  2.52.  Both  these  travel-
Salad,  art.  Aila.  Rommel's  Abulfeda,  p.  lers  have  given  views  of  the  ruins;  that
78,  79.  See  more  under  Ailah,  further  of  Laborde  is  more  elegant,  that  of  Riip-
on.  pell  more  correct.

Vol.  I.— 14*  i.  237,  238

162

FROM  MOUNT  SINAI  TO  'aKABAH.

[Skc.  IV.

wliile  the  shore  before  us  continued  northeast.  Just  beyond
this  point,  a  valley  called  Wady  el-Musry  is  said  to  come  in ;
but  we  did  not  take  note  of  it  at  the  time.  The  mountains  on
the  left  here  retire  from  the  coast ;  and  near  it  are  only  low  hills
of  conglomerated  sand  and  gravel,  almost  of  the  consistence  of
rock,  and  extending  beyond  the  head  of  the  gulf  We  now
began  to  see  the  opening  of  the  great  valley  el-'Arabah.  The
mountains  on  the  east  of  j^are  high  and  picturesque  ;  and  a  low
spot  in  them  marks  the  place  of  Wady  el-Ithm.  At  2  o'clock,
we  passed  a  small  rock  on  the  shore,  vn.th.  a  heap  of  stones  upon
it,  called  Hajr  el-'Alawy, '  Stone  of  the  'Alawy. '  This,  Tuweileb
said,  was  the  ancient  and  proper  boundary  of  the  Tawarah  in
this  quarter,  separating  them  from  the  'Alawin ;  and  here  in
former  days,  both  men  and  beasts  entering  the  territory  of  the
Tawarali  paid  a  tribute.  At  length,  at  a  quarter  past  2  o'clock,
we  reached  the  northwest  corner  of  the  gulf,  and  entered  the
great  Haj  road,  which  comes  down  from  the  western  mountain
and  passes  along  the  shore  at  the  northern  end  of  the  sea.  Just
at  this  point  we  met  a  large  caravan  of  the  Haweitdt  coming
from  the  eastern  desert,  whence  they  had  been  driven  out  by  the
drought.  They  were  now  wandering  towards  the  south  of  Pal-
estine, and  had  with  them  about  seventy  camels  and  many  asses,
but  no  flocks.  These  were  the  first  real  Arabs  of  the  desert  we
had  seen ;  not  wearing  the  turban  like  the  Tawarah,  but  deco-
rated with  the  Kef  iyeh,  a  handkercliief  of  yellow  or  some  glar-
ing colour  thrown  over  the  head,  and  bound  fast  with  a  skein  of
woollen  yarn  ;  the  corners  being  left  loose  and  hanging  down  the
sides  of  the  face  and  neck.  They  were  wild,  savage,  hungry-
lookmg  fellows ;  and  ■we  thought  we  had  much  rather  be  with
our  mild  Tawarah  than  in  their  power.  Tuweileb  held  a  parley
with  them,  wliich  detained  us  fifteen  minutes.

From  this  point,  wliich  we  left  at  2^  o'clock,  the  north  shore
of -the  g  ulf  runs  southeast  almost  in  a  straight  line  nearly  to  the
castle  of  'Akabah.  The  general  course  of  Wady  el-'Arabah,
taken  about  the  middle,  is  here  N.  N.  E.  Its  width  at  this  end
is  about  four  geographical  miles  ;  tarther  north  it  is  wider.  The
mountains  on  either  side  are  high  ;  those  on  the  west  fifteen  to
eighteen  hundred  feet,  and  those  on  the  east  two  thousand  to
twenty-five  hundred  feet.  The  valley  was  full  of  sand-drifts  as
far  as  the  eye  could  reach ;  and  seemed  to  have  little  or  no  ac-
clivity towards  the  north.  The  torrents,  Avliich  in  the  rainy
season  stream  into  it  from  the  adjacent  mountains,  flow  along  its
western  side,  so  far  as  they  are  not  absorbed  by  the  sand  ;  and
enter  the  sea  at  the  northwest  corner.  There  is  no  appearance
of  a  water-course  in  any  other  i)art  of  the  valley.  Along  the
Bhore  from  this  point  nearly  to  the  castle,  the  Avaters  of  the  gulf

i.  239,  240

Apr.  4.]

HEAD  OP  THE  GULF.

163

have  cast  up  an  unbroken  bank  of  sand  and  gravel  which  is
higher  than  the  level  of  the  Wady,  and  would  prevent  the  pas-
sage of  any  stream.  On  the  north  of  the  path,  towards  the
western  side,  a  large  tract  has  the  appearance  of  moist  marshy
ground,  seemingly  impregnated  with  nitre,  and  looking  as  if
water  had  recently  been  standing  upon  it ;  which  sinking  or  dry-
ing away,  had  left  an  incrustation  on  many  portions  of  the  sur-
face. This  tract  is  mostly  naked  of  vegetation ;  yet  the  parts
in  the  vicinity  are  fuU  of  shrubs,  chiefly  of  the  Ghurkud ;  and
seen  from  a  distance,  the  ground  appears  as  if  covered  with  a
luxuriant  vegetation.  This  however  vanishes  on  a  nearer  ap-
proach. We  looked  in  vain  in  the  western  part  of  the  valley  for
traces  of  ruins  of  any  kind ;  we  had  hoped  to  find  something  by
wliich  to  fix  a  site  for  Ezion-geber.  Towards  the  eastern  side
and  around  the  castle  is  a  large  grove  of  palm  trees,  extending
both  ways  for  some  distance  along  the  shore.

At  3.40  we  reached  the  end  of  the  straight  part  of  the  shore,
which  here  takes  a  direction  due  south  for  perhaps  half  an  hour ;
when  it  again  curves  around  S.  S.  W.  to  the  general  hne  of  the
eastern  coast.  At  this  point  the  extensive  moimds  of  mbbish,
which  mark  the  site  of  Ailah,  the  Elath  of  Scripture,  were  on
our  left.  They  present  nothing  of  interest,  except  as  indicating
that  a  very  ancient  city  has  here  utterly  perished.  We  did  not  learn
that  they  have  now  a  name.  Further  east  than  these,  beyond  a
gully  coming  down  from  the  eastern  mountain,  are  the  ruins  of
an  Arab  "\'illage,  mere  walls  of  stone  once  covered  probably  with
flat  roofs  of  palm  leaves,  like  the  dwellings  now  just  around  the
castle.  Many  of  the  palm  trees  are  here  enclosed  in  reservoirs,
in  order  to  retain  the  water  of  the  rainy  season  around  them.
At  3.50  we  reached  the  castle,  and  entered  the  huge  portal
from  the  northwest  through  strong  and  massive  doors  hea\^ly
cased  with  iron  ;  the  whole  passage-way  being  lined  with  many
Arabic  inscriptions.

The  castle  is  an  oblong  quadrangle  of  liigh  tliick  walls,  with
a  tower  or  bastion  at  each  of  the  four  corners.'  All  around  the
wall  on  the  inside  is  a  row  of  chambers  or  magazines  one  story
high,  with  a  sohd  flat  roof,  forming  a  platform  around  the  inte-
rior of  the  castle.  On  this  platform  are  erected  in  several  parts
temporary  huts  or  chambers,  covered  with  the  stalks  of  palm
leaves,  and  occupied  apparently  by  the  garrison  as  dwellings.
We  did  not  learn  the  time  when  the  fortress  was  built ;  the
date  is  doubtless  contained  in  some  of  the  numerous  inscriptions  ;
but  we  were  so  much  taken  up  with  other  matters,  that  this
point  was  overlooked.  Burckhardt  says  it  was  erected,  as  it  now
stands,  by  the  Sultan  el-Ghuiy  of  Egypt  in  the  sixteenth  century.

A  view  of  the  castle  of  'Alcabah  is  given  by  Riippell  and  by  Laborde.

i.  240-242

164

'akabah.

[Sec.  rV.

This  is  not  improbable ;  though  I  am  not  aware  of  the  authority
on  which  the  assertion  rests.  The  garrison  consisted  at  this
time  of  thirty-three  undisciplined  soldiers,  Mugharibeh  or  West-
ern Africans,  as  they  were  called,  but  actually  Bedawin  from
Upper  Egypt.  In  command  of  these  were  a  captain  of  the  gate,
a  gunner,  a  Wakil  or  commissary,  and  over  all  a  governor.

As  we  entered  the  fortress,  the  governor  was  sitting  in  the
open  air  on  a  small  platform  under  the  windows  of  a  room  near
the  southwest  corner  of  the  court.  He  received  us  with  apa-
thetic civility,  invited  us  to  sit  upon  his  platform,  ordered  coffee,
and  meantime  read  the  letters  which  we  had  brought  from  Habib
EfFendi  and  the  governor  of  Suez.  He  was  a  young  man,  who
had  been  here  only  four  or  five  months  ;  his  predecessor  having
been  recalled,  it  was  said,  on  account  of  incivility  to  former
travellers.  There  was  therefore  in  his  whole  demeanour  towards
us,  now  and  afterwards,  an  air  of  studied  endeavour,  not  indeed
to  please  and  gratify  us,  but  so  to  conduct  as  to  avoid  complaint
and  future  censure.  The  room  before  which  he  was  sitting,  was
assigned  to  us ;  it  seemed  to  be  his  usual  haU  of  audience,  with
coarse  gratings  for  vsdndows,  but  no  glass.  Here  our  luggage
was  deposited,  and  we  spread  our  beds ;  and  as  the  walls  of  the
room  were  of  stone  and  the  floor  of  earth,  and  cold,  we  escaped
the  usual  annoyance  from  bugs  and  fleas,  for  which  the  place  is
famous.  Scorpions  are  also  said  to  be  in  plenty  here ;  but  we
saw  none  of  them.  They  are  caught  by  cats,  of  which  there  are
great  numbers  in  the  castle,  as  we  found  at  night  to  our  cost. —
Our  Tawarah  with  their  camels  betook  themselves  for  the  night
without  the  walls.

We  were  yet  sitting  and  chatting  with  the  governor,  when  it
was  discovered  that  the  palm  leaf  roof  of  one  of  the  huts  over-
against  us  had  caught  fire ;  and  suddenly  it  burst  out  into  a
terrific  blaze,  rising  along  and  above  the  wall  of  the  castle.  AU
was  now  confusion  and  clamour  and  hurrying  to  and  fro ;  the
governor  forgot  his  pipe,  his  slippers,  and  his  dignity,  and  rushed
eagerly  among  the  crowd,  distributing  his  orders,  to  which  no
man  listened  ;  while  to  heighten  the  alarm,  it  was  now  announced
that  the  powder  magazine  of  the  fortress  was  directly  under  the
flames.  Fortunately  there  was  nothing  but  stone-work  in  the
vicinity,  and  water  in  plenty  was  near ;  so  that  the  fire  was  soon
extinguished  with  little  damage,  after  vast  clamour  and  uproar
among  the  Arabs.  We  were  not  able  to  satisfy  ourselves,  whether
the  story  of  the  powder  had  any  foundation  or  not.

We  now  withdrew  to  our  room,  and  endeavoured  to  make
use  of  the  time  for  writing ;  but  the  idea  of  our  wishing  to  be
alone  was  incomprehensible  to  our  new  friends ;  and  we  might
as  well  have  set  ourselves  down  in  the  middle  of  the  court.  My

i.  242,  243

Apr.  4.]

THE  GOVERNOR.     ALARM  OF  FIRE.

165

companion  wishing  to  speak  with  the  governor  by  himself,  sought
him  out  in  liis  private  room,  and  found  him  less  reserved  and
more  friendly  than  he  had  been  in  pubHc.  Indeed,  it  is  well  un-
derstood, that  all  the  officers  mentioned  above  are  only  spies
upon  each  other ;  and  the  governor  had  regulated  his  demeanour
in  public  accordingly.  Meantime,  as  our  spokesman  was  absent,
our  own  apartment  was  left  more  in  quiet.

In  the  evening  we  were  invited  by  the  governor  to  coffee  in
his  private  room,  up  one  flight  of  stairs  near  the  southwest  bas-
tion. The  room  was  small  and  entirely  naked,  with  a  floor  of
earth  and  a  roof  of  the  stalks  of  palm  leaves.  In  one  comer
was  a  wooden  bench  or  platform  about  three  feet  high,  on  which
were  his  carpet  and  cushions ;  in  another  part  a  little  basin  or
hearth  for  making  coffee ;  and  these  with  one  or  two  mats  on
the  floor  made  up  the  furniture.  We  were  admitted  to  his
divan ;  others  who  came  in,  took  their  places  on  the  mats  or
squatted  down  on  their  feet.  This  soirie  was  well  meant,  but
proved  to  be  rather  tedious.

In  coming  by  the  way  of  'Akabah,  it  had  been  our  plan  to
proceed  directly  to  Wady  Mftsa,  either  along  the  'Arabah,  or
through  the  eastern  mountains,  and  thence  to  Hebron  ;  and  we
had  been  habitually  led  to  look  upon  this  place  as  perhaps  the
most  critical  point  in  our  whole  journey.    The  country  between
it  and  Wady  Mtisa,  including  the  'Arabah,  is  in  possession  of
the  'Ala^vin,  a  branch  or  clan  of  the  great  tribe  Haweitat ;  who
of  course  have  the  right  of  conducting  all  travellers  passing
through  their  territory.    They  are  a  lawless  tribe,  standing  in
no  good  repute  among  their  neighbours ;  and  their  Sheikh
Husein  has  of  late  years  become  especially  notorious  among
travellers,  as  faithless  and  mean-spirited.'    We  therefore  antici-
pated difficulty  and  much  petty  annoyance  and  imposition,  both
here  and  on  our  way  to  Hebron  ;  though  we  knew  that  the  fear
of  the  Pasha  would  exempt  us  from  all  open  attempts  upon  our
persons  or  property.    We  had  never  thought  of  taking  any  other
route.    We  now  learned,  however,  that  Husein  and  his  tribe
were  encamped  at  the  distance  of  two  days'  journey  from  'Aka-
bah, near  Ma'an ;  and  that  it  would  require  at  least  four  days'
time  to  get  him  here ;  besides  the  delay  that  would  be  incident
to  making  a  bargain  and  other  preparations  for  the  further  jour-
ney.   If  therefore  we  sent  for  him,  we  must  be  content  to  wait
here  pent  up  in  the  fortress  for  five  or  six  days,  without  employ-
ment or  interest,  and  exposed  to  perpetual  annoyance  from  Arab
curiosity  and  official  impertinence.

'  This  is  the  same  person  whom  Schn-    11.  p.  394.    AVe  heard  nothing  of  any  such
bert  calls   "  Emir  Salem  of  Gaza,  the    name  or  attributes,
great  Sheikh  of  the  Araba ; "  Reise.  etc.

i.  243-245

166

'akabah.

[Sec.  IV.

The  idea  of  such  a  loss  of  time  was  insupportable  ;  and  we
looked  about  for  some  way  of  escaping  at  a  less  expense  from
this  castle,  which  we  already  began  to  dread  in  anticipation  as  a
prison-house.    Our  Tawarah  could  not  take  us  to  Wady  Musa
i»  without  invading  the  rights  of  another  tribe,  and  exposing  them-

selves to  repiisals  ;  but  both  they  and  the  governor  said  they
could  carry  us  across  the  western  desert  to  Gaza  or  the  vicinity,
without  danger  of  being  interfered  with  by  any  one.  On  further
inquiry,  we  found  also  that  the  same  route  would  lead  us  to
Gaza  or  Hebron,  as  we  pleased  ;  and  we  need  not  decide  for
either  until  we  should  approach  the  confines  of  Palestine.  The
journey,  it  was'  said,  would  occupy  five  or  six  days.  As  this  was
a  route  for  the  most  part  hitherto  untrodden  by  any  modern  tra-
veller, and  we  should  thus  avoid  delay  and  all  necessity  of  inter-
course with  the  'Alawin,  we  determined  (if  possible)  to  make  a
new  contract  with  our  faithful  Tawarah,  and  proceed  in  this  di-
rection ;  leaving  a  visit  to  Wady  Miisa  to  be  afterwards  con-
nected with  our  contemplated  excursion  to  the  south  end  of  the
Dead  Sea.  On  inquiring  of  the  Tawarah,  they  expressed  a
willingness  to  go  with  us  ;  but,  taking  their  tone  from  the  at-
mosphere of  the  castle,  or  from  what  they  had  heard  of  the  'Ala-
win,  they  demanded  for  each  camel  two  hundred  piastres  for  the
journey  ;  a  larger  sum  than  we  had  paid  them  for  the  whole
distance  from  Cairo  to  this  place.  So  the  matter  rested  f6r  the
night.

Thursday,  April  5th.  Forenoon.  This  morning  the  ne-
gotiation was  resumed  with  an  offer  of  one  hundred  and  twenty
piastres  on  our  part,  and  a  demand  from  the  Arabs  of  one  hun-
dred and  seventy,  which  they  afterwards  abated  to  one  hundred
and  fifty.  As  they  were  sitting  with  us  to  talk  the  matter  over,
the  governor  came  in  with  his  attendants  and  cushions  ;  and
seating  himself,  ordered  coffee  to  be  made  and  served  round.
Our  own  breakfast  was  now  brought  ;  and  our  own  Arabs  had
the  tact  to  go  away.  The  governor  and  his  attendants  re-
mained ;  but  declined  partaking  of  the  meal  to  which  we  in-
vited them,  except  so  far  as  to  drink  a  cup  of  tea.  They  after-
wards withdrew  ;  and  our  Arabs  again  took  up  the  negotiation.
After  long  and  grave  discussion,  the  result  was,  that  the  inter-
mediate sum  of  one  hundred  and  thirty-five  piastres  was  agreed
to  by  both  parties.  In  the  place  of  the  dead  camel,  one  of  Tu-
weileb's  was  to  carry  a  load  ;  and  we  undertook  to  furnish  pro-
visions for  the  men  upon  the  way.  This  was  no  great  matter,
for  their  wants  are  few  and  their  palates  not  difficult.  Bread
and  rice  are  luxuries  which  they  seldom  enjoy  ;  and  of  these  we
had  an  ample  supjjly.  The  commissary  in  the  castle  had  also  a
few  stores  for  sale,  at  enormous  prices  ;  but  we  bought  little  ex-

i.  245,  240

Afb.6.]

NEGOTIATIONS.  ENVIRONS,

167

cept  a  supply  of  lentiles  or  small  beans,  which  are  common  in
Egypt  and  Syria  under  the  name  of  'Adas  ;  the  same  from
which  the  pottage  was  made  for  which  Esau  sold  his  birthright.
We  found  them  very  palatable,  and  could  well  conceive,  that
to  a  weary  hunter,  faint  with  hunger,  they  might  be  quite  a
dainty. '

While  these  negotiations  were  going  on,  I  took  a  stroU  alone
without  the  walls  along  the  shore.  The  castle  is  situated  quite
at  the  eastern  part  of  Wady  el-'Arabah,  on  the  gravel  slope
which  here  rises  from  the  water  towards  the  eastern  mountain.
Directly  back  of  the  castle  the  mountain  is  high,  and  bears  the
name  of  Jebel  el-Ashhab  ;  but  further  south  the  hiUs  near  the
coast  become  much  lower.  The  slope  back  of  the  castle  is  cut
up  with  gullies  from  mountain  torrents  ;  without  however  pre-
senting any  large  and  distinct  water-course.  Wady  el-Ithm
enters  the  'Arabah  further  north  on  the  same  side  ;  and  I  was
disappointed  in  not  finding,  am-where  in  the  latter  valley,  more
traces  of  the  waters  which  must  rush  into  it  during  the  rainy
season.  Indeed  very  little  water  would  seem  to  flow  along  it
into  the  gulf ;  the  greater  part  being  probably  absorbed  by  the
sand.

On  the  shore  I  tried  the  experiment  which  both  RuppeU
and  Laborde  mention,  of  obtaining  fresh  water  by  digging  holes
in  the  sand  when  the  tide  is  out.  It  was  in  part  successful ;
though  less  so  than  I  had  been  led  to  expect  from  their  accounts.
On  digging  a  hole  with  the  hands,  it  gradually  filled  with  water,
which  at  first  was  salt  ;  but  when  this  was  removed,  the  hole
again  became  slowly  filled  with  fresh  water.  The  Arabs  had
dug  several  larger  holes  just  by,  in  which  fresh  water  was  stand-
ing. The  language  of  Laborde  seems  to  imply,  that  the  chief
supply  of  water  for  the  fortress  is  obtained  in  this  way  ;  but  this
•is  not  the  case  ;  as  there  is  a  large  well  within  the  walls,  only
fifteen  or  twenty  feet  deep,  which  furnishes  an  abundance  of
good  water.  There  are  also  other  hke  wells  in  the  vicinity  of
the  fortress.  Indeed  the  fresh  water  on  the  shore  is  apparently
on  about  the  same  level  with  the  bottom  of  these  wells  ;  and  the
supply  of  both  probably  comes  from  water,  that  filters  its  way
down  from  the  eastern  mountain  under  the  gravel  which  here
forms  a  slope  quite  to  the  sea.  This  appearance  of  water  is  con-
fined to  the  shore  near  the  castle  ;  for  I  repeated  the  same  ex-
periment afterwards  in  several  places  towards  the  middle  of
Wady  el-'Arabah  without  the  slightest  success.

Immediately  around  the  fortress,  several  families  of  the
Arabs  'Amran  have  taken  up  their  abode,  and  built  themselves

'  Gen.  25,  34.    The  name  in  Hebrew  and  Arabic  is  the  same.

L  246-248

168

'akabah.

[Sec.  rV.

huts  of  stone  ;  lono;  low  rude  hovels,  roofed  only  with  the  stalks
of  palm  leaves.  The  proper  territory  of  the  trihe  commences
here,  and  includes  the  mountains  further  south  and  southeast  ;
hut  these  appeared  to  he  a  sort  of  dependants  on  the  castle,
employed  in  its  service  as  menials.  The  number  would  seem  to
have  been  formerly  much  greater  ;  as  dwellings  of  the  same  kind
in  ruins  extend  northwest  nearly  to  the  mounds  of  Ailah.  Half
an  hour  south  of  the  fortress,  in  the  mouth  of  the  Wady  Elteit,
is  the  ruin  of  a  small  Arab  fort  or  castle,  called  Kusr  el-Be-
dawy  ;  which  may  perhaps  have  served  for  the  protection  of  the
Haj  or  caravan  of  pilgrims  before  the  present  larger  one  was
built. — 'According  to  Ruppell's  observations,  the  castle  of  'Aka-
bah lies  in  Lat.  29°  30'  58"  N.  and  Long.  32°  40'  30"  E.  from
Paris,  or  35°  0  54''  E.  from  Greenwich.'  From  it  the  little
island  of  Kureiyeh  with  its  ruins  bears  W.  S.  W.  at  the  distance
of  eight  or  ten  miles.

On  returning  into  the  fortress  at  10  o'clock,  I  found  all  our
own  preparations  completed  ;  and  we  wished  to  set  off  without
delay.  But  as  we  were  about  to  take  a  route  which  oxir  Tawarah
had  never  travelled,  it  was  necessary  to  have  with  us  a  guide  ac-
quainted with  the  country.  With  such  an  one  the  governor  un-
dertook to  furnish  us  ;  and  besides,  he  went  very  methodically
to  work,  and  gave  and  took  papers  to  secure  both  himself  and  us.
These  were  :  First,  an  acknowledgment  from  us,  that  he  had
fulfilled  to  our  satisfaction  the  requisitions  contained  in  the  letter
of  Habib  Eifendi.  Second,  a  Tezlcirah  or  protection  for  us,
stating  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  and  that  no  one  had  a
right  to  interfere  with  our  journey,  and  forbidding  all  inter-
ference.* Third,  a  pledge  from  our  Tawarah  Arabs  for  our  safe
conduct  to  Gaza,  etc.  The  preparation  of  these  papers,  the  in-
structions to  the  guide,  the  loading  of  the  camels,  and  the  like,
occupied  the  whole  time  till  1  o'clock  P.  M.

As  we  were  leaving  the  castle,  we  tendered  as  a  matter  of
course  to  the  governor  a  present,  such  as  experience  had  shown
us  to  be  about  "the  thing."  He  declined  it  however  for  him-
self, with  the  remark,  that  the  other  three  officers  were  also  ac-
customed to  receive  presents.    My  companion  replied,  that  we

■  See  Berghaus'  Memoir  zu  seiner  Karte  2°  29' ;  so  that  a  like  variation  is  found

von  Syrien,  pp.  28,  30. — This  gives  the  at  both  places.    Hence,  as  the  longitude

difference  of  longitude  between  'Akabah  of  Suez  has  been  several  times  detei  inincd,

and  Suez  at  2'  29  21".    Tlie  longitude  KiippeU's  specification  at 'Akabah  is  to  be

of 'Akabah  given  by  Moresby  on  his  Chart  preferred;  especially  as  that  of  Moresby

of  tlie  Ked  Sea  is  35^  6'  K.  from  Urcen-  was  reckoned  by  chronometer  from  Bom-

wich,  equal  to  32"  4.5'  36  '  E.  from  Paris;  bay.

and  differing  from  the  specification  of  This  paper  is  so  curious  in  its  details,

Riippell  by  more  than  5  minutes.    But  that  I  give  a  translation  of  it  in  Note  XXI,

the  distance  between  'Akabah  and  Suez  at  the  end  of  the  volume,
on  the  same  chart  is  in  like  manner  only

i.  248,  249

Apb.  5.]

PAPERS.  PRESENTS.

169

had  had  nothing  to  do  with  them,  and  had  not  even  seen  them
all ;  yet  if  he  chose  to  divide  the  money  among  them,  we  had
no  ohjection ;  or  if  he  would  tell  i;s  how  much  more  was  neces-
sary, and  would  give  us  a  receipt  to  be  shown  to  the  consul  in
Cairo,  they  should  have  it.  But  this  he  did  not  seem  much  to
relish,  and  ran  shuffling  after  us  in  his  slippers  to  return  the
money  ;  probably  thinking  it  was  not  enough  to  satisfy  all  his
brother  spies.  Indeed  we  found  the  whole  establishment  to  be
a  nest  of  harpies ;  and  were  heartily  glad  to  quit  the  castle.
Yet,  for  a  traveller  who  has  a  bargain  to  make  with  the  'Alawin,
it  might  be  well  to  propitiate  all  these  dignitaries  by  presents
of  small  articles  of  dress,  such  as  a  cap,  handkerchief,  or  the
]ike,  rather  than  money  ;  for  they  can  be  of  great  assistance  to
him  in  dealing  with  these  most  faithless  of  the  Bedawin.

Just  before  setting  off,  we  saw  in  one  corner  the  process  of
manufacturing  the  goats'  hair  cloth  of  which  the  common  Arab
cloaks  are  made.  A  woman  had  laid  her  warp  along  the  ground
for  the  length  of  several  yards,  and  sat  at  one  end  of  it  under
a  small  shed,  with  a  curtain  before  her  to  ward  off  the  eyes  of
passers-by.  She  wove  by  passing  the  woof  through  with  her
hand,  and  then  driving  it  up  with  a  flat  piece  of  board  having  a
thin  edge.

In  very  ancient  times  there  lay  at  this  extremity  of  the
eastern  gulf  of  the  Ked  Sea,  two  towns  of  note  in  Scripture
history,  Ezion-geber  and  Elath.  The  former  is  mentioned  first,
as  a  station  of  the  Israelites,  from  which  they  returned  to
Kadesh  probably  a  second  time  ;  and  both  towns  are  again  named
after  that  people  had  left  Mount  Hor,  as  the  point  where  they
turned  eastward  from  the  Red  Sea  in  order  to  pass  around  on
the  eastern  side  of  the  land  of  Edom. '  That  they  were  near
each  other  is  also  said  expressly  in  another  place.''

Ezion-geber  became  famous  as  the  port  where  Solomon,  and
after  him  Jehoshaphat,  built  fleets  to  carry  on  a  commerce  with
Ophir.^  Josephus  says  it  lay  near  Mlana.,  and  was  afterwards
called  Berenice.*  But  it  is  mentioned  no  more ;  and  no  trace
of  it  seems  now  to  remain ;  unless  it  be  in  the  name  of  a  small
Wady  with  brackish  water,  el-Ghudyan,  opening  into  el-'Arabah
from  the  western  mountain  some  distance  north  of  'Akabah.'

'  Num.  33,  35.    21,  4.    Deut.  2,  8,  is  beside  [or  at]  Elath,  on  the  shore  of  the

"  by  way  of  the  plain  [which  extends]  Red  Sea."    Compare  2  Chron.  8,  17.  18.

firam  Eluth  and  Ezion-geber."    The  He-  '  See  the  preceding  Note  ;  also  1  Kings

brew  word  here  translated  'plain'  is  'Ara-  22,  49.  [48.]

baJi,  the  same  as  the  present  Arabic  name  *  Autiq.  8.  6.  4.

of  the  great  valley.  '  However  different  the  names  el-Ghud-

*  1  Kings  9,  26.    "  Eidon-geber  which  yan  and  Ezion   may  be  in  appearancei

Vol.  I.— 15  i.  249.  250

170

'akabah.

[Sec.  IV.

May  it  not  be,  perhaps,  that  the  northera  shallow  portion  of
the  gulf  anciently  extended  up  to  this  fountain  ?  In  that  case,
Elath  was  situated  on  a  projecting  point  south  of  the  northern
extremity  of  the  gulf,  just  where  the  great  road  from  Petra  on
the  east  of  the  mountains,  descended  through  Wady  el-Ithm
to  the  shore.'

Elath,  called  by  the  Greeks  and  Eomans  AUah  and  ^lana,
appears  to  have  supplanted  by  degrees  its  less  fortunate  neigh-
bour ;  perhaps  after  having  been  rebuilt  by  Azariah  (Uzziah)
about  800  B.  C.  Some  fifty  years  later  it  was  taken  from  the
Jews  by  Rezin  king  of  Syria,  and  never  came  again  into  their
possession.'^  The  notices  of  this  city  found  in  Greek  and  Roman
writers,  are  fully  collected  in  the  great  works  of  Cellarius  and
Reland.^  In  the  days  of  Jerome  it  was  stiLl  a  place  of  trade  to
India ;  and  a  Roman  legion  was  stationed  here.  Theodoret  a
little  later  remarks,  that  it  had  formerly  been  a  great  emporium,
and  that  ships  in  his  time  sailed  from  thence  to  India.^  Ailah
became  early  the  seat  of  a  Christian  church ;  and  the  names  of
four  bishops  of  Ailah  are  found  in  various  councils  from  A.  D.
320  to  A.  D.  536.'  In  the  sixth  century  also,  Procopius  speaks
of  its  being  inhabited  by  Jews  under  the  Roman  dominion.'  A
few  Notitice  of  ecclesiastical  and  other  writers,  which  mention
AUah,  refer  also  to  this  period.'^  But  when  in  A.  D.  630,  Mu-
hammed  had  carried  his  victorious  arms  northward  as  far  as  to
Tebuk,  it  was  the  signal  for  the  Christian  communities  of  Ara-
bia Petraea  to  submit  voluntarily  to  the  conqueror,  and  obtain
peace  by  the  payment  of  tribute.  Among  these  was  John,  the
Christian  ruler  of  AUah,  who  became  bound  to  pay  an  annual
tribute  of  three  hundred  gold  pieces.*

From  this  time  onward,  AUah  became  lost  under  the  shroud
of  Muhammedan  darkness;  from  which  it  has  fuUy  emerged
only  during  the  present  century.  It  is  simply  mentioned  by  the
supposed  Ibn  Haukal  perhaps  in  the  eleventh  century  ;  and
after  the  middle  of  the  twelfth,  Edrisi  describes  it  as  a  small
town  frequented  by  the  Arabs,  who  were  now  its  masters,  and
forming  an  important  point  in  the  route  between  Cairo  and  Me-

yet  the  letters  in  Arabic  and  Hebrew  all  '  Cellarius  Notit.  Orb.  II.  p.  682  sq.

correspond.    The  name  'Asi/un  mentioned  Relaiul  Pulaistina,  p.  554  sq.

by  Makrizi,  (as  quoted  by  Burckhardt,  p.  *  llieron.  Onomast.  art.  Ailath.  Theo-

511,)  seems  merely  to  refer  to  tlic  ancient  doret  Quxst.  in  .Icr.  c.  49.

city,  of  which  he  had  heard  or  read. —  '  Le  Quien  Oriens  Christ  III.  p.  759.

Schubert  suggests  that  the  little  island  Reland  Pal.  p.  5.5G.

Kureiyeh  may  have  been  the  site  of  Kzioii-  °  Procop,  de  Bell.  Pers.  1.  19.

gcber ;  but  this,  as  we  have  seen,  is  merely  '  See  tbese  collected  in  Reland's  Pa-

a  small  rock  in  the  sea,  300  yards  long.  la?st.  pp.  215-230.

Reiso,  etc.  II.  p.  370.  '  Abulfcdie    Annales    Muslemici,  ed.

'  I  owe  this  suggestion  (1855)  to  Dr.  Adler,  178y  inqairing  after  the  animals  which  a       '  Compare  the  similar  traits  of  law
tribe  possessed,  we  were  always  able  to    among  the  Tawarah,  p.  H0-H2  above,
asoeirtain  the  nature  of  their  country,
i.  26«,  209

Ape.  9.]

WADYS.  ALARM.

183

Monday,  April  9th. .  Soon  after  retiring  to  rest  last  night,
we  had  quite  a  little  alarm.  For  two  or  three  days  a  lean  half
starved  Arab  dog,  probably  from  the  Haiwat  or  Haweitat,  had
attached  himself  to  our  caravan,  and  like  his  masters  was  par-
ticularly attentive  to  Komeh  and  his  kitchen.  About  11  o'clock,
when  I  was  already  sound  asleep,  this  dog,  himself  half  wolf,  be-
gan to  bark.  This  was  an  indication  that  some  strange  person
or  animal  was  near  us  ;  and  we  remembered  the  barking  of  old
'Aid's  dog,  the  night  before  Burckhardt  and  his  party  were  at-
tacked by  robbers.  In  the  present  case  it  might  be  some  prowl-
ing hyaena  ;  or  some  of  our  visitors  of  yesterday,  looking  around
for  an  opportunity  of  thieving  ;  or  it  might  be  also  a  party  of
armed  robbers  from  beyond  the  'Arabah.  We  had  heard  indeed
at  'Akabah,  that  two  tribes  of  that  region,  the  Beni  Sukhr  and
the  Hejaya,  were  at  war  with  the  Arabs  of  the  desert  et-Tih,
often  committing  robberies  in  the  'Arabah  itself,  and  sometimes
extending  their  marauding  expeditions  into  the  western  desert  ;
and  it  was  not  impossible,  that  we  might  now  be  threatened
with  a  visit  of  this  nature.  Our  Arabs  were  evidently  alarmed.
They  said,  if  thieves,  they  would  steal  upon  us  at  midnight  ;
if  robbers,  they  would  come  down  upon  us  towards  morning.
All  proposed  and  promised  to  watch  during  the  whole  night  ;
and  we  also  thought  it  best  to  sit  up  in  turn.  But  we  heard
nothing  further  ;  and  the  morning  found  us  undisturbed.  One
of  our  'Amran  guides  professed  afterwards  to  have  found  the
tracks  of  a  hyaena  not  far  from  the  tent ;  or  the  alarm  may  very
probably  have  proceeded  from  a  thief,  who  ■withdrew  at  the  bark-
ing of  the  dog.  We  now  took  the  poor  dog  into  more  favour  ;
he  proved  a  faithful  guard,  and  continued  with  us  all  the  way  to
Jerusalem.  But  his  Bedawy  habits  were  too  strong  to  be  over-
come ;  and  he  vanished  as  we  entered  the  city.

We  were  again  upon  our  way  at  5|  o'clock,  ascending  by  a
small  branch  Wady,  called  Kaudh  el-Humarah,  through  a  tract
of  undulating  coimtry,  of  limestone  formation  lil^e  all  this  desert,
and  covered  with  black  flints  and  pebbles.  At  7  o'clock  we  came
out  of  this  Wady  and  up  a  low  ascent  to  a  small  plain,  crossing
the  heads  of  several  more  Ridhan  or  dry  brooks  of  the  same  name.
At  tliis  place,  two  or  three  years  before,  a  robbery  had  been  com-
mitted by  a  party  of  the  Hejaya,  one  of  the  tribes  "  from  the
rising  sun,"  on  a  caravan  of  the  'Amran.  They  fell  upon  the
caravan  as  it  was  encamped  at  night,  seizing  the  plunder  and
taking  the  lives  of  one  or  two.

Our  road  now  led  ovei»a  most  desert  tract  of  swelling  hills,
covered  in  like  manner  with  black  tlints  ;  our  course  being  still
N.  by  W.  towards  Jebel  'Araif.  It  7.20  the  cliff  el-Mukrah
bore  N.  E.  while  the  western  end  of  its  high  ridge  bore  north.

i.  269-271

18.4

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

Ten  minutes  further  on,  the  road  from  'Akabah  through  Wady
Beyaneh  fell  into  ours  from  the  right.  At  7.40  we  crossed  a
Wady  running  off  to  the  right  to  Wady  el-GhQdhaghidh  and
60  to  el-'Arabah.  Ascending  again  slightly  to  a  small  plateau,
we  came  immediately  upon  the  water-shed,  or  dividing  line  be-
tween the  waters  of  el-'Arabah  and  those  of  the  Mediterranean ;
the  former  drained  off  by  the  Jerafeh,  and  the  latter  by  the  great
Wady  el-'Arish.  At  no  great  distance  on  our  left  were  low
chalky  cliffs  of  singular  form,  apparently  spurs  from  the  ridges
we  had  before  seen  in  that  direction.  Descending  a  little,  we
immediately  struck  and  crossed  Wady  el-Haikibeh  at  8  o'clock,
here  running  towards  the  northeast,  but  sweeping  round  again
afterwards  to  the  northwest,  so  that  our  path  crossed  it  a  second
time  after  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  It  is  full  of  shrubs.  We
now  continued  along  its  side  N.  N.  W.  until  a  quarter  past  nine
o'clock,  and  then  left  it  running  to  join  the  Kureiyeh,  a  tribu-
tary of  Wady  el-'Arish.  Just  beyond  this  Wady  were  the
chalky  cliffs  above  mentioned  ;  and  as  we  left  them  behind,  other
low  ridges  appeared  on  our  left  at  different  distances  of  five,  ten,
or  fifteen  miles.  We  now  rode  over  another  barren  flinty  tract,
with  a  few  small  Ridhan  running  towards  the  Haikibeh.  In
some  spots  we  found  veiy  small  tufts  of  grass  springing  up
among  the  pebbles,  the  effect  of  recent  rains.  Our  guides  said,
that  in  those  years  when  there  is  plenty  of  rain,  grass  springs  up
in  this  way  all  over  the  face  of  the  desert.  In  such  seasons,
they  said,  the  Arabs  are  kings.  At  10  o'clock  a  path  went  off
to  the  right  leading  to  some  wells  of  sweet  water  called  el-
Mayein,  lying  in  a  direction  N.  by  E.  in  the  mountains  beyond
Jebel  'Araif.  This  path  passes  to  the  right  of  'Araif,  over  the
low  part  of  the  ridge  extending  east  from  that  mountain  ;  and
falls  again  into  our  road  further  on.

We  reached  Wady  el-Kureiyeh  at  10.10,  coming  down  from
near  the  ridge  of  el-Mukrah,  which  was  now  not  far  off.  Here  a
round  mountain  on  our  left  called  Jebel  Ikhrimm  bore  W.  by  N.
The  Kureiyeh  bends  around  and  passes  at  the  northern  base  of
this  hill ;  and  further  west,  about  half  a  day's  journey  from
the  point  where  we  crossed,  there  are  in  it  pits  of  rain  water,
Emshash,  forming  a  station  on  the  great  road  from  the  convent
to  Gaza. — Another  similar  flinty  tract  now  succeeded,  called
Hemadet  et-'Anaz,  over  which  our  course  was  N.  N.  W.  A
clayey  Wady  called  Abu  Tin  followed  at  12.50;  and  another,
the  deep  bed  of  a  torrent,  el-Khuraizeh,  at  half  past  one ;  both
running  southwest  into  the  Kureiyeh.  The  country  now  became
open  quite  to  the  base  of  Jebel  'Araif  en-Nakah,  which  had  so
long  been  our  landmark.  The  mountain  is  of  a  conical  form,
five  or  six  hundred  feet  high,  consisting  of  limestone  thickly

i.  271.  272

JEBEL  'aRAIF.

185

Btrewed  with  flints.  At  a  distance  it  seems  whollr  isolated  ;  the
low  ridges,  which  extend  from  it  east  and  west,  being  there  over-
looked. That  on  the  east,  as  has  l>een  said  already,  connects
with  higher  ridges  further  on,  and  terminates  in  the  bluff  el-
Muknih ;  while  that  on  the  west  continues  lower  and  more
bR">ken.  The  'Araif  forms  a  striking  object,  as  thns  seen  in  the
middle  of  the  mighty  waste.  It  is  indeed  a  huge  bulwark,  ter-
minating the  open  desert  on  this  part,  and  forming  the  outwork
or  Imstion  of  a  more  moimtainous  tract  beyond. — At  '2h  o'clock
a  Wady  came  down  directly  from  the  mountain,  (here  half  an
hour  or  more  distant,)  bearing  the  same  name,  'Araif,  and  pass-
ing on  W.  S.  W.  to  the  Kureiyeh.  Under  one  of  its  low  banks
the  corpse  of  a  man  had  been  recently  half  buried,  and  a  few
stones  placed  around  :  some  of  the  toes  and  a  few  rags  were  vis-
ible; and  our  Arabs  said  the  hyjenas  would  soon  devour  the
body.

Proceeding  on  the  same  course  X.  N.  W.  we  came  at  3
o'clock  to  the  top  of  the  low  ridge,  running  out  west  from  Jebel
'Araif.  Here  we  could  look  back  over  the  desert  tract  we  had
just  crossed,  bounded  on  the  south  by  low  hills  at  a  great  dis-
tance, the  whole  of  it  drained  by  the  Kureiyeh  into  Wady
el-'Arish.  Before  us  was  another  plain,  extending  into  the
mountains  towards  the  right,  and  bounded  on  the  north  by  a
line  of  higher  hills  alx>ut  two  hours  distant.  From  this  point
in  our  road.  Jebel  'Araif  bore  X.  70^  E.  about  a  mile  distant.
Jebel  Ikhrimm  bore  west,  being  separated  from  the  ridge  on
which  we  stood  only  by  Wady  el-Kxireiyeh.  At  a  much  greater
distance  in  the  W.  N.  W.  appeared  a  high  and  longer  mountain
called  Yelek ;  and  more  to  the  right,  about  N.  X.  W.  another
called  el-HelilL  Both  these  last  were  said  to  be  bevond  Wadv
el-'Arish.

A  short  and  steep  descent  now  brought  us  in  ten  minutes  to
the  bed  of  Wady  el-Mayein  or  el  Ma  ein.  which  flowing  along
the  northern  base  of  Jebel  'Araif  and  the  ridge  further  west
goes  TO  unite  with  the  Kureiyeh.  It  has  its  head  far  up  among
the  mountains  on  the  right ;  and  in  it  are  the  wells  of  the  same
name  already  mentioned.  Its  bed  bears  evident  traces  of  a
large  volume  of  water :  and  the  flat  plain  beyond  is  much  cut  up
by  its  torrents.  The  bed  of  the  Wady  and  the  adjacent  part  of
the  plain  are  covered  with  stones,  some  quite  large,  apparently
brought  down  by  the  waters  from  the  moim tains.  Crossing  the
plain  on  a  course  north,  we  encamped  at  half  past  4  o'clock  at
the  foot  of  the  line  of  bills  which  bound  it  on  this  side ;  Jebel
'Araif  bearing  from  our  tent  S.  55^  E.  in  full  view,  about  three
miles  distant.  On  this  plain  comes  in  the  road  from  the  con-
vent to  Gara,  which  passes  by  'Ain  and  eth-Themed. — Our  tent

L  272-274

186

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec  V.

was  pitched  near  a  shallow  water-course  niniiiiig  off  to  Wady
el-Mayein,  ftill  of  herbs  and  shrubs  Kke  most  of  the  Wadys  we
had  passed,  and  affording  fine  pasture  for  the  camels.  Among
the  shrubs  of  the  desert,  the  Eetem  or  broom  was  particularly
abundant,  and  of  a  larger  size  than  we  had  before  seen  it.

We  had  now  left  the  coimtry  of  the  Haiwat,  and  entered
that  of  the  southern  Tiyahah.  Here  too  ends  the  region  or
desert  of  the  Tih,  through  which  we  had  been  travelling  ever
since  we  left  the  'Arabah.  The  territory  of  the  Haiwat  com-
mences, as  we  have  seen,  at  the  northern  ridge  of  Jebel  et-Tih ;
and  extends  northwards  along  and  adjacent  to  the  'Arabah  as
far  as  to  the  mountains  'Araif  and  el-Mukrah ;  where  the  high
ridge  between  rises  like  a  wall  and  forms  a  boimdarv  on  this  side.
On  the  west  of  this  tribe  lies  the  country  of  the  Tiyahah,  also
extending  from  Jebel  et-Tih  through  the  middle  of  the  desert
northwards  beyond  that  of  the  Haiwat,  to  the  vicinity  of  Gaza
and  Beersheba.  The  Tiyahah  are  divided  into  the  Beneiyat
and  the  Sukeirat.  Still  further  west  are  the  Terabin,  dwelling
from  the  mountains  near  Suez  to  the  region  of  Gaza ;  their
main  body  being  found  not  far  distant  from  the  latter  place.
This  tribe  is  the  strongest  of  all,  and  is  closely  leagued  with  the
Tiyahah.

The  mountainous  district  north  of  Jebel  'Araif  and  el-Muk-
rah,  and  between  el-' Arabah  and  the  Tiyahah,  is  inhabited  by
the  'Azazimeh,  who  are  in  close  alhance  with  the  former  tribe,
and  sometimes  pasture  witlun  their  territory.  Still  further  north
along  the  Ghor,  are  the  Sa'idin  or  Sa'idiyeh,  the  Dhullam,  and
the  Jehalin ;  the  latter  dwelhng  between  Hebron  and  the  Dead
Sea.  Our  guides  mentioned  also  the  names  of  the  Sawarikeh,
the  Jebarat,  and  the  Henajireh.  as  liWug  in  the  same  region ;
respecting  whom  we  learned  nothing  further,  and  heard  of  them
no  more. — The  above,  so  far  as  we  could  ascertain,  are  all  the
Arab  tribes  inhabiting  the  great  western  desert.

"We  had  now  become  so  far  acquainted  with  the  general  fea-
tures of  this  region,  as  to  perceive  the  reason,  why  all  the  roads
leading  across  it  from  'Akabah  and  from  the  convent  to  Hebron
and  Gaza,  should  meet  together  in  one  main  trunk  in  the  middle
of  the  desert.  The  whole  district  adjacent  to  the  'Arabah.  north
of  Jebel  'Araif  and  el-Mukrah,  as  has  been  said,  is  mountainous  ;
and  is  composed,  as  we  afterwards  found,  of  steep  ridges  running
mostly  from  east  to  west,  and  presenting  almost  insuperable  ob-
stacles to  the  passage  of  a  road  jiarallel  to  the  'Arabah.  In  con-
sequence, no  great  route  now  leads,  or  ever  has  led,  through  this
district ;  but  the  roads  from  'Akabah,  which  ascend  from  Wady
el-'Arabah  and  in  any  degree  touch  the  high  i)lateau  of  the  de.^ert
south  of  el-Mukr&h,  must  necessarily  curve  to  the  west,  and

i.  274.  275

Aph.  10.]

ANCIENT  ROMAN  BOAD.  LYSA.

187

passing  around  the  base  of  Jebel  'Araif  el-Nakah,  continue  along
the  western  side  of  this  mountainous  tract.

We  felt  assured,  therefore,  that  we  were  now  upon  the  ancient
Roman  road,  as  marked  upon  the  Peutinger  Tables,  leading
across  this  desert  from  'Akabah  to  Jerusalem  ;  whether  it  as-
cended from  the  'Arabah  by  the  route  we  had  followed  ;  or,  as
is  more  probable,  kept  along  the  'Arabah  for  a  time  and  then
ascended  through  Wady  Beyaneh.  We  inquii-ed  very  minutely
after  the  names  of  Easa  (Gerasa)  and  Gypsaria,  the  first  stations
marked  on  the  ancient  road,  and  also  mentioned  by  Ptolemy ;
but  could  find  no  trace  of  anything  corresponding  to  them.  Of
the  other  stations,  still  north  of  us,  Lysa,  Eboda,  and  Elusa,  as
also  Beersheba,  we  hoped  to  be  able  to  give  a  better  account ;
for  our  guides  had  already  spoken  of  a  Wady  Lussan,  of  ruins
called  'Abdeh  and  Khidasah,  and  of  wells  at  Bir  es-Seba'.

In  respect  to  the  route  of  the  Israelites  in  approaching  Pales-
tine, we  here  obtained  only  the  con^action^hat  they  could  not
have  passed  to  the  westward  of  Jebel  'Araif  ;  since  such  a  course
would  have  brought  them  directly  to  Beersheba,  and  not  to
Kadesh,  which  latter  city  lay  near  to  the  border  of  Edom.^

Tuesday,  April  lOtJi.  Mounting  at  5f  o'clock,  we  ascended
the  line  of  hills  immediately  before  us,  by  a  very  stony  path,
reaching  the  top  in  twenty-five  minutes.  We  found  the  ridge  to
be  broad  ;  though  we  began  soon  to  descend  gradually  through
a  small  Wady.  On  our  right  and  towards  the  northeast  was
now  a  mountainous  tract ;  consistiag  of  steep  limestone  ridges
running  parallel  to  each  other  from  east  to  west  three  or  four
hundred  feet  in  height,  and  terminating  towards  the  west  in  steep
blufis.  Our  course  was  still  N.  by  W.  parallel  to  the  end  of
these  blufis,  and  at  no  great  distance  from  them,  through  a  low-
er and  more  open  region.  Before  us  was  another  large  Wady
running  west,  and  then  another  line  of  hills  lower  than  the  bluffs  ;
and  such  continued  to  be  the  make  of  the  land  for  the  gi-eater
part  of  the  day.  At  6.35  we  came  down  upon  Wady  Lussan,  a
broad  plain  swept  over  by  torrents  descending  from  the  moun-
tains on  the  right,  and  fiowing  to  Wady  el-'Arish.  Our  guides
knew  of  no  fountain  or  water  in  this  vaUey ;  nor  of  any  ruins.
The  name,  however,  and  perhaps  the  position,  corresponds  to
Lysa,  a  station  on  the  Roman  road,  lying  according  to  Eennell
about  fifty-five  geographical  miles  from  Ailah  ;^  from  which  place
we  had  now  travelled  about  thirty  hours  by  a  longer  route.  The
ancient  road  could  only  have  been,  like  ours,  a  caravan  path  ;

'  Nmn.  20,  16.  lent  to  about  18  hours  with  camels.  From

'  Comparat.  Geogr.  of  Western  Asia.  I.    Wadv  Lussin,  however,  to  Eboda,  we

p.  92. — It  i?  marked  in  the  Peutinger  Ta-    found  only  U  hours.

blcs  at  48  R.  M.  south  of  Eboda,  equiva-

l  275-277

188

FROM  'AKABAH  to  JERUSALEM,

[Sec.  V.

and  Lysa  and  tlie  other  places  marked  upon  it  further  south,
were  very  probably  mere  stations,  with  a  guard  and  a  few  tents
or  huts,  and  without  water  except  as  supplied  from  cisterns  orfrom
a  distance.  On  our  left,  just  as  we  reached  the  plain,  were  a  few
remains  of  rude  walls  and  foundations,  which  we  regarded  at  the
time  as  marking  only  the  site  of  a  former  Arab  encampment.
But  from  the  many  similar  remains  which  we  afterwards  saw
along  the  road,  I  am  now  inclined  to  suppose,  that  they  may
have  belonged  to  the  substructions  of  Lysa.

We  were  fifteen  minutes  in  crossing  this  plain,  and  at  6.50  en-
tered upon  another  tract  of  undulating  hilly  country,  which  in-
deed might  almost  be  called  mountainous.  A  path  went  off  on
the  right,  leading  to  some  rain  water  in  the  rocks  at  the  head  of
Wady  Jerur  ;  falling  into  our  road  again  further  on.  In  a  few
minutes  more,  the  path  firom  the  fountain  Mayein,  which  left
ours  yesterday,  came  in  from  the  right.  We  here  entered  a  large
plain,  or  basin,  drakied  by  a  water-course  near  the  middle,  with
its  branches,  callea  Wady  el-Muzeiri'ah,  running  southwest  to
the  Lussan.  This  we  reached  at  a  quarter  past  seven.  This
whole  basin  was  full  of  shrubs  and  vegetation,  and  seemed  capa-
ble of  tniage.  Indeed,  in  several  spots  we  saw  traces  of  rude
ploughing  ;  and  were  told,  that  in  years  of  rain  the  Arabs  are
accustomed  to  plough  and  sow  here.  A  thin  meager  grass  was
springing  up  in  various  places.  Such  spots  as  these  we  had  not
seen  or  heard  of,  since  passing  Wady  GhurOndel  on  the  gulf  of
Suez.  In  aU  the  region  of  the  Tawarah,  the  'Amran,  and  the
Haiwat,  there  are  none/

We  now  ascended  along  a  narrow  Wady  to  the  top  of  another
sloping  parallel  ridge,  on  which  we  came  out  at  8  o'clock.  Ve-
getation continued  quite  to  the  summit,  consisting  of  shrubs  and
thin  tufts  of  slender  grass.  This  point  commands  a  wide  view
over  a  broad  open  tract  of  country  on  the  left  and  towards  the
northwest,  extending  apparently  to  the  mountains  Yelek  and  el-
Helal,  broken  in  some  parts  by  low  Hmestone  ridges  and  hills  of
chalk  ;  while  on  our  right  the  precipitous  chalky  cliffs  of  the
mountainous  district  continued.  Through  the  plain  before  us,
passed  down  Wady  Jerur.  But  the  weather  was  now  so  hazy,
that  we  were  unable  to  see  the  country  so  distinctly  as  we  wished ;
especially  the  distant  mountains.  Around  us  vegetation  seemed
more  abundant  ;  and  camels  were  at  pasture  on  our  left,  belong-
ing to  the  Haweitat  who  had  passed  on  a  few  days  before.  Here
Salim,  one  of  our  'Amran  guides,  went  on  ahead  of  our  caravan,
and  lay  down  to  sleep.  On  our  coming  up,  we  found  him  with
a  large  scratch  on  his  face  and  a  slight  cut  on  his  shoulder,  which
he  said  had  been  given  him  by  two  Arabs,  who  feU  upon  him
while  asleep,  and  tried  to  rob  him  of  his  dagger  and  cloak.  We

i.  277,  278

Apr.  10.]

WADY  JERrB.

189

doubted  the  truth  of  this  part  of  his  story  ;  for  he  was  an  im-
pudent blackguard,  and  very  likely  to  get  into  a  quarrel.

We  reached  the  bed  of  Wady  Jerur  at  9  o'clock,  coming  from
the  mountains  on  our  right  and  running  west  to  the  'Arish.  Our
guides  knew  of  no  water  in  it  above  or  below,  (except  the  rain
water  among  the  rocks  near  its  head,  as  already  mentioned,)  nor
of  any  cultivation  ;  though  Tuweileb  and  others  had  crossed  it
further  down  near  its  mouth.'  Our  path  now  ascended  very
gradually,  and  at  9.55  again  descended  through  a  narrow  Wady,
where  we  found  a  little  rain  water  standing  in  the  rocks  at  the
bottom,  of  which  the  guide  and  dog  drank  together.  Indeed,  in
several  Wadys  both  yesterday  and  to-day,  we  had  seen  traces  of
running  water  from  the  late  rains.  At  10^  o'clock,  we  passed  a
limestone  ridge  of  some  height  by  a  gap.  Here  we  had  our  last
view  of  Jebel  'Araif,  bearing  S.  by  E.  From  this  point  our
course  became  N.  N.  E.  for  the  remainder  of  the  day.  Half  an
hour  later  we  came  upon  three  broad  and  shallow  water-courses,
full  of  the  shrub  Eetem,  uniting  below  and  called  Wady  ^-
Sa'idat,  which  runs  down  to  join  the  Jaifeh  before  us.  This
latter  vaUey  followed  at  11.50,  very  broad  and  full  of  pasture ;
coming  from  the  E.  S.  E.  where  are  many  spots  in  it  tilled  and
sown  by  the  Tiyahah.  It  passes  on  to  the  'Arish  ;  having  no
water  known  to  our  guides.  In  it,  on  our  left,  many  camels
were  browsing,  belonging  to  the  main  body  of  our  new  friends
the  Haweitat,  who  had  passed  us  near  'Akabah.

After  another  hour  a  slight  ascent  brought  us  out  upon  a  high
stony  plain ;  while  our  course  was  bringing  us  nearer  and  nearer
to  the  mountains  on  our  right.  At  1.10  we  came  upon  Wady
Abu  Retemat,  a  wide  plain  with  shrubs  and  Retem  ;  beyond
which  a  limestone  ridge  of  some  height  stretched  from  the
eastern  mountains  far  to  the  west,  having  in  it  several  gaps  and
passes.  We  soon  came  close  to  the  mountain  on  our  right,  and
began  to  ascend  graduaU}-  through  a  Wady  with  many  herbs,
coming  down  from  the  northeast  into  Abu  Retemat,  and  form-
ing a  wide  pass  between  the  mountain  and  the  beginning  of  the
ridge  just  mentioned.  Beyond  the  eastern  mountain  at  some
distance  is  a  large  fountain  with  sweet  runfling  water,  named
'Ain  el-Kudeirat,  but  more  usually  called  simply  el-'Ain.*
From  it  a  Wady,  also  called  el-'Ain,  runs  off  towards  the  north,

'  The  name  Jerur  in  Arabic  corres-  lande,  ^i/rf/'s,  and  visited  by  him  as  Kadesh

ponds  to  the  Hebrew  Gerar ;  bnt  neither  Barnea.    He  obviously  made  out  the  name

the  position  nor  the  character  of  thb  Wa-  Khdf-i  by  misnnder.-itanding  d-Kuddrdt,

dy  admits  the  supposition  of  its  being  the  the  name  of  the  tribe  who  water  at  this

same  with  the  Gerar  of  Scripture.    This  fountain.    There  is  no  other  foundation

lay  much  nearer  to  Gaza,  in  the  country  for  supposing  a  Kadesh  here ;  as  we  shall

of  the  Philistines,  and  was  very  fertile,  see  further  on.    See  Williams'  Holy  City,

Gen.  20,  1.    26,  6.  8.  edit.  2,  I.  p.  4G6.

'  This  is  the  spot  called  by  Mr.  Row-

i.  276-280

190

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM,

[Sec.  V.

and  sweeping  round  northwest  through  a  tract  of  open  country,
goes  to  join  the  'Arish.  A  path  went  otf  from  our  road  at  If
o'clock,  leading  to  the  wells  el-Birein,  lying  a  little  to  the  right
of  our  way,  half  a  day's  journey  from  this  spot.  We  reached
the  top  of  the  pass,  which  is  everywhere  sprinkled  with  herhage,
at  2  o'clock.  It  opens  out  upon  a  large  gravelly  plain  or  hasin,
thickly  covered  in  many  parts  with  shrubs  and  coarse  herbage,
and  having  in  other  parts  tracts  of  naked  sand.  Here  the  line
of  the  eastern  mountains  abruptly  retires  ;  the  plain  extends
up  far  to  the  right ;  and  is  shut  in  on  the  east,  south,  and  west,
by  limestone  hiUs.

Crossing  the  plain  for  twenty  minutes,  we  came  to  several
pits  of  bluish,  brackish  water,  dug  a  few  feet  deep  in  a  bed
of  blue  clay,  surrounded  by  an  abundance  of  coarse  bulrushes
and  rank  vegetation.  Only  one  pit  had  water  in  it  at  the  time.
Here  we  stopped  for  half  an  hour  ;  watered  the  camels,  which
seemed  thirsty  ;  and  filled  some  of  the  water-skins.  To  do
this  the  more  quickly,  Tuweileb's  boy  went  down  naked  into
the  water,  and  handed  it  up  in  our  leathern  bucket.  These
wells  lie  in  a  shallow  Wady  called  el-Kusaimeh,  which  rises  in
the  plain  and  runs  off  W.  N.  W,  among  the  western  hills. —
From  this  spot  the  northern  end  of  Jebel  el-Helal  beyond
Wady  el-' Arish  bore  N.  80°  W.  The  same  seen  from  Wady
el-Jaifeh  at  11.50  bore  N.  55°  W.  The  opening  by  which
Wady  el-'Ain  leaves  the  mountains,  bore  from  here  southeast.
The  hed  of  this  Wady  passes  across  the  plain  to  the  eastward
of  the  wells,  and  then  sweeps  around  to  the  northwest.

Leaving  the  wells  at  2.50  we  ascended  gently  among  low
chalky  hills  for  half  an  hour ;  when  we  again  descended  gradu-
ally, and  passing  two  or  three  small  Wadys,  came  upon  Wady
el-'Ain,  here  running  to  the  left  through  a  wide  gravelly  plain
with  occasional  tracts  of  sand,  thinly  covered  in  this  part  with
shrubs  and  herbage.  We  reached  the  deep  gully  which  forms  its
water-course,  at  4  o'clock ;  and  found  it  bordered  with  grass,
daisies,  and  other  small  flowers,  most  refreshing  to  the  eye  after
so  long  an  abstinence.  Indeed,  we  had  found  to-day  more  vege-
tation in  the  desirt,  than  before  in  all  the  way  from  Egypt.
This  Wady,  as  we  have  seen,  comes  from  el-'Ain,  the  fountain
above  mentioned,  by  a  circuitous  course ;  and  continues  on  to
join  Wady  el-'Arish.  Further  down,  a  Wady  enters  it  from  the
left,  having  in  it  brackish  water  called  el-Muweilih,  forming  a
station  on  the  western  road  from  the  convent  to  Gaza.

After  crossing  the  water-course,  we  came  upon  a  broad  tract
of  tolerably  fertile  soil,  capable  of  tillage,  and  apparently  once
tilled.  Across  the  whole  tract  the  remains  of  long  ranges  of  low
stone  walls  were  visible,  which  probably  once  served  as  the  divi-

i.  280,  281

•Ipb.  11.]]

WADY  EL-*AIN.  'aBDEH.

191

sions  of  cultivated  fields.  The  Arabs  caU  them  el-Muzeiri'at,
"little  plantations."  We  afterwards  saw  many  such  walls,
which  obviously  were  not  constructed  by  the  present  race  of  Arab
inhabitants  ;  but  must  be  referred  back  to  an  earlier  period.
We  neither  saw  nor  heard  of  any  site  of  ruins  in  this  valley ;  it
may  have  been  tilled  by  the  inhabitants  of  some  place  not  far
remote.  We  encamped  at  4.25  upon  the  plain.  On  its  northern
side  rose  a  swelling  ridge  of  considerable  elevation,  with  several
sharp  chalky  peaks  ;  the  most  prominent  of  which  was  called
Kas  es-Seram.  Towards  the  east,  mountains  were  visible  only
at  a  distance.

The  country  through  which  we  had  passed  to-day,  though  in
itself  barren  and  desolate  in  the  extreme,  yet  in  consequence  of
the  recent  rains  presented  the  appearance  of  a  less  frightful
desert.  Some  grass,  a  few  flowers,  more  frequent  herbs  and
shrubs,  and  a  few  faint  traces  of  tillage,  were  to  us  agreeable
novelties  ;  the  more  grateful,  as  they  gave  promise  of  better
things  to  come.

Wednesday,  April  11th.  The  morning  was  bright  and
beautiful ;  and  we  set  off  at  5|  o'clock  in  high  spirits,  in  the
hope  of  finding  to-day,  not  indeed  Arab  habitations,  but  the
more  interesting  remains  of  the  dwellings  of  former  generations.
Our  guides  had  promised  to  take  us  to  a  place  with  ruins,  not
far  from  our  path,  which  they  knew  only  by  the  name  of  'Aujeh  ;
but  which  Tuweileb  said  was  also  called  'Abdeh.  Our  course
lay  first  across  the  plain  N.  E.  by  N.  and  our  main  route  con-
tinued in  tliis  direction  all  day.  On  both  sides  of  the  way
patches  of  wheat  and  barley  were  seen  ;  their  deep  green  con-
trasting strongly  with  the  nakedness  around.  We  saw  many
such  patches  in  the  course  of  the  day ;  but  they  were  mostly
stunted  and  poor,  in  consequence  of  the  Uttle  rain.  The  plain
now  became  a  gradual  acclivity  ;  and  following  up  a  broad
Wady,  or  tract  covered  with  herbs,  we  came  out  at  6.40  on  a
smaller  high  circular  plain,  surrounded  by  chalky  hills,  which  from
a  distance  appear  like  mountain  peaks.  This  plain  is  about  a
mile  in  diameter,  and  covered  with  shrubs.  One  of  the  hills,  a
chalky  cone  on  the  southwest,  is  the  Kas  es-Seram  seen  yester-
day. It  is  so  caUed  from  Wady  es-Seram  of  which  this  plain  is
the  head,  and  which  issues  from  it  on  the  opposite  or  northeast
part.  On  this  plain  comes  in  the  great  western  road  from  the
convent  of  Sinai  to  Gaza  ;  the  different  routes  over  Jebel  et-
Tth,  by  the  two  passes  er-Kakineh  and  el-Mureikhy,  having
united  long  before  reaching  this  point.  Thus  aU  the  roads
across  the  desert  were  now  combined  into  one  main  trunk,  and
continued  so  for  the  remainder  of  the  day.

We  crossed  the  plain ;  and  at  a  quarter  past  7  o'clock  en-

i.  281-283

192

FROM  'AKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

tered  and  descended  Wady  es-Seram.  The  desert  began  to  as-
sume a  gentler  aspect.  The  Seram  spread  out  further  down  into
a  wide  plain,  with  shrubs  and  grass  and  patches  of  wheat  and
barley,  looking  almost  like  a  meadow.  A  few  Arabs  of  the
'Azazimeh  were  pasturing  their  camels  and  flocks.  The  country
around  became  gradually  still  more  open,  with  broad  arable  val-
leys separated  by  low  swelling  hiUs.  Grass  increased  in  the
valleys,  and  herbs  were  sprinkled  over  the  hills.  We  heard  this
morning,  for  the  first  time,  the  songs  of  many  birds,  and  among
them  the  lark.  I  watched  the  little  warbler  rising  and  soaring
in  his  song  ;  and  was  inexpressibly  delighted.  On  reaching  the
plain,  we  sent  two  Arabs  with  a  camel  over  the  liills  on  the
right  to  the  wells  Birein  for  water,  with  directions  to  overtake
the  party  again  in  the  course  of  the  day.  At  8  o'clock,  leaving
our  servants  and  camels  to  continue  in  the  direct  route  to  Eu-
haibeh,  where  we  were  to  encamp,  we  ourselves  with  the  drome-
daries and  three  Arabs  turned  off  the  road  towards  the  left  of  a
low  range  of  hills,  in  order  to  visit  the  ruins  of  'Aujeh  or  'Abdeh.
In  half  an  hour,  travelling  about  north,  we  came  upon  a  low
ridge,  commanding  a  view  out  over  a  boundless  plain  or  shghtly
undulating  tract  towards  the  east,  often  sandy,  but  everywhere
sprinkled  with  shrubs  and  herbs  like  a  Wady.  The  Seram  ex-
pands into  this  plain,  as  do  also  Wady  el-Birein  from  the  south,
and  Wady  el-Hufir  from  the  southeast.  The  water-course  of  the
Seram  keeps  along  on  the  western  side  of  the  plain  beneath  the
hills  on  which  we  now  were.  We  here  struck  a  track  coming
from  Wady  es-Seram  on  the  right  and  going  off  to  Gaza  ;  but  it
was  not  the  usual  Gaza  road.  We  soon  left  it,  and  turning
more  to  the  right,  saw,  at  three  quarters  past  8,  the  ruins  on  a
hill  north.

Descending  along  a  little  Wady,  we  struck  the  water-course
of  the  Seram  at  9  o'clock,  still  running  north  along  the  base  of  the
low  hUls  which  continue  to  skirt  the  plain  on  this  side.  Here  we
came  upon  the  remains  of  walls  similar  to  those  we  had  seen  near
Wady  el-'Ain,  apparently  once  enclosing  fields  or  gardens,  along
the  tract  overflowed  by  the  torrent  during  the  rainy  season.  At
first  these  walls  were  slight,  but  became  thicker  and  more  solid
as  we  advanced.  Most  of  them  are  two  or  three  feet  thick,  and
double ;  the  faces  being  laid  up  very  neatly  with  round  stones
from  the  torrent,  and  the  middle  filled  in  with  gravel.  Some,
built  across  the  water-course,  are  six  or  eight  feet  thick,  forming
a  solid  dam  ;  and  were  doubtless  intended  to  regulate  the  flow-
ing and  distribution  of  the  water.  In  some  of  the  walls,  the
sides  are  perpendicular ;  in  others  sloping ;  and  occasionally  the
round  stones  are  broken  to  a  face.  At  9.10  the  water-bed  of
Wady  el-Birein  came  in  across  the  plain,  and  gave  its  name  to

i.  283,  284

Apr.  11.]

'abdeh,  EBODA.

193

the  whole.  Five  minutes  further  on  was  a  Ghudir  or  pool  of
rain  water  in  its  bed,  and  another  just  below.  This  point  was
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  distant  from  the  hUl  with  ruins.
Here  we  dismounted,  and  turned  up  a  little  Wady  coming  in
from  the  west,  to  visit  the  ruin  of  a  square  tower  of  hewn  stone
on  its  southern  bank.  Near  by  it  the  foundations  of  houses
were  visible  ;  and  many  hewn  stones  and  fragments  of  pottery
were  strewn  around.  On  the  north  side  of  the  little  Wady,  op-
posite the  tower,  is  a  deep  cavern  in  the  limestone  hill,  appa-
rently once  a  quarry,  with  pillars  left  to  support  the  roof.  From
it  the  materials  for  the  neighbouring  buildings  were  probably
taken.  It  is  more  than  a  hundred  feet  in  length  ;  and  has  been
apparently  inhabited,  perhaps  by  the  Arabs  ;  as  fragments  of
pottery  were  scattered  in  it.  It  is  now  the  resort  of  multitudes
of  pigeons,  which  flew  out  in  a  cloud  as  we  entered.

The  principal  ruins  are  situated  on  a  hill  or  rocky  ridge,
from  sixty  to  one  hundred  feet  high,  running  out  like  a  pro-
montory towards  the  east  from  the  elevated  land  on  our  left,  and
overlooking  the  broad  plain  in  front  ;  while  the  bed  of  the  tor-
rent sweeps  in  a  deep  channel  close  around  its  end.  On  this  hiU
two  ruins  were  conspicuous,  resembling  the  fortresses  of  an  acro-
polis. As  we  approached,  there  was  on  our  left  apparently  an
ancient  reservoir,  which  received  its  water  from  the  hills  above.
Here  we  found  Arabs  with  their  camels  and  goats  at  pasture  ;
they  proved  to  be  a  family  of  the  Tawarah,  who  had  wandered
off  thus  far  from  their  home.  Arriving  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,
we  found  the  southern  base  and  slope  covered  with  the  ruins  of
buildings  of  hewn  stone,  thrown  together  in  utter  confusion,  and
showinsr  this  to  have  been  the  main  site  of  the  ancient  town.
Among  these  we  noticed  several  columns  and  entablatures.  On
the  top  of  the  hill,  the  westernmost  building,  near  the  middle
of  the  ridge,  proved  to  be  a  Greek  church,  fronting  towards  the
east,  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  feet  in  length,  and  of  pro-
portional breadth.  The  walls  are  still  in  great  part  standing,
built  of  hewn  stone  apparently  from  the  neighbouring  quarry,
and  of  good  workmanship.  The  arched  recess  or  place  of  the
altar  was  yet  visible,  with  a  similar  smaller  recess  on  each  side
quite  entire.  In  the  western  part  was  a  side  chapel  with  two
or  three  smaller  rooms.  The  space  within  the  walls  was  strewn
with  broken  columns  and  entablatures.

About  one  hundred  and  fifty  paces  further  east,  near  the  ex-
tremity of  the  ridge,  are  the  ruins  of  a  fortress  or  castle  ;  a  large
parallelogram  likewise  built  of  hewn  stone  from  the  quairy.
The  length  of  the  enclosure,  of  which  the  walls  are  still  stand-
ing, is  more  than  three  hundred  feet  from  east  to  west.  On
the  eastern  end  there  would  seem  to  have  been  another  and  per-

VoL.  L— 17  i.  284-286

194

FROM  'AKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[SecV.

haps  stronger  part  of  the  fortress,  extending  a  hundred  feet  fur-
ther quite  to  the  brow  of  the  precipice.  This  part  is  now  wholly
destroyed  ;  and  of  the  larger  enclosure  no  portion  is  covered
over.  The  entrance  was  from  the  west,  by  a  fine  arched  portal
now  broken  at  the  top.  We  looked  here,  as  well  as  in  the  church,
for  inscriptions  ;  but  without  success.  At  the  eastern  end,  be-
yond the  present  wall,  but  within  the  circuit  of  the  smaller  for-
tress, is  a  very  deep  cistern,  capable  of  holding  several  hundred
hogsheads  ;  and  further  on,  near  the  extreme  point  of  the  rock,
a  well  about  one  hundred  feet  deep,  now  dry.  The  bottom  of
this  well  for  some  sixty  feet  is  wholly  sunk  in  the  solid  rock  ;
while  the  top,  for  about  forty  feet,  is  walled  up  eight  feet  square
with  hewn  stones  in  an  uncommonly  good  style  of  masonry.  An
arch  was  formerly  thrown  over  the  top,  which  is  now  broken
down.  The  walls  of  the  smaller  part  of  the  fortress  included
both  the  cistern  and  well.  At  the  bottom  of  the  hiU  imme-
diately below  this  point,  is  another  well  about  forty  feet  deep,
walled  up  in  the  same  manner. — On  the  east  of  the  water-course
of  Wady  el-Birein  are  also  ruins  of  buildings  ;  and  the  walls  of
fields,  similar  to  those  we  saw  at  first,  extend  far  out  into  the
plain.

From  the  castle  the  direction  of  the  wells  Birein  was  pointed
out  about  S.  by  E.  Further  to  the  east  the  water-course
of  Wady  el-Huf  ir  comes  down  across  the  plain  ;  and  uniting
with  that  of  Wady  el-Birein  just  north  of  the  castle,  gives  its
name  to  the  whole.  It  then  runs  off  northwest  to  join  Wady
el-Abyad.

We  had  no  doubt  at  the  time,  nor  hsive  I  any  now,  that
these  were  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  Eboda  or  Oboda,  a  city  men-
tioned only  by  Ptolemy,  and  marked  on  the  Peutinger  Tables  as
lying  on  the  Roman  road  twenty-three  Eoman  miles  to  the
southward  of  Elusa  ;  equivalent  to  nine  hours  with  camels  at
the  usual  rate  of  travel.  We  were  afterwards  eight  hours  in
passing  from  these  ruins  to  the  site  of  Elusa,  at  a  rate  more
rapid  than  usual ;  so  that  the  correspondence  is  here  sufficiently
exact ;  and  the  name  of  'Abdeh,  which  the  spot  still  bears,  is
decisive.  It  must  have  been  a  place  of  importance  and  of  great
strength.  The  large  church  marks  a  numerous  Christian  popu-
lation ;  though  Eboda  is  nowhere  mentioned  among  the  episco-
pal cities.  It  is  rare  also  to  find  in  the  desert  a  fortress  of  such
extent,  and  built  with  so  much  care.  But  the  desert  has  reas-
Bumed  its  rights  ;  the  intrusive  hand  of  cultivation  has  been
driven  back  ;  the  race  that  dwelt  here  have  perished  ;  and  their
works  now  look  abroad  in  loneliness  and  silence  over  the  mighty
waste. '

'  See  note  XXIII,  at  the  end  of  the  volume.

i.  286,  287

,  Afr.  11.]

'abdeh.  sirocco.

195

"We  left  the  ruins  at  10|  o'clock.  Just  as  we  were  mount-
ing our  camels,  one  of  the  'Azazimeh,  who  was  pasturing  in  the
vicinity,  came  up  and  scolded  our  guides  most  violently  for
bringing  Christians  to  view  his  country.  Our  course  lay  N.  E.
by  E.  across  the  plain  to  regain  our  former  road.  The  character
of  the  desert  began  to  change,  and  became  more  and  more  sandy
as  we  advanced.  We  struck  the  route  at  a  quarter  past  noon  ;
and  fell  in  again  with  our  acquaintances,  the  Haweitat,  who
were  now  going  the  same  road.  We  soon  passed  by  their  cara-
van, and  saw  them  no  more.

During  this  time  we  were  exposed  to  a  violent  sirocco,  which
continued  tUl  towards  evening,  resembling  the  Khamsin  of  Egypt.
The  wind  had  been  aU  the  morning  northeast,  but  at  11  o'clock
it  suddenly  changed  to  the  south,  and  came  upon  us  with  vio-
lence and  intense  heat,  until  it  blew  a  perfect  tempest.  The
atmosphere  was  filled  with  fine  particles  of  sand,  forming  a
bluish  haze  ;  the  sun  was  scarcely  visible,  his  disk  exhibiting
only  a  dun  and  sickly  hue  ;  and  the  glow  of  the  wind  came  upon
our  faces  as  from  a  burning  oven.  Often  we  could  not  see  ten
rods  around  us  ;  and  our  eyes,  ears,  mouths,  and  clothes,  were
filled  with  sand.  The  thermometer  at  12  o'clock  stood  at  88°  F,
and  had  apparently  been  higher  ;  at  2  o'clock  it  had  fallen  to
76°,  althoiigh  the  wind  still  continued.

We  kept  on  our  way,  proceeding  among  sand-drifts,  the
ground  in  spots  being  white  with  broken  snail-shells  ;  and  began
to  descend  very  gradually  towards  Wady  el-Abyad.  At  12.50
there  were  again  walls  of  fields,  marking  an  extensive  enclosure.
At  1  o'clock  we  came  to  an  Arab  cemetery,  with  a  rude  heap  of
stones,  called  the  tomb  of  Sheikh  el-'Amry,  whom  the  Arabs
never  mention  without  a  curse.  A  ridiculous  story  of  Arab
Bupefstition  is  attached  to  this  tomb.  There  seemed  also  to  be
the  foundations  of  a  village  or  the  like,  connected  with  the  said
fields.  Close  by  is  the  bed  of  Wady  el-Abyad,  running  to  the
left  into  the  'Arish  ;  it  was  said  to  be  the  last  Wady  on  our
route,  that  joins  the  latter  valley.  The  region  is  here  all  sand  ;
and  we  now  passed  among  swelling  hills,  which,  though  of  sand,
were  yet  covered  to  the  top  with  tufts  of  herbs  and  shrubs,  like
the  valleys  and  plains  ;  all  greener  than  before,  and  indicating
our  approach  to  a  land  of  rain.  Among  these  hills  we  passed  at
half  past  two  through  a  large  basin,  the  head  of  a  Wady  called
Nehiyeh,  running  off  west  to  Wady  el-Abyad.  Here  we  over-
took our  two  men  with  a  load  of  good  water  from  el-Birein.
They  reported  that  the  wells  were  four  instead  of  two ;  all
twenty-five  or  thirty  feet  deep,  walled  up  with  hewn  stone,  and
containing  living  water.  The  plain  beyond  the  wells,  they  said,
was  extensively  cultivated  by  the  Arabs.

i.  287-289

196

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

We  overtook  the  rest  of  our  party  not  long  after,  and  soon
began  to  descend  gradually  towards  the  head  of  Wady  er-Ruhai-
beh.  The  tempest  continued  unabated,  although  the  burning
glow  had  in  part  passed  away.  As  we  crossed  a  plain  shghtly
descending  towards  the  northeast,  there  were,  at  3.20,  traces  of
walls  and  former  fields.  Ten  minutes  further  brought  us  to  the
entrance  of  Wady  er-Ruhaibeh,  which  runs  from  the  plaiu
towards  the  northeast.  Here  is  the  fork  of  the  two  main  roads
leading  to  Gaza  and  Hebron.  We  encamped  at  3|  o'clock  in
the  Wady,  which  is  at  first  narrow,  lying  between  hills  of  gentle
acclivity.

The  tempest  now  seemed  to  have  reached  its  greatest  ftiry,
and  had  become  a  tornado.  It  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty
that  we  could  pitch  our  tent,  or  keep  it  upright  after  it  was
pitched.  For  a  time  the  prospect  was  dreadful ;  and  the  storm
in  itself  was  probably  as  terrific,  as  most  of  those  which  have
given  rise  to  the  exaggerated  accounts  of  travellers.  Yet  here
was  no  danger  of  life ;  though  I  can  well  conceive  that  in  cer-
tain circumstances,  as  where  a  traveller  is  without  water  and  is
previously  feeble  and  exhausted,  such  a  "horrible  tempest"  may
well  prove  fatal.  Most  of  our  Arabs  covered  their  faces  with  a
handkerchief,  although  we  were  travelling  before  the  wind.
After  5  o'clock  the  wind  fell ;  the  air  became  less  obscure ;  a
breeze  sprung  up  from  the  northwest,  which  soon  purified  the  at-
mosphere, restored  the  sun  to  his  splendour,  and  brought  us  a
clear  and  pleasant  evening,  with  a  temperature  of  66°  F.  It
was  no  little  labour  to  free  ourselves  from  the  casing  of  sand  in
which  we  were  enveloped.

We  had  not  been  told  of  ruins  at  this  place,  or  only  in  gen-
eral terms  ;  and  were  therefore  the  more  surprised  to  find  here
also  traces  of  antiquity.  In  the  valley  itself,  just  at  the  left  of
the  path,  is  the  ruin  of  a  small  rough  building  with  a  dome,
built  in  the  manner  of  a  mosk ;  it  was  obviously  once  a  Wely  or
tomb  of  a  Muhammedan  saint.  On  the  right  of  the  path  is  a
confused  heap  of  hewn  stones,  the  remains  of  a  square  building
of  some  size,  perhaps  a  tower.  On  the  acchvity  of  the  eastern
hill  we  found  traces  of  wells ;  a  deep  cistern,  or  rather  cavern,
which  seemed  to  have  been  used  as  such ;  and  a  fine  circular
threshing  floor,  evidently  antique.  But  on  ascending  the  hill  on
the  left  of  the  valley,  we  were  astonished  to  find  ourselves  amid
the  ruins  of  an  ancient  city.  Here  is  a  level  tract  of  ten  or
twelve  acres  in  extent,  entirely  and  thickly  covered  over  with
confused  heaps  of  stones,  with  just  enough  of  their  former  order
remaining,  to  show  the  foundations  and  form  of  tlie  houses,  and
the  course  of  some  of  the  streets.  The  liousos  were  mostly
small,  all  solidly  built  of  bluish  limestone,  squared  and  often

i.  289,  290

Apr.  11.]

RUHAIBEH.

197

hewn  on  the  exterior  surface.  Many  of  tlie  dwellings  had  eacli
its  cistern,  cut  in  the  solid  rock ;  and  these  still  remained  quite
entire.  One  mass  of  stones  larger  than. the  rest,  appeared  to  he
the  remains  of  a  church,  from  the  fragments  of  columns  and  en-
tablatures strewed  around.  Another  large  mass  lay  further  to
the  north,  which  we  did  not  visit.  There  seemed  to  have  been
no  public  square,  and  no  important  or  large  public  buildings ;
nor  could  we  trace  with  certainty  any  city  walls.  We  sought
also  in  vain  for  inscriptions.  Once,  as  we  judged  upon  the  spot,
this  must  have  been  a  city  of  not  less  than  twelve  or  fifteen
thousand  inhabitants.  Now,  it  is  a  perfect  field  of  ruins,  a
scene  of  unutterable  desolation ;  across  which  the  passing  stran-
ger can  with  difficulty  find  his  way.  Multitudes  of  lizards  were
briskly  and  silently  ghding  among  the  stones ;  and  at  evening,
as  we  sat  writing,  the  screechings  of  an  owl  were  the  only  sound
to  break  in  upon  the  death-like  stillness.

These  ruins  have  apparently  been  seen  by  no  former  travel-
ler ;  and  it  was  only  by  accident  that  we  stumbled  upon  them.
The  place  must  anciently  have  been  one  of  some  note  and  im-
portance ;  but  what  city  could  it  have  been  ?  This  is  a  ques-
tion, which  after  long  inquiry,  and  with  the  best  aid  from  the
light  of  European  science,  I  am  as  yet  unable  to  answer.  The
name  er-Ruhaibeh  naturally  suggests  the  Hebrew  SeJioboth,  one
of  Isaac's  wells  in  the  vicinity  of  Gerar ; '  but  this  appears  to
have  been  nothing  but  a  well,  and  there  is  no  mention  in  Scrip-
ture or  elsewhere  of  any  city  connected  with  it.  Here,  on  the
other  hand,  was  a  city,  but,  it  would  seem,  no  well ;  the  inhab-
itants having  been  apparently  supplied  with  rain  water  by
means  of  cisterns.  The  position  of  Isaac's  well,  too,  appears  to
have  been  much  further  north,  and  between  Gerar  and  Beershe-
ba,  where  he  was  residing.  But  these  ruins  are  a  large  eight
hours  distant  from  Beersheba  ;  and  not  in  the  direction  of  Gerar.
No  town  of  this  name  is  spoken  of  in  all  this  region ;  and  I  am
still,  after  many  years,  unable  to  solve  the  mystery.'^

The  ruined  Wely  above  mentioned  seems  to  indicate,  that
the  place  was  inhabited,  or  at  least  frequented,  down  to  a  period
considerably  later  than  the  Muhammedan  conquest.

As  Ruhaibeh  is  the  great  point  from  which  the  roads  across
the  desert,  after  having  been  all  united,  again  diverge  towards

'  Gen.  26,  22.  Aili ,  Hauara,  and  Zadacathn,  all  of  which

'  In  the  Notitia  Dipnitatum  (c.  29),  a  are  on  the  east  of  the  'Arabah,  it  more

place  Rohotha  is  named  in  the  rude  draw-  probably  represents  the  'PouffuiA  or Robooth

ing  at  the  head  of  the  chapter;  but  is  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  which  they  place

omitted  in  the  list.    This  name  might  an-  in  Gabalene,  meaning  Idnmaja.    See  No-

swer  to  Rehohoth  (Ruhaibeh);  but  as  the  tit.  Dign.  p.  78,  346.  ed.  Booking;  p.  215,

place  is  mentioned  along  with  Moahila,  21(5,  ed.  Pancerol;  Reland.  Falsest,  p.  231.

Vol.  I.— 17*  i.  290,  291

198

FKOM  'aKABAH  to  JEEUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

Gaza  and  Hebron,  the  present  is  a  fit  occasion  for  bringing
together  all  that  remains  to  be  said  of  these  routes  and  of  the
region  further  south.  We  travelled  the  road  from  this  point  to
Hebron,  a  journey  of  two  days,  which  is  described  in  the  follow-
ing pages.  Gaza  (Arabic  Ghuzzeh)  was  said  to  be  only  one  day
distant  from  Euhaibeh,  though  it  must  be  a  very  long  day's
journey.  Our  guides  knew  of  no  ruins  on  the  way ;  and  only  of
one  place  of  any  note,  called  Nuttar  Abu  Sumar-,  where  the
Arabs  have  magazines  of  grain.

From  'Akabah  to  Hebron  and  Gaza,  one  road  passes  along
nearly  the  whole  length  of  the  great  Wady  el-'Arabah,  and
ascends  from  it  to  the  high  western  plateau  by  several  passes,  not
far  from  the  south  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.  These  we  shall  have
occasion  to  describe  at  a  later  period.  From  'Akabah  to  Euhai-
beh there  are  two  roads  for  a  part  of  the  way ;  one,  the  route  we
travelled ;  and  the  other,  keeping  for  some  time  along  the
'Arabah,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  and  then  ascending
through  Wady  el-Beyaneh  to  join  our  road  before  reaching  Jebel
'Araif.

From  the  convent  of  Sinai,  (and  consequently  also  from
Ttir,)  three  roads  cross  by  the  three  great  passes  of  Jebel  et-Tih,
and  unite  before  reaching  Euhaibeh.  The  easternmost  is  the
road  passing  by  el-'Ain  and  also  by  the  well  eth-Themed,  west
of  the  mountain  Tilrf  er-Eukn ;  and  falling  into  our  route  at
Wady  el-Mayein  near  Jebel  'Araif  The  middle  road  crosses
the  Tih  by  the  pass  el-Mureikhy ;  and  the  western  one  by  the
pass  er-Eakineh.  These  unite  before  reaching  the  Haj  route ;
and  fall  into  our  road  on  the  circular  plain  at  the  head  of  Wady
es-Seram,  about  one  day's  journey  from  Euhaibeh.  This  united
route  passes  some  distance  to  the  eastward  of  the  fortress  Nflkhl
on  the  Haj  road ;  six  hours,  according  to  Seetzen's  information. '
A  branch  route,  however,  from  both  the  passes,  goes  off  by  way
of  Nukhl,  and  falls  in  again  further  north ;  but  this  increases
the  distance  one  day's  journey.  From  the  convent  to  Euhaibeh
is  reckoned  nine  days'  journey  on  all  the  direct  roads ;  and  by
way  of  Nukhl,  ten  days.  The  middle  route,  across  the  pass  el-
Mureikhy,  is  the  one  most  commonly  travelled  by  the  Tawarah ;
though  Tuweileb  wa«  acquainted  with  them  all.

These  roads,  it  will  be  seen,  all  lie  to  the  eastward  of  Wady
el-'Arish ;  the  westernmost  crossing  that  Wady  from  west  to
east,  not  far  above  J ebel  Ikhrimm.  But  another  branch  keeps
on  from  that  point  to  Gazu,  along  the  western  side  of  the
'Arish,  crossing  it  much  further  down,  and  leaving  Euhaibeh
at  some  distance  on  the  right.    This  would  seem  to  be  the

»  Zach's  Moiiatl.  Corrcsp.  XVII.  p.  147.

i.  291-293

Apk.  11.]

BOUTES  ACROSS  THE  DESERT.

199

route  taken  by  the  pilgrims,  who  travelled  in  the  fifteenth  and
sixteenth  centuries  from  Gaza  to  Mount  Sinai.

The  above  are  all  the  roads  we  heard  of,  across  the  desert,
from  south  to  north.  But  an  important  road  leads  from  Cairo
by  way  of  'Ajrud  to  Hebron,  and  falls  into  our  route  at  the
head  of  Wady  es-Seram,  before  reaching  Kuhaibeh. — A  few
days  before  we  passed,  Lord  Prudhoe  had  also  travelled  directly
from  Nukhl  to  Wady  Musa,  and  kindly  furnished  us  with  the
notes  of  his  route.

The  notices  thus  collected  by  us  for  the  first  time  from  the
Arabs,  together  with  our  own  observations  and  Burckhardt's
route  in  1812,  furnished,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  only  topographi-
cal details  as  yet  given  to  the  public,  respecting  the  great  desert
north  of  Jebel  et-Tih  and  the  Haj  route;  excepting  a  very
brief  account  by  Kussegger  of  his  journey  from  the  convent  to
Hebron  a  few  months  after  we  had  passed.  The  details  are  em-
bodied in  a  note  at  the  end  of  the  volume.'

From  a  comparison  of  all  these  notices,  it  appears,  that  the
middle  of  this  desert  is  occupied  by  a  long  central  basin,  ex-
tending from  Jebel  et-Tih  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,
descending  towards  the  north  with  a  rapid  slope,  and  drained
through  aU  its  length  by  Wady  el-'Arish,  which  enters  the  sea
near  the  place  of  the  same  name.  West  of  this  basin,  other
Wadys  run  by  themselves  down  to  the  sea.  On  the  east  of
the  same  central  basin  is  another  similar  and  parallel  one,  be-
tween it  and  the  'Arabah,  (the  two  being  separated  by  the  chain
el-'Ojmeh  and  its  continuation,)  extending  from  the  Tih  nearly
to  J ebel ' Araif  and  el-Mukrah,  and  drained  throughout  by  the
Wady  el-Jerafeh ;  which  having  its  head  in  or  near  the  Tih,
empties  into  the  'Arabah  not  far  from  el-Mukrdh.  North  of  this
last  basin,  the  tract  between  the  'Arabah  and  the  basin  of  the
'Arish,  is  filled  up  by  ranges  or  clusters  of  mountains;  from  which
on  the  east  short  Wadys  run  to  the  'Arabah,  and  on  the  west
longer  ones  to  Wady  el-'Arish;  until  further  north,  these  latter
continue  by  themselves  to  the  sea  nearer  Graza.

Comparing  now  this  formation  of  the  northern  desert  with
the  notices  already  given  respectiog  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  we
obtain  a  more  distinct  view  of  the  general  features  of  the  latter.
If  the  parallel  of  the  northern  coast  of  Egypt  be  extended  east-
ward to  the  great  Wady  el-' Arabah,  it  appears  that  the  desert,
south  of  this  parallel,  rises  gradually  towards  the  south,  until
on  the  summit  of  the  ridge  et-Tih,  between  the  gulfs  of  Suez
and  ''Akabah,  it  attains  the  elevation  of  4322  feet,  according  to
Russegger.    The  waters  of  all  this  great  tract  flow  off  north-

*  See  Note  XXIV,  end  of  the  volume.  For  the  routes  of  the  few  travellers  since
1840,  see  Ritter  Erdk.  XTV.  p.  866  sij.

i.  293,  294

200

FKOM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

wards  either  to  the  Mediterranean  or  the  Dead  Sea.  The  Tih
forms  a  sort  of  offset ;  and  along  its  southern  base  the  surface
sinks  at  once  to  the  height  of  only  about  3000  feet,  forming  the
sandy  plain  which  extends  nearly  across  the  peninsula.  After
this  the  mountains  of  the  peninsula  proper  commence,  and  rise
rapidly  through  the  formations  of  sandstone,  grunstein,  porphyry,
and  granite,  into  the  lofty  masses  of  St.  Catharine  and  Um
Shaumer ;  the  former  of  which  has  an  elevation  of  more  than
8000  Paris  feet,  or  nearly  double  that  of  the  Tih.  Here  the
waters  all  run  eastward  or  westward  to  the  gulfs  of  'Akabah
and  Suez.

Thursday,  April  Vlih.  Our  'Amran  guides  had  been  en-
gaged only  as  far  as  to  Sheikh  el-'Amry,  which  we  passed  yester-
day ;  but  as  they  professed  to  be  going  to  Gaza,  they  continued
with  us  to  Kuhaibeh,  and  left  us  at  evening.  We  ourselves
had  been  long  undecided  which  route  to  take  from  this  point.
But  as  we  learned  that  there  were  no  places  of  importance  on
the  Gaza  road ;  and  by  taking  it  we  should  probably  arrive  a
day  later  at  Jerusalem ;  while  the  way  by  Hebron  was  more
direct  and  apparently  passed  the  sites  of  important  ancient
cities ;  we  determined  to  follow  the  latter.  The  journey  of
yesterday  had  been  one  of  deep  interest  to  us ;  nor  did  that  of
to-day  afford  results  less  unexpected  or  gratifying.

Starting  at  5\  o'clock,  we  proceeded  on  a  general  course
northeast  down  Wady  er-Ruhaibeh,  which  becomes  broad  and
arable,  with  rounded  hills  on  either  side.  After  three  quarters
of  an  hour  there  was  a  ruin  on  the  hill  on  our  right,  a  square
tower  of  hewn  stones,  with  a  large  heap  of  stones  adjoining.
A  smaU  Wady  called  esh-Shutein  comes  in  at  tliis  point  from
the  same  side ;  and  on  the  hills  further  north  we  saw  other
heaps  of  squared  stones.  As  we  advanced,  the  valley  became
quite  green  with  grass ;  and  in  a  season  of  ordinary  rain  would
be  verdant  and  fuU  of  luxuriant  herbage.  The  birds  were  now
more  frequent,  warbling  forth  their  carols  and  fiUing  the  air
with  melody.  We  noticed  the  quail  with  his  whistle,  and  the
lark  with  her  song ;  besides  mafiy  smaller  warblers.  In  the
course  of  the  day,  we  heard  also  the  notes  of  the  nightingale.
At  half  past  six  a  ruined  village  was  on  the  left-hand  hill.
Five  minutes  later  we  left  Wady  er-Ruhaibeh  running  northwest
to  join  Wady  el-Kurn ;  and  passed  up  a  small  side  valley,  Wady
el-Futeis.  We  had  overtaken  a  straggling  family  of  the
Haweitat,  with  three  or  four  camels,  travelling  on  our  route ;
and  as  the  man  seemed  acquainted  with  the  country,  having

i.  294,  2'.)G

Apr.  12.]

EL-KHULASAH,  ELUSA.

201

often  iDeen  here,  (as  he  said,)  we  engaged  him  as  a  guide  as  far
as  to  the  vicinity  of  Hebron.

Our  path  now  led  over  a  hill  and  down  another  small  valley,
running  nearly  E.  N.  E.  towards  a  wide  open  country,  which
spread  itself  out  on  every  side  with  swelling  hills,  but  no  moun-
tains, almost  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.  Herbs  were  abun-
dant ;  but  the  scanty  grass  was  withered  and  parched.  Crossing
a  tract  of  low  hills  extending  along  from  the  left,  we  came  at
8.20  to  the  bed  of  Wady  el-Kurn.  This  is  a  valley  or  plain  of
some  width,  with  a  water-course  in  the  middle,  running  here
■west,  and  then  northwest  and  joining  the  Kuhaibeh.  As  we
approached  its  bed  from  the  south,  we  perceived  a  wall  of  hewn
stone,  extending  for  some  distance  obhquely  from  the  bed  ;  and
many  small  fragments  of  pottery  were  strewed  over  the  soil.
We  halted  on  the  northern  bank  at  a  fine  well,  surrounded  with
several  drinking-troughs  of  stone  for  watering  camels  and  flocks.
The  well  is  circular,  eight  or  ten  feet  in  diameter;  and  meas-
ured twenty-seven  feet  in  depth  to  the  surface  of  the  water.  It
is  very  neatly  stoned  up  with  giod  masonry ;  but  the  bottom
seemed  to  have  been  partly  filled  with  rubbish.  The  water  was
slightly  brackish,  and  was  said  never  to  fail.  Adjacent  to  this
well  the  ground  was  strewed  with  ruins,  which  our  Arabs  called
el-Khulasah ;  in  which  name  we  could  not  but  recognise  the
ancient  Elusa.

These  ruins  cover  an  area  of  fifteen  or  twenty  acres,  through-
out which  the  foundations  and  enclosures  of  houses  are  dis-
tinctly to  be  traced ;  and  squared  stones  are  everywhere  thinly
scattered.  Toward  the  western  side  are  two  open  places,  per-
haps open  squares  of  the  ancient  city.  Several  large  heaps  of
hewn  stones  in  various  parts  probably  mark  the  sites  of  public
buildings  ;  but  they  are  thrown  together  in  too  much  confusion
to  be  easily  made  out.  Occasional  fragments  of  columns  and
entablatures  were  visible.  We  found  no  cisterns ;  the  city
having  been  apparently  siippUed  with  water  from  the  public
well.  The  space  covered  by  the  ruins  is  at  least  one  third
greater  than  that  at  Ruhaibeh ;  but  the  city  was  apparently
less  compactly  built ;  and  the  masses  of  ruins  are  much  less
considerable.  The  limestone  is  here  softer,  and  is  much  decayed
from  the  influence  of  the  weather ;  many  of  the  blocks  being
eaten  through  and  through  Like  a  honeycomb.  In  this  way
probably  a  large  portion  of  the  materials  has  perished.  We
judged  that  here  must  have  been  a  city  with  room  enough  for  a
population  of  fifteen  or  twenty  thousand  souls.

The  city  of  Elusa  lay  without  the  borders  of  Palestine  ;  and
its  name  is  not  found  in  the  Bible.  It  is  first  mentioned  by
Ptolemy  in  the  first  half  of  the  second  century,  among  the  cities

i.  2'JG,  297

202

FEOM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

of  Idumea,  west  of  the  Dead  Sea  ;  and  is  marked  in  the  Peu-
tinger  Tables  as  lying  on  the  Eoman  road,  seventy-one  Roman
miles  southward  from  Jerusalem.  This  distance  we  afterwards
travelled  in  twenty-sis  hours  and  a  quarter,  at  a  pace  some-
what more  rapid  than  our  average  rate ;  affording  a  coincidence
near  enough  to  determine  the  site,  even  if  the  name  were  not
decisive. '

Profane  history  makes  no  farther  mention  of  Elusa ;  but  from
ecclesiastical  writers  we  learn,  that  although  there  was  here  a
Christian  church  with  a  bishop,  yet  the  city  was  chiefly  inhab-
ited by  heathen,  connected  with  the  Saracens  of  the  adjacent
deserts.  Jerome  relates  of  St.  HUarion,  that  travelling  with  a
company  of  monks  into  the  desert  of  Kadesh,  he  came  to  Elusa
just  as  an  annual  festival  had  collected  all  the  people  in  the
temple  of  Venus ;  whom  they  worshipped,  hke  the  Saracens,  in
conjunction  with  the  morning  star.  The  town  itself,  he  says,
was  f^r  the  most  part  semi-barbarous.  As  an  episcopal  city,
Elusa  was  reckoned  to  the  third  Palestine.  About  A.  D.  400,
the  son  of  Xilus  was  brought«here  as  a  prisoner  from  Mount
Sinai,  and  redeemed  by  the  bishop  ;  as  has  been  already  related
in  speaking  of  the  convent.*  The  names  of  four  other  bishops
are  found  in  the  records  of  councils,  as  late  as  to  A.  D.  536.
About  A.  D.  600,  Antoninus  Martyr  appears  to  have  passed
from  Palestine  to  Sinai  by  Elusa,  which  he  calls  Eulatia.  The
NotiticB  of  ecclesiastical  writers,  collected  by  Reland,  refer  to
nearly  the  same  period.  From  that  time  onward  until  now,  an
interval  of  more  than  eleven  centuries,  Elusa  has  remained  un-
mentioned,  and  its  place  unknown ;  until  we  were  thus  permitted
to  rescue  it  again  from  this  long  oblivion.^

Leaving  the  well  at  a  quarter  past  9  o'clock,  we  proceeded
on  our  way,  on  a  course  N.  N.  E.  Of  Wady  el-Kum,  (some-
times called  also  Wady  el-Khulasah,)  we  had  two  accounts.
Tuweileb  thought  that  after  the  junction  of  the  Ruhaibeh  with
it,  the  two  form  Wady  Khubarah,  which  enters  the  'Arish.  This
Wady,  the  Khubarah,  though  without  living  water,  is  very  fer-
tile, and  yields  good  crops  of  grain  and  also  of  melons.    On  the

'  From  a  remark  of  Jerome,  (Comm.
in  Esa.  15,  4,)  it  would  appear,  that  the
Aramsan  name  of  this  city  was  r!X?Vn
which  was  softened  in  Greek  to  'ZKowra.
The  Arabic  version  in  Gen.  20,  1.  2,  and
26,  1,  instead  of  Gerar,  reads  el-Khul'i*,
as  if  referring  it  to  Elosa.  See  Keland
Pa'jest.  pp.  755,  805.  Bochart  Phalcg,
p.  300. — The  length  of  the  Roman  mile  is
commardt,  p.  iS3.
wrongly  hj  Jumper.   The  tools  are  Toy

L  299  300

204

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

grass  and  ricli  pasture,  were  now  burnt  over  with  drought.
Arabs  were  pasturing  their  camels  in  various  parts  ;  but  no  trace
of  dwellings  was  any  where  visible.  At  2f  o'clock  we  reached
Wady  es-Seba',  a  wide  water-course,  or  bed  of  a  torrent,  running
here  W.  S.  W.  towards  Wady  es-Suny.  Upon  its  northern
side,  close  upon  the  bank,  are  two  deep  wells,  still  called  Bir  es-
Seba',  the  ancient  Beersheha.  We  had  entered  the  borders  of
Palestine !

These  wells  are  some  distance  apart ;  they  are  circular,  and
stoned  up  very  neatly  with  solid  masonry,  apparently  much
more  ancient  than  that  of  the  wells  at  'Abdeh.  The  larger  one
is  twelve  and  a  half  feet  in  diameter,  and  forty-four  and  a  half
feet  deep  to  the  surface  of  the  water ;  sixteen  feet  of  which  at
the  bottom  is  excavated  in  the  sohd  rock.  The  other  well  lies
fifty-five  rods  W.  S.  W.,  and  is  five  feet  in  diameter  and  forty-
two  feet  deep.  The  water  in  both  is  pure  and  sweet,  and  in
great  abundance  ;  the  finest  indeed  we  had  found  since  leaving
Sinai.  Both  wells  are  surrounded  with  drinking-troughs  of  stone
for  camels  and  flocks ;  such  as  were  doubtless  used  of  old  for
the  flocks  which  then  fed  on  the  adjacent  hills.  The  curb-stones
were  deeply  worn  by  the  friction  of  the  ropes  in  drawing  up  water
by  hand. '

We  had  heard  of  no  ruins  here,  and  hardly  expected  to  find
any  ;  for  none  were  visible  from  the  wells  ;  yet  we  did  not  wish
to  leave  so  important  a  spot  without  due  examination.  Ascend-
ing the  low  hills  north  of  the  wells,  we  found  them  covered  with
the  ruins  of  former  habitations,  the  foundations  of  which  are  still
distinctly  to  be  traced,  although  scarcely  one  stone  remains  upon
another.  The  houses  appear  not  to  have  stood  compactly,  but
scattered  over  several  httle  hills  and  in  the  hollows  between.
They  seem  to  have  been  built  chiefly  of  round  stones  ;  though
some  of  the  stones  are  squared  and  some  hewn.  It  was  probably
only  a  small  straggling  city.  This  very  expression  I  wrote  in
pencil  on  the  spot ;  and  was  afterwards  gratified  to  find,  that
Eusebius  and  Jerome  both  describe  it  only  as  a  "  large  village  "
with  a  Roman  garrison.*  We  could  find  no  special  traces  of
churches  or  other  public  biuldings  ;  although  one  or  two  larger
heaps  of  stones  may  probably  have  been  such  edifices.  These
ruins  are  spread  over  a  space  half  a  mile  in  length  along  the

'  The  Hebrew  name  Beersheba  signi-  implying  seven  wells;  but  without  the

fies  "  Well  of  the  Oath ; "  or  as  some  slightest  historical  or  other  ground.  On

suppose,  "  Well  of  the  Seven,"  referring  the  map  of  our  route  across  the  desert,

to  the  seven  lambs  which  Abraham  gave  published  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal

to  Abimclech  in  token  of  the  oath  between  Gcopp-aphical  Society  of  London  for  1839,

them.    See  Gen.  21,  28-32.    The  Arabic  a  similar  explanation  was  inserted  without

name  Bir  es-.Seba'  signifies  "  Well  of  the  my  knowledge.

Seven,"  and  also  "  Well  of  the  Lion." —       '■'  Onomast.  art.  Bersabee.  Euseb.  Kci/t?)

Some  writ';rs  have  regarded  the  name  as  ntyiffrri.    Jerome,  "  vicns  grandis."
■  i.  300,  301

Apr.  12.]

BEERSHEBA.

205

northern  side  of  the  water-course  and  extending  back  about  a
quarter  of  a  mile.  Fragments  of  pottery  are  scattered  over  the
whole. — On  the  south  side  of  the  water-course  is  a  long  wall  of
hewn  stone  under  the  bank,  extending  for  several  hundred  feet,
apparently  intended  to  protect  the  bank  from  being  washed  away
by  the  torrent.  Probably  gardens  or  some  important  building
may  have  been  situated  on  the  bank  above  ;  of  which  however
there  is  now  no  trace.  On  the  same  side  are  several  heaps  of
stones  ;  and  the  ground  is  also  strewed  with  small  fragments  of
pottery.

Here  then  is  the  place  where  the  patriarchs  Abraham,  Isaac,
and  Jacob  often  dwelt  !  Here  Abraham  dug  perhaps  this  very
well ;  and  journeyed  from  hence  with  Isaac  to  Mount  Moriah,  to
otfer  him  up  there  in  sacrifice.  From  this  place  Jacob  fled  to
Padan-Aram,  after  acquiring  the  birthright  and  blessing  belong-
ing to  his  brother  ;  and  here  too  he  sacrificed  to  the  Lord  on
setting  off  to  meet  his  son  Joseph  in  Egypt.  Here  Samuel  made
his  sons  judges  ;  and  from  here  Elijah  wandered  out  into  the
southern  desert,  and  sat  down  under  a  shrub  of  Ketem,  just  as
our  Arabs  sat  down  under  it  every  day  and  every  night.  Here
was  the  border  of  Palestine  proper,  which  extended  from  Dan  to
Beersheba.'  Over  these  swelling  hUls  the  flocks  of  the  patriarchs
once  roved  by  thousands  ;  where  now  we  found  only  a  few  camels,
asses,  and  goats  !

Beersheba  is  last  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  as  one  of
the  places  to  which  the  Jews  returned  after  the  exUe.^  The
name  does  not  occur  in  the  New  Testament ;  nor  is  it  referred  to
as  then  existing  by  any  writer  earlier  than  Eusebius  and  Jerome
in  the  fourth  century.  They  describe  it  as  a  large  viUage  with  a
Koman  garrison.^  It  is  found  as  an  episcopal  city  in  the  early
ecclesiastical  and  other  Notitke  referring  to  the  centuries  before
and  after  the  Muhammedan  conquests  but  none  of  its  bishops
are  anpvhere  mentioned.  Its  site  was  in  Hke  manner  long  for-
gotten ;  and  the  crusaders  assigned  this  name  to  the  place  now
called  Beit  Jibrin,  lying  between  Hebron  and  Askelon.^  About
the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  Sir  J ohn  Maundeville  and
also  Ludolf  de  Suchem  and  William  de  Baldensel  passed  on  this
route  from  Sinai  to  Hebron  and  Jerusalem  ;  and  aU  of  them
mention  here  Beersheba.  The  two  latter  say  it  was  then  unin-
habited ;  but  some  of  the  churches  were  still  standing.  From
this  time  onward  for  five  centuries,  it  has  again  remained  until

'  See  Gen.  21,  31  sq.    22,  19.    26,23.  indeed  mentions  a  Bersabee  among  the

28,  10.    46,  1.    1  Sam.  8,  2.    1  Kings  towns  which  he  fortified ;  but  this  was

19,3.    2Sam.  17,  11.    Compare  in  gen-  in  GalOee.    B.  J.  2.  20.  6.    Vit.  37.

eral,  Reland's  Palast.  p.  620.  *  Reland's  Pal.  pp.  215,  217,  222,  229.

»  Neh.  11,  27.  30.  '  WiU.  Tyr.  14.  22.

'  Onomast.   art.  Bersabee. — Josephus

Vol.  I.— 18  i.  302,  303

206

FROM  'AKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

this  day  apparently  unvisited  and  unknown  ;  except  tlie  slight
notice  which  Seetzen  obtained  respecting  it  from  the  Arabs.'

We  remained  nearly  an  hour  upon  this  interesting  spot  ;
where  all  that  is  now  to  be  seen,  lies  within  a  very  narrow  com-
pass. Meantime  several  flocks  of  goats  came  up  for  water  ;  or
perhaps  because  their  keepers  wished  to  get  a  nearer  view  of  the
strangers.  After  some  chaffering,  we  bought  a  kid  for  our  Arabs  ;
intending  to  give  them  a  good  supper,  inasmuch  as  we  were  ap-
proaching the  end  of  our  journey.  We  set  off  again  at  3.35,  on
a  course  northeast,  the  path  gradually  ascending  over  an  open
tract,  which  in  ordinary  seasons  must  be  a  fine  grazing  country.
Not  a  precipice,  not  a  tree,  was  to  be  seen  ;  notlung  but  grassy
hills.  At  4.25  we  passed  the  site  of  a  village,  the  stone  houses
of  which  had  been  thrown  down  to  the  very  foundation.  We
could  learn  no  name.  Ten  minutes  later  we  encamped  in  this
open  tract,  for  the  first  time  on  grass,  or  rather  what  had  once
been  grass ;  for  it  was  now  parched  and  brown.  Yet  it  was
something  better  than  the  desert ;  where  hitherto  the  floor  of  our
tent  had  always  been  the  naked  sand  or  gravel.

Our  Arabs  quickly  slaughtered  the  poor  goat ;  and  the  dif-
ferent portions  were  speedily  in  the  process  of  cooking  at  different
fires.  This  time  they  had  no  guests,  bidden  or  unbidden,  to
interrupt  the  full  enjoyment  of  their  savoury  repast.  Such  pro-
bably in  kind  was  the  "  savoury  meat "  which  Isaac  loved  ;  and
with  which,  in  this  very  neighbourhood,  Jacob  enticed  from  him
the  blessing  intended  for  his  elder  brother.'  Our  Haweity  guide
had  brought  along  his  family,  with  two  or  three  camels  ;  and  to
them  the  offals  of  the  kid  were  abandoned.  I  looked  in  upon
this  feast ;  and  found  the  women  boiling  the  stomach  and  en-
trails, whic^  they  had  merely  cleaned  by  stripping  them  with  the
hand,  without  washing  ;  while  the  head  unskinned  and  unopened,
was  roasting  underneath  in  the  embers  of  a  fire  made  chiefly  of
camels'  dung.  With  such  a  meal  our  Tawarah  would  hardly
have  been  content.  Indeed  all  the  Bedawin  we  had  yet  met
with  out  of  the  peninsula,  the  'Amran,  the  Haiwat,  the  Haweitat,
and  the  Tiyahah,  were  obviously  upon  a  lower  scale  of  civiliza-
tion than  the  Tawarah  ;  and  seemed  little  if  any  further  removed
from  savage  life,  than  the  red  man  of  the  American  wUds.

'  Zach's  Monatl.  Corresp.  XVII.  14^5.  towards  the  south.    This  is  a  striking  in-

At  the  time  of  our  visit  I  was  undfr  tli«  stance  of  their  loose  and  vaj^c  manner  of

impression,  that  Seetnen  had  liiinself  been  specifying  distances  and  bearings  not  defi-

ftt  Beersheba.    But  ho  went  from  Hebron  ritc\y  Itnown  to  them.    We  found  the  dis-

first  to  the  vicinity  of  Gaza  ;  and  thence  taace  from  Beerslieba  to  Hebron  to  be  a

direct  to  Sinai ;  and  only  speaks  of  the  good  12  hours  with  camels  ;  equivalent  to

■wells  of  Bir  es-Seba'  as  being  several  neariy  25  (x.  M.  or  more  than  30  llomau

Lours  j;.  N.  E.  of  tlie  spot  where  he  then  milus,  on  a  general  course  N.  E.  by  E.

•was. — Eusebius  and  Jerome  place  Beer-  Compare  RcUmd's  Pal.  p.  474  sq.

8heba  at  twenty  Roman  miles  from  Hebron  '  Gen.  27,  9  sq.

i.  303,  304

Apr.  13.]

ARAB  FEAST.     THE  HAWEITAT.

207

Our  guide  of  the  Haweitat  was  from  the  country  east  of  the
gulf  of  'Akabah  and  north  of  the  Haj  route.  Like  so  many-
others  of  his  tribe,  he  had  been  driven  out  by  the  drought ;  and
had  wandered  off  hither  to  the  south  of  Syria  in  search  of  pas-
twre.  We  afterwards  found  similar  wanderers  in  the  district
around  Wady  Musa.  He  said  that  in  his  country  there  were
many  ruined  towns,  which  had  never  yet  been  "  written  down,"
His  tribe  have  no  horses  ;  not  one  of  them,  not  even  the  Sheikh,
can  read  ;  nor  did  he  know  of  any  Bedawy  who  could.  When
the  Haweitat  of  that  region  receive  letters,  they  apply  to  the
Arabs  Hndhr,  "townsmen,"  of  Muweilih  to  have  them  read.
These  Haweitat  are  at  enmity  with  the  Arabs  of  Khaibar. —
This  guide,  as  well  as  our  other  Arabs,  called  the  wind  we  had
yesterday  Shurkiyeh,  an  east  wind,  although  it  blew  from  the
south.*  The  Simoom,  they  said,  differs  from  it  only  in  its  greater
heat  ;  the  haze  and  sand  and  discoloration  of  the  air  being  alike
in  both.  Should  it  overtake  a  traveller  without  water,  it  may
in  certain  circumstances  prove  fatal  to  him.  He  needs  water
not  only  to  drink  ;  but  it  is  well  to  wash  the  skin.  The  Simoom,
they  said,  prevails  only  during  the  season  when  the  Khamsin
blows  in  Egypt.    This  is  during  the  months  of  April  and  May."

Friday,  April  We  started  at  5.25,  and  in  five  minutes

crossed  a  track  leading  off  N.  by  W.  to  the  well  of  Khuwei-
lifeh,  situated  in  a  Wady  of  the  same  name  on  the  road  from
Hebron  by  Dhoheriyeh  to  Graza.  It  was  described  to  us  as
similar  to  the  smaller  well  at  Bir  es-Seba'.^  Fifteen  minutes
more  brought  us  out  upon  a  wide  open  grassy  plain,  suffering
greatly  indeed  from  drought,  but  in  which  many  fields  of  wheat
were  scattered,  looking  beautifully  in  their  vesture  of  bright
green.  The  ground  too  was  in  many  places  decked  with  flowers  ;
among  them  were  an  abundance  of  low  scarlet  poppies.  The
morning  was  lovely  ;  the  sky  perfectly  serene,  with  a  refreshing
breeze  from  the  southwest ;  the  air  full  of  the  sweet  carols  of
birds.  Thus  we  spent  our  first  morning  in  Palestine.  It  was  a
delightful  entrance  to  the  Promised  Land.

The  plain  over  which  we  now  travelled  on  a  course  N.  E.
by  E.  has  an  undulating  surface,  and  eitends  very  far  towards
the  southeast.  No  shrubs  nor  trees  were  visible  ;  nothing  but
grass  and  flowers  and  green  fields.  It  reminded  me  of  the  vast
plains  of  northern  Germany.  On  the  east  and  north  were  hills
and  ridges,  the  beginning  of  the  mountains  of  Judah,  formiu'i  an
angle  in  the  northeast  towards  which  our  course  led.  The  pi  lin
was  much  cut  up  by  deep  guUies  with  precipitous  banks,  mostly

'  This  name  Shurkiyeh  suggests  an  ob-       '  Lane's  Mod.  Egypt.  I.  pp.  2,  'A.
vious  etymology  of  the  Italian  word  ^  See  more  respecting  this  well  under

rocco.  date  of  June  7th.

i.  305.  3U6

208

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUf5ALEM.

[Sec.  V.

running  towards  the  left,  worn  by  the  wintry  torrents.  At  6.10
a  track  went  off  to  the  left  towards  the  north  to  a  place,  where
the  Bedawin  have  their  magazines  of  grain,  called  Nuttar  el-
Lukiyeh.  About  7  o'clock  we  crossed  a  Wady  running  north-
westerly through  the  plain  ;  it  was  said  to  be  the  Khuweilifeh,
which  after  passing  the  well  of  that  name,  bends  round  to  join
the  Wady  Seba'.  We  had  however  some  doubt  as  to  the  cor-
rectness of  this  information.

Ten  minutes  later  we  crossed  the  road  leading  from  Gaza  to
Wady  Musa  and  Ma'an.  According  to  our  Haweity  guide,  it
unites  with  the  road  from  Hebron  at  or  near  a  well  called  el-
Milh,  and  then  divides  and  descends  to  the  '  Arabah  by  two  passes
called  el-Grharib  and  er-Rakib.  We  learned  more  of  this  road
at  a  later  period  ;  but  heard  nothing  further  of  this  latter  pass.'
As  we  advanced,  the  hills  from  the  northwest  approached  more
and  more  to  meet  those  upon  the  east ;  and  a  small  Wady  was
visible  descending  from  the  angle.  At  8.20  a  path  went  off  to
the  right,  which  was  said  to  lead  to  a  village  in  the  mountains.
At  three  quarters  past  eight,  the  plain  terminated  ;  we  began
to  get  among  the  hills,  and  entered  the  Wady  above  mentioned,
which  our  Arabs  chose  to  call  Wady  el-Khulil ;  but  whether  for
any  other  reason  than  because  it  was  leading  us  towards  el-
Khulil  or  Hebron,  is  doubtful.  In  this  valley  were  fields  of
grain  ;  and  half  an  hour  after  entering  it,  we  found  a  man  plough-
ing with  two  heifers  in  order  to  sow  millet.  His  plough  was  very
simple,  and  by  English  and  American  farmers  would  be  called
rude.  Yet  it  did  its  work  well,  and  was  of  a  much  lighter  and
better  construction  than  the  coarse  plough  of  Egypt.  The  an-
cient form  is  not  improbably  still  preserved.

We  now  began  to  ascend  more  rapidly  ;  the  limestone  hills
on  each  side  became  rocky  and  higher,  and  were  green  with  grass ;
while  low  trees  were  occasionally  scattered  over  them.  Among
these  the  Butm,  Pistacia  TerebintJnis  of  Linnaeus,  the  Tere-
binth of  the  Old  Testament,  was  the  most  frequent.  We  noticed
here  red  clover  growing  wild  along  our  path.  At  9|  o'clock  we
reached  the  head  of  the  valley,  and  came  out  upon  a  ridge,  from
which  a  very  steep  descent  brought  us  to  the  bottom  of  another
deep  and  narrow  Wady  coming  down  from  the  northeast.  This
latter  here  turned  short  towards  the  southeast.  We  could  learn
neither  its  name,  nor  in  what  direction  its  waters  were  ultimately
carried  off ;  but  we  afterwards  found,  that  it  joins  the  great  val-
ley wliich  passes  down  further  east  from  near  Hebron  to  Wady
es-Seba'.  Our  path  now  followed  up  this  Wady,  still  on  a
general  course  N.  E.  by  E.  It  is  quite  narrow  and  winds
much  amons;  the  hills  ;  so  that  it  seemed  to  be  almost  inter-

'  See  under  date  of  June  2d  and  3d.

L  30G.  307

Apb.  13.]

DHOHIRITEH.

209

minable.  The  sides  were  rocky,  but  clothed  with  grass  and  the
shrub  Bellan,  a  sort  of  furze.  Here  we  met  several  wild  savage-
looking  Arabs  ;  and  further  on,  a  man  on  horseback,  the  first  we
had  seen  since  leaving  Egypt.  He  was  on  a  sleek  mare,  which
brought  him  rapidly  down  the  steep  rocky  side  of  one  of  the
hills.  The  bottom  of  the  valley  in  its  steeper  parts  was  formerly
laid  off  into  terraces,  of  which  the  massive  waUs  stiU  remain  ;  but
nothing  more.  After  some  time  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  mingled
together  were  seen  feeding  on  the  hills  ;  and  we  feU  in  with  other
flocks  consisting  of  young  kids  alone.  Not  long  after,  we  came
upon  herds  of  neat  cattle  and  donkeys  grazing ;  and  at  length,
at  a  quarter  past  11  o'clock,  got  sight  of  the  village  of  edh-
Dhoheriyeh  on  the  summit  of  a  hill  terminating  the  Wady,  the
head  of  which  here  opens  out  into  a  green  basin.  This  and  the
hills  around  were  covered  with  flocks  and  neat  cattle  in  the  an-
cient patriarchal  style,  with  many  horses,  asses,  and  camels,  aU
in  fine  order  ;  and  affording  to  us  a  most  pleasing  prospect,  after
having  been  jfor  thirty  days  confined  to  the  dreary  nakedness  of
the  desert.    We  reached  Dhoheriyeh  at  11.35.

Our  Tawarah  Arabs  had  always  said,  that  they  could  take
us  only  as  far  as  to  this  village,  the  first  on  this  road  within  the
borders  of  Syria.  They  had  represented  it  too  as  being  very  near
to  Hebron.  The  Bedawin  never  bring  travellers  or  loads  further
than  this  point ;  as  the  inhabitants,  living  on  the  great  road
from  Hebron  to  Gaza  and  Egypt,  have  the  monopoly  of  trans-
porting all  goods  and  passengers  that  come  by  way  of  the  desert.
Our  first  object  therefore  was  to  obtain  the  means  of  proceeding
without  delay  to  Hebron  ;  the  day  being  not  yet  half  spent.
We  sought  for  the  Sheikh  of  the  village,  but  he  was  absent.
The  person  who  acted  for  him,  we  found  sitting  with  a  number
of  the  inhabitants.  He  informed  us  that  we  could  obtain  no
animals  until  the  next  day  ;  when  they  would  engage  to  take  us
through  to  J erusalem.  To  aU  our  pressing  solicitations  to  be
sent  forward  immediately,  they  turned  a  deaf  ear  ;  probably  be-
cause they  did  not  wish  to  stop  for  the  night  with  us  at  Hebron ;
but  they  said  our  Arabs  might  go  on  with  us,  if  they  would.
This  we  then  proposed  ;  but  the  Tawarah  said  they  were  strangers
here,  and  feared  that  if  they  went  to  Hebron  their  camels  would
be  pressed  for  the  service  of  the  government ;  a  thing  not  at  all
unusual,  as  we  knew.  We  now  tried  to  ascertain  the  distance
to  Hebron  ;  thinking  we  could  perhaps  send  one  of  our  servants
thither  and  obtain  animals.  Some  said  it  was  three,  some  four,
and  some  five  hours  distant ;  nor  was  it  till  we  had  actually
travelled  over  the  ground  ourselves,  that  we  arrived  at  any
certainty  ;  and  then  we  found  the  largest  estimate  correct. —
Under  all  the  circumstances,  much  as  we  wished  to  get  on,  we

Yoi-  I.— lb*  i.  309

210

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

rsBc.v.

felt  compelled  to  have  the  camels  unloaded,  and  the  tent  pitched.
This  was  done  for  the  first  time  on  green  grass,  and  among  olive
trees,  in  the  basin  just  below  the  village  on  the  southeast.  Our
intention  was  to  pay  off  and  dismiss  our  Tawarah  ;  and  then,  if
possible,  obtain  animals  from  Hebron.

We  found  no  difficulty  in  satisfying  all  our  Arabs,  whose
camels  had  brought  loads  from  the  convent ;  but  an  unexpected
question  arose  in  the  case  of  Tuweileb.  We  had  regarded  him
merely  as  taking  the  place  of  Besharah,  as  head  of  the  party
and  guide ;  which,  according  to  the  express  stipulation  of  our
contract,  he  was  to  do  without  additional  expense  to  us,  except
such  slight  presents  as  we  might  choose  to  give  him.  I  have
already  mentioned,  that  he  had  brought  with  him  two  extra
camels,  apparently  for  himself  and  children ;  one  of  which  had
been  taken  into  our  service  at  'Akabah,  instead  of  a  camel  which
had  died  by  the  way.  But  his  views,  it  seems,  in  entering  upon
the  journey,  had  been  different  from  ours ;  and  Besharah  had
told  him,  that  we  would  take  him  as  Sheikh  of  the  party,  and
pay  him  the  hire  of  a  dromedary  for  himself;  or  rather,  would
make  him  an  equivalent  and  generous  present.  Thus  the  ani-
mal, which  all  along  upon  the  journey  had  been  nothing  more
than  a  broken  down  camel,  was  now  suddenly  transformed  into
the  dromedary  of  a  Sheikh.  We  had  already  paid  him  enough,
as  we  supposed ;  but  this  was  a  higher  claim,  touching  his
honour  as  a  Sheikh  and  as  a  Bedawy.  He  had  been  understood
to  come  as  the  Sheikh  of  our  party ;  he  had  consented  that  his
dromedary  shoidd  bear  a  burden  for  our  accommodation ;  and
now  both  he  and  his  dromedary  would  be  forever  degraded  in  the
eyes  of  his  tribe,  unless  we  made  him  a  fitting  present  for  a
Sheikh.  To  all  this  we  had  nothing  to  reply,  except  the  words
of  our  contract,  which  he  could  not  read.  We  cut  the  matter
short  at  last,  by  giving  him  our  old  pistols,  wliich  he  had  usually
paraded  in  his  girdle  on  the  way,  and  which  we  had  bought  for
a  trifle  in  Cairo.  With  this  present  he  seemed  highly  gratified.
But  we  were  not  sure,  that  he  did  not  immediately  sell  the
pistols  in  the  village ;  where  fire-arms  were  sought  with  avidity,
in  consequence  of  the  disarming  of  the  people  by  the  Egyptian
government.

We  had  on  the  whole  been  much  pleased  with  Tuweileb ;
although,  as  I  have  already  remarked,  he  liad  seen  his  best  days,
and  for  much  of  the  time  had  been  quite  unwell.  He  was  uni-
formly kind,  patient,  accommodating,  and  faithful ;  and  imtU
now  had  shown  himself  less  a  beggar  than  liis  companions.  He
gave  us  his  adieu  by  repeatedly  kissing  each  on  both  cheeks,  in
addition  to  the  usual  kiss  of  the  hand.  We  parted  with  our
Tawarah  Arabs  with  regret  and  with  the  kindest  feelings.  For

i.  309  311

Apr.  13.]

DHOHERIYEH.

211

thirty  days  they  had  now  been  our  companions  and  guides
through  the  desert ;  and  not  the  slightest  difficulty  had  arisen
between  us.  On  the  contrary,  they  had  done  all  in  their  power
to  lighten  the  tods  of  our  journey,  and  protect  us  from  discom-
forts by  the  way.  In  all  our  subsequent  journeyings,  we  found
no  guides  so  faitliful  and  devoted.

By  this  time  it  was  too  late  to  think  of  reaching  Hebron.
We  therefore  sent  and  engaged  camels  for  Jerusalem,  to  take  lib
and  our  luggage  at  midnight,  and  reach  the  Holy  City  before
the  next  evening.  The  journey  through  the  desert  had  made
such  inroads  upon  our  stores,  that  the  Sheikh  of  the  camels  re-
quired us  to  take  only  six,  instead  of  the  nine  which  had  brought
us  thus  far.  They  were  however  much  larger  and  stouter  than
those  of  the  Bedawin.

The  village  of  Dhoheriyeh  lies  high,  and  is  visible  from  a
great  distance  in  every  direction.  It  is  a  rude  assemblage  of
stone  hovels ;  many  of  which  are  half  under  ground,  and  others
broken  down.  A  castle  or  fortress  apparently  once  stood  here  ;
the  remains  of  a  square  tower  are  still  to  be  seen,  now  used  as  a
dwelling ;  and  the  doorways  of  many  hovels  are  of  hewn  stone
with  arches.  It  would  seem  to  have  been  one  of  the  line  of
small  fortresses,  which  apparently  once  existed  all  along  the
southern  border  of  Palestine.  The  village  contains,  according
to  the  government  census,  one  hundred  full  grown  men ;  of
whom  thirty-eight  had  been  taken  at  three  separate  times  for  the
Egyptian  army.  Though  half  in  ruins,  it  is  yet  rich  in  flocks
and  herds,  and  has  at  least  a  hundred  camels.  The  inhabitants
are  Hudhr,  or  townsmen ;  and  belong  to  the  party  called  Keis.
Most  of  the  villagers  in  this  quarter  are  of  this  party ;  as  well
as  some  of  the  Bedawin.

The  country  around  looks  barren  ;  the  limestone  rocks  come
out  in  large  blocks  and  masses  upon  the  sides  and  tops  of  the
hills  ;  and  give  a  whitish  cast  to  the  whole  landscape.  No  trees
were  visible ;  nor  any  fields  of  grain,  except  in  the  bottoms  of
the  narrow  valleys.  Indeed  the  aspect  of  the  whole  region  was
stern  and  dreary.  Yet  it  must  be  a  fine  grazing  country  ;  as  is
proved  by  the  fat  and  sleek  condition  of  the  herds  and  flocks ;
and  by  its  having  been,  from  the  days  of  Abraham  onward,  a
place  of  resort  for  nomadic  herdsmen.

Towards  evening  we  went  to  the  top  of  a  hill  just  east  of  our
tent ;  but  could  see  nothing  aU  around  save  rocky  hills  and  swells.
On  one  of  these  in  the  direction  E.  by  S.  was  a  ruined  castle ;
which  proved  to  be  Semu'a,  on  the  road  from  Wady  Musa  to
Hebron.  In  its  immediate  vicinity,  the  Arabs  said  there  were
two  other  like  ruins ;  one  called  'Attir,  and  the  other  Husn  el-
Ghiirab.    Of  the  latter  we  heard  no  more ;  but  saw  the  former

i,  311,  312

212

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[SecV.

place  as  we  afterwards  returned  from  Wady  Musa  tkrough
Semu'a.

During  the  evening  we  lay  down  and  slept.  At  the  rising  of
the  moon,  about  10  o'clock,  the  camels  came,  and  we  fixed  the
time  for  loading  at  half  past  twelve  ;  not  wishing  to  reach  He-
bron before  day.  They  aU,  camels  and  men,  lay  down  upon  the
ground,  and  were  soon  in  deep  sleep.  My  companions  also  lay
^  own ;  whUe  I  sat  up  alone  to  watch  during  the  few  hours  that
yet  remained.

Saturday,  April  lAth.  Half  an  hour  after  midnight  we
mustered  again,  and  set  to  work  on  the  luggage ;  but  such  was
the  inefficiency  and  stupidity  of  our  new  camel  drivers,  that
nearly  two  hours  elapsed,  before  we  could  mount.  One  camel
proved  refractory  and  refused  its  load ;  and  another  had  to  be
brought  from  the  village  in  its  stead.  We  started  at  length  at
2^  o'clock ;  but  in  descending  the  long  and  steep  hiU  from  the
village,  we  were  delayed  nearly  three  quarters  of  an  hour  by  the
necessity  of  repacking  one  of  the  loads ;  and  this  with  various
other  hindrances,  caused  us  to  lose  not  less  than  an  hour  upon
the  way.  The  course  from  Dhoheriyeh  to  Hebron,  as  we  after-
wards found  by  observation,  is  N.  54°  E.  The  hill  we  first  de-
scended is  very  steep  and  rocky ;  and  the  path  winds  down
among  the  stones.  It  brought  us  to  the  bottom  of  a  deep  valley,
running  towards  the  right,  probably  to  the  great  Wady  which
drains  the  region  around  Hebron.  The  road  continued  to  wind
among  valleys  and  over  hiUs ;  but  the  darkness  prevented  us
from  observing  much  of  the  country.  The  hiUs,  we  could  see,
began  to  be  covered  with  shrubs  ;  and  these  increased  as  we  ad-
vanced, and  were  intermingled  with  evergreen  or  prickly  oaks,
arbutus,  and  other  dwarf  trees  and  bushes.  At  half  past  five
there  was  a  spring  of  living  water ;  the  first  we  had  seen.

As  the  sun  rose  we  heard  upon  the  left  the  bleating  of  flocks
and  the  crowing  of  cocks,  as  if  from  a  village.  On  inquiring,
we  were  told  that  there  was  none ;  but  a  company  of  peasants
were  living  there  in  caves,  pasturing  their  flocks.  In  summer,
it  was  said,  a  large  portion  of  the  peasantry  leave  their  villages,
and  dwell  in  caves  or  ruins,  in  order  to  be  nearer  to  their  flocks
and  fields.  At  6.10  there  was  another  fountain  with  a  square
reservoir  below  it  on  the  right  ;  and  ten  minutes  further  on,  a
nmning  brpok,  the  first  we  had  seen  since  leanng  the  Nile.
This  was  in  a  Wady  called  ed-Dilbeh,  nmning  off  to  the  right,
and  partially  cultivated.  Near  by  was  the  site  of  a  ruined
village,  called  ed-Daumeh.

The  camels  we  now  had,  were  huge,  fat,  and  powerful,  each
stronger  than  any  two  of  our  former  Bedawin  -animals.  At  the
same  time  they  were  harder  in  their  gait,  treading  more  firmly,

L  3ia-314

Apr.  14.]

NEW  CAMELS.  HEBRON.

213

from  being  accustomed  to  carry  only  burdens  and  not  to  travel
as  dromedaries.  Two  of  the  owners  had  started  with  us ;  but
soon  abandoned  us  under  the  pretext  of  speedily  returning,
leaving  us  and  their  animals  to  the  care  of  two  ordinary  camel
drivers  and  a  young  Nubian  slave,  who  all  knew  nothing  of  the
country  except  what  lay  just  upon  the  road.  As  we  advanced,
the  hills  were  more  thickly  clothed  with  bushes,  and  covered
with  great  quantities  of  the  Za'ter,  a  species  of  thyme,  scented
almost  like  balm,  and  used  in  cooking.  At  7.20  we  left  the
direct  road  to  Jerusalem,  which  passes  on  the  left  of  Hebron,
and  turned  somewhat  more  to  the  right.  Crossing  a  ridge  we
came  at  a  quarter  before  8  o'clock  to  a  little  valley  with  many
olive  trees  and  enclosed  vineyards,  indicating  our  approach  to  a
land  of  higher  cultivation.  The  region  around  Hebron  abounds
with  vineyards,  and  the  grapes  are  the  finest  in  Palestine.
Each  vineyard  has  a  small  house  or  tower  of  stone,  which  serves
for  a  keeper's  lodge  ;  and,  during  ^the  vintage,  we  were  told
that  the  inhabitants  of  Hebron  go  out  and  dwell  in  these  houses,
and  the  town  is  almost  deserted.  In  this  little  valley  every
thing  looked  thrifty  ;  and  round  about  were  large  flocks  of  sheep
and  goats,  aU  in  good  condition.

Ascending  gradually  another  ridge,  we  at  length  from  its
top  saw  Hebron,  now  called  el-Khulil,  below  us  in  a  deep  narrow
valley  running  from  N.  N.  W.  to  S.  S.  E.  into  the  great  Wady
which  flows  off  to  Wady  es-Seba'.  The  spot  where  we  were,
affords  one  of  the  best  views  of  the  place.  The  town  lies  low
down  on  the  sloping  sides  of  this  valley,  chiefly  on  the  eastern ;
but  in  the  southern  part  extends  across  also  to  the  western  side.
The  houses  are  all  of  stone,  high  and  well  bmlt,  with  windows
and  flat  roofs  ;  and  on  these  roofs  small  domes,  sometimes  two
or  three  to  each  house ;  a  mode  of  building  apparently  peculiar
to  Judea,  for  I  do  not  remember  to  have  seen  it  further  north
than  Nabulus.  This  gave  to  the  city  in  our  eyes  a  new  and
rather  striking  aspect ;  and  the  whole  appearance  was  much
better  than  I  had  anticipated.  We  descended  from  the  west
into  the  valley  by  a  very  rocky  path ;  and  halted  at  8^  o'clock
on  the  green  slope  overagainst  the  northern  part  of  the  town ;
which  is  partly  occupied  as  a  cemetery.  We  had  thus  found
the  distance  from  Dhoheriyeh  to  Hebron  to  be  five  hours  of
travel.

We  had  now  reached  a  most  interesting  point  in  our  journey.
The  town  before  us  was  one  of  the  most  ancient  still  existing
cities  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures,  or  perhaps  in  the  records  of
the  world.'  Here  Abraham  and  the  other  patriarchs  dwelt  and
communed  with  God ;  and  in  this  vicinity  they  and  their  wives

'  Gen.  13,  18.

i.  314,  315

214

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

were  buried.  Here  too  had  been  for  seven  years  the  royal  resi-
dence of  David ;  and  before  us  was  the  pool  in  Hebron,  over
which  he  hanged  up  the  murderers  of  his  rival  Ishbosheth.'  In
Hebron  too  he  probably  composed  many  of  his  Psalms,  which
yet  thrill  through  the  soul  and  lift  it  up  to  God.  Our  minds
were  deeply  affected  by  all  these  associations,  and  we  would  fain
have  devoted  the  day  to  a  closer  examination  of  the  place.  But
the  strong  desire  we  felt  of  reaching  Jerusalem  before  night,
and  thus  closing  our  long  and  wearisome  journey  ;  together  with
the  expectation  we  cherished  of  revisiting  Hebron  at  a  later
time ;  induced  us  to  forego  all  other  considerations,  and  press
forward  as  soon  as  possible  to  Jerusalem.  Nearly  six  weeks
afterwards  we  spent  several  days  in  Hebron ;  and  I  therefore
defer  a  fuller  account  of  the  city  and  its  neighbourhood  until  that
time.*

Taking  a  hasty  ramble  through  the  streets  of  Hebron,  we
were  again  upon  our  way  at  9:^  o'clock,  after  a  stop  of  a  single
hour.  The  road  to  Jerusalem  is  rough  and  mountainous,  but
very  direct ;  the  general  course  being  between  N.  E.  by  N.  and
N.  N.  E.  As  we  issued  from  the  town,  the  path  for  a  short  dis-
tance was  full  of  mud  and  puddles  from  a  spring  near  by ;  and
to  us,  coming  out  of  the  desert,  this  was  quite  a  refreshing  sight.
The  road  leads  up  the  valley  for  a  short  time ;  and  then  up  a
branch  coming  from  the  northeast.  The  path  is  here  paved  ;  or
rather  laid  unevenly  with  large  stones,  in  the  manner  of  a  Swiss
mountain  road.  It  passes  between  the  walls  of  vineyards  and
olive  yards ;  the  former  chiefly  in  the  valley,  and  the  latter  on
the  slopes  of  the  hiUs,  which  are  in  many  parts  buUt  up  in  ter-
races. These  vineyards  are  very  fine,  and  produce  the  largest
and  best  grapes  in  all  the  coimtry.  Tliis  vaUey  is  generally
assumed  to  be  the  Eshcol  of  the  Old  Testament,  whence  the
spies  brought  back  the  cluster  of  grapes  to  Kadesh ;  and  ap-
parently not  without  reason.  The  character  of  its  fruit  stiU
corresponds  to  its  ancient  celebrity ;  and  pomegranates  and
figs,  as  well  as  apricots,  quinces,  and  the  like,  stiU  grow  there  in
abundance.'

This  road  bears  every  mark  of  having  always  been  a  great
highway  between  Hebron  and  Jerusalem.  It  is  direct ;  and  in
many  parts  artificially  made,  evidently  in  times  of  old.  But
wheels  probably  never  passed  here ;  the  hills  are  too  sharp  and

'  2  Sam.  4,  12.  Ancr,  Eshcol,  mid  Mamre.    Now  Mamre

"  See  Uiider  May  24  and  25.  gave  his  name  to  the  terebinth  near  He-

"  Num.  13,  23.    The  situation  of  Ksh-  bron,  by  wliiih  Abraham  dwelt  (Geu.  13,

col  is  not  specified  in  this  passiiffc.    liut  18);  and  in  like  iiiamier,  the  name  of  the

in  Gen.  14,  24  we  are  tcld  that  Abraham  valley  was  not  improbably  derived  from

in  his  pursuit  of  the  four  kings  from  He-  that  of  his  companion  Eshcol.
brou,  wa.«   accompanied   by  his  friends

i.  315-317

Apk.  14.]

ENVIRONS  OF  HEBRON.

215

steep,  and  the  surface  of  the  ground  too  thickly  strewn  with
rocks,  to  admit  of  the  possibility  of  vehicles  being  used  in  this
mountainous  regipn,  without  the  toilsome  construction  of  arti-
ficial roads,  such  as  never  yet  existed  here.  Indeed  we  nowhere
read  of  wheeled  carriages  in  connection  with  the  country  south
of  Jerusalem  ;  except  where  Joseph  is  said  to  have  sent  waggons
to  bring  down  his  father  Jacob  into  Egypt.  These  came  to
Hebron ;  and  Jacob  travelled  with  them  thence  to  Beersheba.^
We  had  this  circumstance  in  mind  on  our  journey  from  Beer-
sheba  to  Hebron  ;  and  long  before  reaching  Dhoheriyeh,  we
were  convinced,  that  waggons  for  the  patriarch  could  not  have
passed  by  that  route.  StUl,  by  taking  a  more  circuitous  course
up  the  great  Wady  el-Khulil,  more  to  the  right,  they  might
probably  reach  Hebron  through  the  valleys  without  great  diffi-
culty.

In  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  we  came  to  the  head  of
the  valley  ;  the  vineyards  ceased  ;  we  came  out  upon  an  open
tract,  having  on  our  left  at  10  o'clock  the  ruins  of  a  village
once  inhabited  by  Christians,  now  called  Khurbet  el-NQsarah.
The  inhabitants,  it  was  said,  were  massacred  by  the  Muslims  ;
and  now  there  are  no  Christians  in  all  the  province  of  Hebron.

At  one  hour  from  Hebron  a  blind  path  went  off  to  the  right
at  right  angles,  leading  to  Teku'a ;  and  on  it,  about  five  min-
utes' walk  from  our  road,  are  the  foundations  of  an  immense
building,  which  excited  our  curiosity.  We  ran  thither  on  foot,
leaving  our  beasts  to  proceed  slowly  ;  and  found  the  substruc-
tions of  an  edifice,  which  would  seem  to  have  been  commenced
on  a  large  scale,  but  never  completed.  They  consist  of  two
walls  apparently  of  a  large  enclosure  ;  one  facing  towards  the
southwest,  two  hundred  feet  long  ;  and  the  other  at  right  angles
facing  northwest  one  hundred  and  sixty  feet  long,  with  a  space
left  in  the  middle  of  it  as  if  for  a  portal.  There  are  only  two
courses  of  hewn  stones  above  ground,  each  three  feet  four  inches
high  ;  one  of  the  stones  measured  fifteen  and  a  half  feet  long  by
three  and  one  third  feet  thick.  In  the  northwest  angle  is  a  well
or  cistern  arched  over,  but  not  deep.  There  are  no  stones  nor
ruins  of  any  kind  Ij^ing  around,  to  mark  that  these  walls  were
ever  carried  higher.  It  is  difficult  to  say,  judging  merely  from
the  remains  themselves,  what  could  have  been  the  object  for
which  the  building  was  intended.  It  may  have  been  a  church ;
though  it  does  not  lie,  like  most  ancient  churches,  in  the  direc-
tion from  west  to  east.  Or  it  might  possibly  have  been  begun
as  a  fortress  ;  though  there  would  seem  to  be  nothing  in  the
vicinity  to  guard.  At  any  rate,  these  walls  cannot  have  been
constructed  later  than  the  first  centuries  after  the  Christian  era,

'  Gen.  45,  19.  21.  27.    46,  1.

i.  317,  318

216

FEOM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

and  the  size  of  the  stones  points  rather  to  an  earlier  age.  The
spot  is  called  by  the  Arabs  Eamet  el-Khulil.  The  Jews  of
Hebron  call  it  the  House  of  Abraham ;  and  regard  this  as  the
place  of  Abraham's  tent  and  terebinth  at  Mamre.  May  we  not
perhaps  suppose,  that  these  massive  walls  are  indeed  the  work
of  Jewish  hands,  erected  here  in  ancient  days  around  the  spot
where  the  founder  of  their  race  had  dwelt  ?  On  such  a  suppo-
sition, the  stracture  would  have  corresjDonded  to  that  around  his
sepulchre  in  Hebron.'

The  country  was  still  rocky  and  uneven,  though  somewhat
cultivated.  At  10|  o'clock  a  ruined  mosk,  called  Neby  Yunas
(Prophet  Jonah),  was  upon  a  long  hill  parallel  to  our  road  on
the  right,  at  the  distance  of  half  an  hour  or  more,  looking  much
like  the  church  of  a  New  England  village.  Around  this  mosk,
as  we  afterwards  learned,  are  the  remains  of  walls  and  founda-
tions, marking  an  ancient  site.  The  place  is  called  by  the  Arabs
Hulhul ;  doubtless  the  ancient  Halhul,  a  city  in  the  mountains
of  Judah,  which  Jerome  places  near  to  Hebron.'  Another  road
from  Hebron  to  J erusalem,  which  some  of  our  friends  took  a  few
weeks  later,  leads  by  this  place.  We  saw  it  again  from  the  east
on  a  subsequent  excursion  from  Jerusalem  ;  but  did  not  visit  it.^
At  some  distance  beyond  the  same  hill,  runs  the  great  valley,
which  passing  down  southwest  to  Wady  es-Seba',  drains  the
whole  region  around  Hebron  and  Dhoheriyeh.

A  large  village  was  now  visible  in  the  N.  N.  E.  at  the  dis-
tance of  an  hour  or  more,  called  Beit  Ummar ;  but  we  did  not
observe  it  afterwards.  At  11.10  there  was  on  our  left  a  ruined
tower,  perhaps  of  the  time  of  the  crusades  ;  and  in  five  minutes
more  we  came  to  a  fountain  on  the  right  with  a  stone  trough,
and  with  ruins  around  as  of  a  former  church.    The  stones  are

'  See  the  Haram  tinder  May  24th. —  other  hand  places  the  terebinth  of  Mamre

This  Jewish  tradition  and  name  is  at  least  at  only  six  stadia  from  Hebron  ;  B.  J.  4.

as  old  as  the  crusades ;  Benj.  of  Tud.  by  9.  7. — The  English  version  has  less  cor-

Asher,  I.  p.  77.    Von  Troilo  also  speaks  Tect]j  plain  of  Mamre;  Gen.  1.3,  18.  etc.

of  the  spot  and  wells  as  Mamre  ;  Eeise-  — We  again  visited  this  spot  in  1852  ;  see

beschr.  p.  319,  Dresd.  1676.  If  the  suppo-  Vol.  III.  Sect.  VI,  nnder  May  7,  1852.
sition  in  the  text  he  not  admissible,  these       '  Josh.  15,  58.    Hieron.  Onomast.  art.

remains  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  be-  Elul.

longing  to  the  church  erected  by  order  of  '  It  is  also  mentioned  by  Ibn  Batiita  in
Constantine,  near  the  supposed  place  of  the  fourteenth  century  as  the  tomb  of  Jo-
Abraham's  terebinth ;  see  Euseb.  Vit.  nah  ;  see  his  Travels  translated  by  Prof.
Const.  III.  51-53,  and  Valesius' Notes  on  Lee,  Lond.  1829.  p.  20.  Niebuhr  seems
c.  53.  Hieron.  Onomast.  art.  Arboch,  and  first  to  have  heard  the  name  Hiilhiil,  as  a
Drys.  The  Itin.  Hieros.  in  A.  D.  333,  village  where  the  Jews  venerate  the  tomb
speaks  of  this  church  as  two  Roman  miles  of  the  prophet  Nathan  ;  Reisebeschr.  III.
from  Hebron  towards  Jerusalem.  Ac-  p.  69.  Schubert  visited  the  place  in  1837,
cording  to  Sozomen  it  was  15  stadia  in  the  and  makes  a  similar  report  of  the  tomb
same  direction;  Hist.  Ecc.  II.  4.  Adam-  of  Nathan  and  of  ancient  walls;  but  seems
nanus  mentions  here  these  walls  as  of  a  not  to  have  heard  the  name  Hulhul.  Reise
church;  lib.  U.  11.  See  generally  Re-  II.  p.  487.
land  Falsest,  p.  711  sq.    Josephus  on  the

i.  318,  319

Apr.  14.]

HALHUL.  KIJFIN.

217

very  large,  and  the  adjacent  rocks  hewn  away  to  a  perpendicular
face.  The  place  is  called  ed-Dirweh.*  The  country  now  became
more  open.  The  valleys  were  wider  and  apparently  fertile  ;  and
the  hiUs  were  covered  with  bushes,  arbutus,  and  dwarf  oaks,  ex-
hibiting also  in  their  terraced  sides  the  traces  of  ancient  cultiva-
tion. This  tract  seemed  to  be  full  of  partridges ;  whose  calling
and  clucking  we  heard  on  every  side.  Crossing  a  valley  obliquely,
we  came  at  a  quarter  past  noon  to  the  ruins  of  another  village
called  Kufin,^  with  olive  trees  and  tillage  around,  and  a  reservoir
of  rain  water.  Here  we  could  see  the  road  at  some  distance
before  us,  ascending  the  side  of  a  long  ridge.  Half  an  hour  fur-
ther on,  there  was  another  ruined  tower  upon  our  left.  The  road
up  the  ascent  just  mentioned,  is  artificial ;  half  way  up  is  a  cis-
tern of  rain  water,  and  an  open  place  of  prayer  for  the  Muham-
medan  traveller.  From  the  top,  the  path  descends  into  a  long
straight  valley,  which  it  follows  for  an  hour,  called  Wady  et-
Tuheishimeh.  At  2^  o'clock  the  hills  became  higher  and  more
rocky  ;  the  valley  narrower  and  winding  ;  while  the  road  ascends
obliquely  on  the  left,  and  bends  around  the  eastern  point  of  a
high  hill,  leaving  the  valley  very  deep  below  on  the  right.  In
this  part  of  it  are  the  ruins  of  a  large  square  building,  perhaps
once  a  convent  ;  and  here  too  was  the  scene  of  one  of  the  battles
between  Ibrahim  Pasha  and  the  rebel  FellShs  in  A.  D.  1834.
The  valley  passes  on  towards  the  right,  and  further  down  (as  I
suppose)  receives  that  which  descends  from  Solomon's  Pools,  and
so  runs  to  the  Dead  Sea.

Our  road  now  crossed  the  ridge  obhquely  towards  the  left  ;
and  brought  us  at  half  past  two  to  a  narrow  valley  descending
towards  the  east.  Along  the  side  of  the  northern  hill  was  an
aqueduct,  which,  as  we  afterwards  found,  passes  around  the  eastern
end  of  the  same  hdl  and  enters  the  lower  pool.  Crossing  this
ridge  we  came  upon  the  more  open  valley  in  which  are  the  pools.
This  also  descends  towards  the  east ;  receives  the  Wady  we  had
just  crossed  ;  and  further  on  unites  with  Wady  et-Tuheisliimeh.
From  the  hiU  we  could  see  before  us,  at  a  distance  across  the
valley,  the  little  village  and  small  church  of  St.  George,  called
by  the  Arabs  el-Khudr.'    Our  path  led  us  along  the  upper  end

'  In  afterwards  searching  for  the  site  of  it  eleven  miles  from  Hebron.    Yet  this  spot

the  ancient  Beth-zur,  this  place  recurred  is  the  tnie  Beth-zur ;  see  under  May  7,

to  our  minds.    That  city  was  probably  not  1852. — This  certainly  cannot  have  been

far  from  Halhul  (Josh.  15,  58),  on  the  way  the  water  at  which  the  eunuch  was  bap-

from  Jerusalem  to  Hebron,  near  a  foun-  tized  ;  for  he  was  driving  in  his  chariot

tain ;    Euseb.  et  Hieron.  Onomast.  art.  towards   Gaza,    and   never  could  have

Bethsur.    But  Euseb.  and  Jerome  both  passed  on   this   route.  Acts  8,  26  sq.

place  Beth-zur  at  20  miles  from  Jerusalem,  Comp.  Schubert's  Raise,  II.  p.  488.  See

and  of  course  only  two  miles  from  He-  more  under  June  7th.

bron ;  while  this  spot  is  two  hours  with  '  Not  Abu  Fid,  as  in  the  former  edition,

camels,  or  some  five  Roman  miles  from  ^  See  under  May  17th.
the  latter  place.   The  Itin.  Hv  ros.  makes

Vol.  I.— 19  i.-  320,  321

218

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  V.

of  the  upper  pool,  whicli  we  reached  at  2|  o'clock.  There  are
three  of  these  immense  reservoirs,  lying  one  above  another  in  the
sloping  valley,  and  bearing  every  mark  of  high  antiquity.  A
smaU  aqueduct  is  carried  from  them  along  the  sides  of  the  hills
to  Bethlehem  and  J erusalem.  Their  name  in  Arabic  is  el-Burak.
Close  by  is  a  large  square  Saracenic  fortress,  called  Kul'at  el-
Burak  ;  which  seemed  now  to  be  inhabited  only  by  the  keeper
of  the  pools.*

We  stopped  for  half  an  hour,  and  took  a  hasty  survey  of  the
reservoirs  ;  but  as  we  afterwards  \'isited  them  again  and  examined
them  more  at  leisure,  I  defer  the  description  of  them  for  the
present.''  A  road  passes  from  hence  to  Bethlehem  along  the
aqueduct ;  but  as  we  wished  to  press  forward,  we  took  one  more
direct,  which  leads  obliquely  up  the  gentle  ascent  north  of  the
pools ;  setting  off  at  a  quarter  past  three  o'clock.  The  path
passes  afterwards  over  a  level,  but  exceedingly  rocky  tract,  and
was  difficult  for  the  camels.  Our  road  lay  nearly  half  a  mile  to
the  left  of  Betlilehem,  which  we  saw  from  a  distance ;  but  it  was
afterwards  hidden  from  us  by  the  intervening  hill.  The  Arab
name  is  Beit  Lahm.  On  our  left  was  the  head  of  a  valley,  run-
ning at  first  parallel  to  our  course,  and  then  bending  to  the
northwest  around  a  hiU  on  the  left,  towards  the  Mediterranean.
It  is  here  called  Wady  Ahmed.  On  the  eastern  slope  of  this
hill,  over  against  Bethlehem,  lies  the  large  village  of  Beit  Jala,
inhabited  like  Bethlehem  by  Christians,  and  surrounded  by  oKve
groves  extending  into  the  valley.  At  4.10  we  were  opposite
Bethlehem,  between  it  and  Beit  Jala.  The  road  then  passes
along  a  low  .swell  or  ridge  between  Wady  Ahmed  on  the  left,
and  the  head  of  a  Wady  on  the  right,  which  flows  off  north  of
Bethlehem  to  the  Dead  Sea.

Someways  up  the  gentle  acclivity,  which  here  rises  towards
the  northeast  from  Wady  Ahmed,  stands  the  Kubbet  Rahil,  or
Eachel's  Tomb,  w^hich  we  reached  at  4.25.  This  is  merely  an
ordinary  Muslim  Wely,  or  tomb  of  a  holy  person ;  a  small  square
building  of  stone  with  a  dome,  and  witliin  it  a  tomb  in  the  ordi-
nary Muhammedan  form ;  the  whole  plastered  over  with  mortar.
Of  course  the  building  is  not  ancient ;  in  the  seventh  century
there  was  here  only  a  pyramid  of  stones.^  It  is  now  neglected,
and  falling  to  decay ;  though  pilgrimages  are  stiU  made  to  it  by
the  Jews.  The  naked  walls  are  covered  with  names  in  several
languages  ;  many  of  them  in  Hebrew.    The  general  correctness

'  In  1852  we  again  passed  over  this  on  the  four  sides,  which  were  walled  up

same  road  from  the  pools  to  Rainct  el-  about  a  century  ago.    It  seems  to  have

Khulil ;  see  under  May  7,  1852.  heen  built  before  Edrisi's  day;  see  Kdrisi,

'  See  under  May  8th.  p.  345.  ed.  Jaub.    Comp.  Cotov.  Itin.  p.

'  Adamnanus  ex  Arculfo,  II.  7.— The  245.    Pococke  II.  i.  p.  3l>.
present  building  had  ibrme-ly  open  arches
i.  321.  322

Apr.  14.]

APPROACH  TO  THE  HOLY  CITY.

219

of  the  tradition  which  has  fixed  upon  this  spot  for  the  tomb  of
Kachel,  cannot  well  be  drawn  in  question  ;  since  it  is  fully  sup-
ported by  the  circumstances  of  the  Scriptural  narrative.  It  is
also  mentioned  by  the  Itin.  Hieros.  A.  D.  333,  and  by  Jerome
in  the  same  century.'

Still  ascending  the  hill  towards  the  Greek  convent  of  Mar
Elvas,  the  road  passes  to  the  left  around  the  head  of  a  deep
valley  running  off  eastward  to  the  Dead  Sea ;  and  affords  a  wide
view  out  over  the  mountainous  regions  towards  and  beyond  that
sea,  including  Betlilehem  and  the  Frank  mountain.  The  deep
basin  of  the  sea  could  also  be  in  part  made  out ;  but  its  waters
were  not  visible.  Here  we  began  to  see  traces  of  the  pilgrims
now  collected  in  Jerusalem  at  the  festival  of  Easter.  A  large
number  of  their  horses  were  feeding  on  this  spot,  guarded  at  the
moment  only  by  a  single  man.  The  animals  were  sleek  and  in
good  case  ;  and  had  no  appearance  of  having  made  a  long  jour-
ney. The  same  night,  as  we  afterwards  learned,  the  keepers
were  attacked  by  robbers  ;  one  man  was  killed  ;  another  wound-
ed ;  and  some  of  the  horses  driven  off.

At  4.55  we  came  opposite  the  convent  of  Mar  Elyas,  which
lies  on  the  brow  of  the  high  ridge,  overlooking  Bethlehem  and
the  deep  valley  around  which  we  had  just  passed  ;  while  towards
the  north  the  descent  is  small,  and  the  waters  run  agaia  towards
the  Mediterranean.  Here  we  got  our  first  view  of  a  portion  of  the
Holy  City, — the  mosk  and  other  high  buildings  standing  on
Mount  Zion  without  the  walls.  As  we  advanced  we  had  on  the
right  low  hills  ;  and  on  the  left  the  cultivated  valley  or  plain  of
Kephaim  or  the  Giants,  with  gentle  hiEs  beyond.  This  plain  is
broad,  and  descends  gradually  towards  the  southwest  until  it
contracts  in  that  direction  into  a  deeper  and  narrower  valley,
called  lower  down  Wady  el-Werd,  which  unites  further  on  with
Wady  Ahmed,  and  finds  its  way  to  the  western  plain.*  Along
this  plain  we  met  many  people,  mostly  Christians,  men,  women
and  children,  returning  from  Jerusalem.  It  was  now  the  eve  of
Easter  Sunday  ;  and  the  miracle  of  the  Greek  holy  fire  had  just
been  performed.  They  were  dressed  in  their  best  attire,  and
seemed  light-hearted  and  gay.

The  plain  of  Rephaim  extends  nearly  to  the  city  ;  which,  as
seen  from  it,  appears  to  be  ahnost  on  the  same  level.  As  we  ad-
vanced, the  plain  was  terminated  by  a  slight  rocky  ridge,  forming
the  brow  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  This  deep  and  narrow  dell,
with  steep  rocky  sides,  often  precipitous,  here  comes  down  from

'  Gen.  35, 16-20.  Hieron.  Epist.  Ixxxvi.  ley  of  the  Giants  (Rephaim)  was  near  Je-
ed  Eustoch.  Epitaph.  Paulas,  0pp.  Tom.  rusalem,  and  extended  towards  Bethlehem ;
IV.  ii.  p.  674.  ed.  Mart.— See  more  in  Antiq.  7.  4.  1.  ib.  7.  12.  4.  See  also
BibUoth.  Sacra,  1844,  p.  602  sq.  Josh.  15,  8.    18,  16.    2  Sam.  5,  18.  22.

'  Josephus  says  expressly,  that  the  val-    23,  13.  14.

i.  323,  324

220

FROM  'aKABAH  to  JKRUSALEM.

[Sec.  V,

the  north  from  as  far  as  the  Yafa  gate  ;  and  sweeping  around
Mount  Zion  at  ahuost  a  right  angle,  descends  with  great  rapidity
into  the  very  deep  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  The  southern  side  of
Zion  is  very  steep,  though  not  precipitous  ;  while  the  great  depth
of  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  struck  me  with  surprise.  We
crossed  the  valley  of  Hinnom  opposite  the  southwest  comer  of
Zion  ;  and  passed  up  along  the  eastern  side  of  the  valley  to  the
Hebron  or  Yafa  gate.  On  our  left  was  the  lower  pool,  an  im-
mense reservoir  now  broken  down  and  dry.  Above  this  the
aqueduct  from  Solomon's  pools  curves  across  the  valley  on  very
low  arches.  At  length,  at  6  o'clock,  we  entered  the  Holy  City,
el-Kurls,  just  at  the  closing  of  the  gates  on  the  evening  before
Easter  Sunday ;  and  found  a  welcome  home  in  the  houses  of  our
missionary  friends  and  countrymen.

This  was  the  most  fatiguing  day  of  our  whole  journey.  "We
had  been  for  sixteen  hours  almost  constantly  upon  our  camels  ;
yet  the  exhaustion  arose  more  from  want  of  rest  and  sleep,  than
from  any  great  exertion. — The  distance  between  Hebron  and
Jerusalem  is  definitely  given  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  at  twenty-
two  Roman  miles  ;  equivalent  to  about  seventeen  and  a  half
geographical  miles.  Our  time  between  the  two  cities  was  eight
and  a  quarter  hours  with  camels  ;  affording  a  coincidence  suf-
ficiently exact,

i.  324,  325

SECTION  YI.

JERUSALEM.

INCIDENTS  AND  FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

The  feelings  of  a  Christian  traveller  on  approaching  Jerusa-
lem, can  be  better  conceived  than  described.  Mine  were  strongly
excited.  Before  us,  as  we  drew  near,  lay  Zion,  the  mount  of
Olives,  the  vales  of  Hinnom  and  Jehoshaphat,  and  other  objects
of  the  deepest  interest  ;  whUe,  crowning  the  summits  of  the  same
ancient  hUls,  was  spread  out  the  city  where  Grod  of  old  had  dwelt,
and  where  the  Saviour  of  the  world  had  lived  and  taught  and
died.  From  the  earliest  childhood  I  had  read  of  and  studied
the  localities  of  this  sacred  spot ;  now  I  beheld  them  with  my
own  eyes  ;  and  they  all  seemed  familiar  to  me,  as  if  the  realiza-
tion of  a  former  dream.  I  seemed  to  be  again  among  cherished
scenes  of  childhood,  long  unvisited,  indeed,  but  distinctly  recol-
lected ;  and  it  was  almost  a  painful  interruption,  when  my  com-
panion (who  had  been  here  before)  began  to  point  out  and  name
the  various  objects  in  view.

At  length  "  our  feet  stand  within  thy  gates,  0  Jerusalem  !
— Peace  be  within  thy  walls  and  prosperity  within  thy  palaces ! "
We  entered  the  Yafa  gate,  passed  the  small  open  place  within,
and  descended  the  steep  and  narrow  way  along  the  head  of  the
ancient  Tyropceon,  or  valley  of  the  Cheesemakers.  until  we
came  to  the  first  street  leading  north  below  the  pool  of  Heze-
Mah.  In  this  street,  nearly  against  the  middle  of  the  pool,  was
the  residence  of  the  Rev.  Mr  Whiting,  where  we  stopped  for  a
few  moments,  while  our  camels  were  unloaded  and  dismissed.
Thence  proceeding  a  little  further  north,  we  crossed  down
through  the  court  of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  to  the
next  parallel  street ;  and  turning  to  the  left  a  few  steps  we  en-

VoL.  I.— 19*  i.  326,  327

222

JERUSALEM. — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec.  VL

tered  the  first  right-hand  lane,  and  found  ourselves  after  two  or
three  doors  at  the  dwelling  of  the  Eev.  Mr  Lanneau.  Here  a
home  was  already  prepared  for  us  ;  where  we  remained  during
our  sojourn  in  the  city.  Both  these  gentlemen  were  our  country-
men ;  and  had  already  been  established  in  the  Holy  City  as
missionaries  for  several  years.  The  house  of  the  latter  was  one
of  the  better  class  ;  it  was  large,  with  marble  floors,  and  had  on
one  side  an  extensive  and  pleasant  garden,  with  orange  and  other
fruit  trees  and  many  flowers.  It  furnished  indeed  one  of  the
most  desirable  and  healthful  residences  in  the  city.  Yet  the
rent  was  less  than  fifty  Spanish  dollars  a  year.

In  the  houses  of  our  friends,  we  found  collected  all  the  mem-
bers of  the  Syrian  mission,  with  a  single  exception,  from  the
stations  at  Beirut  and  in  Cyprus  ;  and  one  also  from  the  mission
at  Constantinople.*  They  had  come  up  with  their  families,  like
the  Hebrews  of  old,  at  the  time  of  the  Passover,  to  worship  in
this  place,  and  to  consult  together  on  the  best  measures  for  pro-
moting the  great  work  in  which  they  were  engaged.  Among  the
eight  missionaries  thus  assembled,  it  was  with  feelings  of  no  or-
dinary gratification,  that  I  could  welcome  five  as  former  friends
and  pupUs.  In  those  days  of  former  intercourse,  we  had  never
thought  thus  to  see  each  other  on  earth  upon  Mount  Zion  ;  and
so  much  the  more  deeply  did  we  all  now  feel  and  prize  the  high
privilege  of  meeting  on  this  sacred  spot,  where  we  might  again
"  take  sweet  counsel  together,  and  walk  unto  the  house  of  God
in  company."

I  have  already  remarked,  that  as  we  crossed  the  valley  of
Hinnom,  I  was  particularly  struck  with  its  rapid  descent,  and
the  great  depth  of  the  vale  of  J ehoshaphat  or  the  Kidron,  into
which  it  opens.  In  the  city  itself,  the  steepness  of  the  streets
which  descend  towards  the  east  was  greater  than  I  had  antici-
pated. But  on  entering  the  gates  of  Jerusalem,  apart  from  the
overpowering  recollections  which  naturally  rush  upon  the  mind,
I  was  in  many  respects  agreeably  disappointed.  From  the  de-
scriptions of  Chateaubriand  and  other  travellers,  I  had  expected
to  find  the  houses  of  the  city  miserable,  the  streets  filthy,  and
the  population  squalid.  Yet  the  first  impression  made  upon  my
mind  was  of  a  different  character  ;  nor  did  I  afterwards  see  any
reason  to  doubt  the  correctness  of  this  first  impression.  The
houses  are  in  general  better  built,  and  the  streets  cleaner,  than
those  of  Alexandria,  Smyrna,  or  even  Constantinople.  Indeed,
of  all  the  oriental  cities  which  it  was  my  lot  to  visit,  Jerusalem,
after  Cairo,  is  the  cleanest  and  most  solidly  built.  The  streets
indeed  are  narrow,  and  very  rudely  paved  ;  like  those  of  all  cities

'  I  speak  here  of  course  only  of  mis-    of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions,
tionaiic'd  sent  out  by  the  American  Board    which  has  its  central  offices  iu  Boston,
i.  327,  328

Apr.  15.]

EASTER  SUNDAY.

223

in  the  east.  The  houses  are  of  hewn  stone,  often  large,  and  fur-
nished with  the  small  domes  upon  the  roofs,  which  have  been
already  mentioned  at  Hebron,  as  perhaps  peculiar  to  the  dis-
trict of  Judea.  These  domes  seem  to  be  not  merely  for  orna-
ment ;  but  are  intended,  on  account  of  the  scarcity  of  timber,
to  aid  in  supporting  and  strengthening  the  otherwise  flat  roofs.
There  is  usually  one  or  more  over  each  room  in  a  house  ;  and
they  serve  also  to  give  a  greater  elevation  and  an  architectural
effect  to  the  ceiling  of  the  room,  which  rises  within  them.  The
streets  and  the  population  that  throngs  them,  may  also  well
bear  comparison  with  those  of  any  other  oriental  city  ;  although
if  one  seeks  here,  or  elsewhere  in  the  east,  for  the  general  clean-
liness and  thrift  which  characterize  many  cities  of  Europe  and
America,  he  will  of  course  seek  in  vain.

Sunday,  April  15th.  This  was  the  Christian  Sabbath,  and
it  was  also  Easter  Sunday.  It  was  in  a  special  manner  a
"great  day"  in  Jerusalem,  inasmuch  as  the  Easter  of  the
Eomish  and  that  of  the  Oriental  churches,  which  usually  occur
on  different  days,  fell  together  for  the  present  year.  During
Easter  week,  the  city  had  been  thronged,  though  not  very  fully,
with  pilgrims.  These  were  mostly  Greeks  and  Armenians  ;
very  few  Latins  were  seen  ;  and  only  now  and  then  a  straggling
Copt.  The  whole  number  had  been  less  than  usual.  The
annual  excursion  to  the  Jordan  had  been  made,  in  which  some
of  our  friends  had  joined ;  and  the  annual  mockery  of  the  Greek
holy  fire  had  taken  place  just  before  we  entered  the  city.  The
Latins  too  had  enacted  their  mummery,  representing  the  scenes
of  the  crucifixion.  In  consequence  of  our  late  arrival,  we  thus
missed  all  the  incidents  of  the  holy  week.  This  however  we
counted  as  no  loss,  but  rather  a  gain ;  for  the  object  of  our  visit
was  the  city  itself,  in  relation  to  its  ancient  renown  and  religious
associations  ;  not  as  seen  in  its  present  state  of  decay  and  super-
stitious or  fraudful  degradation.  The  Jews  also  were  celebrating
their  passover  ;  and  our  friends  had  received  a  present  of  some
of  their  unleavened  bread.  It  was  spread  out  into  very  thin
sheets,  almost  like  paper,  very  white,  and  also  very  delicate  and
palatable.  Thus  to  all  the  inhabitants,  except  to  the  Muham-
medans  ;  and  to  all  the  strangers  who  were  present,  save  the
few  Protestants ;  this  was  the  greatest  festival  of  the  year.

The  different  sects  of  Christians  who  have  possession  of  the
church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  had  of  course  been  compelled  to
alternate  in  their  occupancy  of  it,  and  in  the  j^erformance  of
their  religious  ceremonies.  On  this  last  "high  day"  of  the
festival,  the  Greeks  held  their  grand  mass  at  the  sepulchre
before  break  of  day ;  and  the  Latins  followed  at  9  o'clock.  I
looked  in  for  a  few  moments,  with  a  friend,  upon  this  latter

i.  328-330

224

JERUSALEM. — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec.  VL

ceremonial.  Few  persons  were  present,  except  those  engaged
in  the  service.  These  few  were  all  below  in  the  body  of  the
church  ;  in  the  galleries  there  were  no  spectators.  The  reputed
sepulchre,  as  is  well  known,  stands  in  the  middle  of  the  spacious
rotunda,  directly  beneath  the  centre  of  the  great  dome,  which
is  open  to  the  sky.  The  high  altar  was  placed  directly  before
the  door  of  the  sepulchre ;  so  that  we  could  not  enter  the  latter.
The  ceremonies  we  saw  consisted  only  in  a  procession  of  the
monks  and  others  marching  around  the  sepulchre  ;  stopping  oc-
casionally to  read  a  portion  of  the  Gospel;  and  then  again
advancing  with  chanting  and  singing,  I  was  struck  with  the
splendour  of  their  robes,  stiff  with  embroidery  of  silver  and
gold,  the  weU  meant  offerings  probably  of  Koman  Catholics  out
of  every  country  of  Europe ;  but  I  was  not  less  struck  with  the
vulgar  and  tanmeaning  visages  that  peered  out  from  these  costly
vestments.  The  wearers  looked  more  like  ordinary  ruffians,  than
like  ministers  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  Indeed  there  is  reason  to
believe,  that  the  Latin  monks  in  Palestine  are  actually  for  the
most  part  ignorant  and  often  illiterate  men,  chiefly  from  Spain,
the  refuse  of  her  monks  and  clergy,  who  come  or  are  sent  hither
as  into  a  sort  of  exile,  where  they  serve  to  excite  the  sympathies
and  the  misplaced  charities  of  the  Romanists  of  Europe.  There
was  hardly  a  face  among  all  those  before  us,  that  could  be  called
intelligent,  A  few  fine  looking  French  naval  officers,  and  one
or  two  Irish  Catholics,  had  joined  the  procession ;  but  seemed
quite  out  of  place,  and  as  if  ashamed  of  their  companions.

I  make  these  remarks  merely  as  relating  a  matter  of  fact ;
and  not,  I  trust,  out  of  any  spirit  of  prejudice  against  the
Romish  church  or  her  clergy,  I  had  once  spent  the  holy  week
in  Rome  itself;  and  there  admired  the  intelligent  and  noble
countenances  of  many  of  the  clergy  and  monks  congregated  in
that  city.  For  this  very  reason  the  present  contrast  struck  me
the  more  forcibly  and  disagreeably.  The  whole  scene  indeed
was  to  a  Protestant  painful  and  revolting.  It  might  perhaps
have  been  less  so,  had  there  been  manifested  the  slightest  degree
of  faith  in  the  genuineness  of  the  surrounding  objects  ;  but
even  the  monks  themselves  do  not  pretend,  that  the  present
sepulchre  is  any  thing  more  than  an  imitation  of  the  original.
But  to  be  in  the  ancient  city  of  the  Most  High,  and  to  see  these
venerated  places  and  the  very  name  of  our  holy  religion  profaned
by  idle  and  lying  mummeries ;  while  the  proud  Mussulman
looks  on  with  haughty  scorn ;  all  this  excited  in  my  mind  a
feeling  too  painful  to  be  borne ;  and  I  never  visited  the  place
again.

We  now  repaired  to  the  house  of  Mr  Whiting ;  where  in  a
large  upper  room  our  friends  had  long  established  regular  divine
i.  3a0, 331

Apr.  15.]'

PROTESTANT  MISSIONS.

225

service  in  English  every  Sunday ;  in  wliicli  they  were  assisted
by  Mr  Nicolayson,  the  able  missionary  of  the  English  church,
sent  out  hither  by  the  London  Missionary  Society  for  the  Jews.
We  found  a  very  respectable  congregation,  composed  of  all  the
missionary  families,  besides  several  European  travellers  of  rank
and  name.  It  was,  I  presume,  the  largest  Protestant  congrega-
tion ever  collected  within  the  walls  of  the  Holy  City ;  and  it
was  gratifying  to  see  Protestants  of  various  names  here  laying
aside  aU  distinctions,  and  uniting  with  one  heart  to  declare  by
their  example  in  Jerusalem  itself,  that  "  God  is  a  Spirit ;  and
they  that  worship  him,  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  '
The  simplicity  and  spirituality  of  the  Protestant  worship  was
to  me  affecting  and  doubly  pleasing,  in  contrast  with  the
pageant  of  which  we  had  just  been  spectators.

Early  in  the  afternoon  we  were  also  present  at  the  service  in
Arabic,  which  the  same  missionaries  had  established  in  the
house  of  Mr  Lanneau,  and  which  was  then  regularly  attended
by  some  twenty  or  thirty  Arab  Christians  of  the  Greek  rite.'*
These  were  men  of  respectable  appearance,  merchants  and  oth-
ers ;  and  seemed  to  yield  attention  to  the  things  which  they  heard.

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  remark,  that  the  object
of  the  American  missions  to  Syria  and  other  parts  of  the  Levant,
was  not  to  draw  off  members  of  the  Oriental  churches  to
Protestantism ;  but  to  awaken  them  to  a  knowledge  and  belief
of  the  Gospel  truth,  in  the  purity  and  simplicity  of  its  original
scriptural  form.  To  this  end  all  the  efforts  of  the  missionaries
were  directed ;  in  the  hope,  that  individuals  thus  enlightened,
and  remaining,  if  they  chose,  within  the  pale  of  their  own
churches,  might  by  degrees  become  instrumental  in  infusing  into
the  latter  life  and  vigour  and  a  love  of  the  truth,  before  which
the  various  forms  of  error  and  superstition  would  of  themselves
vanish  away.  The  missionaries  would  seem  thus  to  have  taken
the  proper  course,  in  going  forward  simply  as  preachers  of  the
Gospel,  and  not  as  the  direct  assailants  of  specific  errors  ;  striv-
ing to  overcom^ darkness  by  diffusing  light,  and  not  by  denounc-
ing it  as  gross  darkness.  True,  in  this  way  they  would  make
less  noise  ;  for  the  mere  presentation  of  truth  excites  less  op-
position than  the  calling  in  question  of  long  cherished  error;
but,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  they  would  be  likely  to  reap  a
more  abundant  harvest,  and  exert  a  larger  and  more  lasting
influence  in  the  moral  regeneration  of  the  east.  At  this  time
the  Protestant  movement  which  has  since  spread  so  widely  had
not  yet  begun.

'  John  4,  24.  they  are  all  native  Arabs,  and  employ  only

The  great  body  of  the  Christians  in    the  Arabic  language  in  their  worship.
Palestine  are  of  the  Greek  church ;  but

i.  331-333

226

JERUSALEM. — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS,

[Sec.  VI.

Towards  evening,  the  families  again  came  together  in  a  less
formal  manner  for  an  hour  of  prayer  and  religious  exhortation.
These  various  exercises,  with  others  occasionally  upon  other  days,
were  regularly  kept  up  by  the  missionaries  whenever  circum-
stances permitted.  So  long  as  we  remained  in  the  city,  they
were  continued  without  interruption ;  but  subsequently,  the
occurrence  of  the  plague  broke  up  all  regularity ;  and  other  cir-
cumstances conspired  to  suspend  wholly,  for  a  time,  the  labours
of  the  American  mission  in  Jerusalem.'

Monday,  April  \&th.  After  our  long  banishment  in  the
desert,  I  had  now  of  course  many  letters  to  write,  in  order  to
inform  my  family  and  distant  friends  of  our  general  welfare  and
safe  arrival  in  the  Holy  City.  Up  to  the  time  of  our  leaving
Cairo,  there  had  been  no  difficulty  in  despatching  letters  when
we  pleased ;  as  the  various  lines  of  French  and  Austrian  steam-
ers had  already  rendered  intercourse  with  the  west  as  direct  and
frequent,  as  between  different  parts  of  Europe  itself.  But  these
facilities  had  not  yet  been  extended  to  Syria.  The  English
steamer  from  Malta  to  Alexandria  came  indeed  once  a  month
from  the  latter  place  to  Beirut  for  a  few  hours  ;  and  this  was  the
only  regular  mode  of  sending  off"  letters  from  Jerusalem  to
Europe,  in  connection  with  a  weekly  private  post,  which  had
just  been  established  to  Beirut.  The  Pasha's  Ime  of  posts  from
Cairo  to  Damascus  and  Aleppo  passed  through  Gaza  and  Yafa,
without  communicating  with  J erusalem.  Of  this  we  were  able
to  avail  ourselves  by  transmitting  letters  to  our  consular  agent
at  Yafa,  who  could  thence  forward  them  under  cover  to  the  con-
suls in  Cairo  and  Alexandria.  I  did  this  also  once  in  Gaza ;
and  once  an  opportunity  occurred,  of  sending  by  a  government
express  direct  from  Jerusalem  to  Alexandria.

The  general  meeting  of  the  missionaries  was  to  be  one  of  bus-
iness, in  which  several  important  quesrions  were  to  be  considered
and  decided.  They  met  this  day  for  the  first  time ;  and  con-
tinued their  sessions,  morning  and  afternoon,  for  about  ten  days.
The  time  of  my  companion  was  necessarily  clAfly  occupied  in
these  meetings.  For  myself,  I  had  enough  to  do  at  first  in  the
writing  of  letters  and  the  arrangement  of  my  journals ;  to  say
nothing  of  the  reading  necessary  to  prepare  upon  the  spot  for  a
close  examination  of  Jerusalem  itself,  and  for  our  future  excur-
sions into  the  country  round  alx)ut.  I  took  great  pleasure  also
in  attending  the  meetings  of  the  missionaries,  so  far  as  time  and
circumstances  permitted.    It  was  truly  gratifying  to  observe  the

'  Mr  and  Mrs  Whiting  were  compelled  for  medical  advice,  where  he  remained

a  few  months  later  to  return  for  a  time  to  during  the  subsequent  winter.    The  niis-

the  United  .States,  in  consequence  of  her  sion  was  afterwards  re-established,  but  has

declining  health.    Mr  Lanneau  was  driven  since  been  wholly  withdrawn.  Mr  Lanneaa

by  a  severe  affection  of  the  eyes  to  Beirut  has  returned  to  the  United  States.
L  333,  334

Sec.  VI.]

THE  lord's  supper.

227

spirit  of  love  and  harmony  by  which  they  were  all  actuated.  On
many  points,  it  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  there  should  not
at  first  be  diversity  of  opinion  ;  but  there  was  manifestly  a  strong
desire  and  endeavour,  by  ripe  deliberation  and  mutual  conces-
sion, to  arrive  in  every  case  at  some  conclusion  in  which  all
might  cordially  unite.  The  results  to  which  they  came,  were  I
believe  in  every  instance  unanimous ;  and  the  influence  of  this
meeting  and  of  these  dehberations,  in  strengthening  among  them
the  bonds  of  mutual  affection  and  respect,  (if  I  may  judge  from
my  own  feelings,)  will  not  soon  pass  away.

Under  the  influence  of  such  feelings  and  impressions,  the
evening:  of  the  follo'ndno'  Christian  Sabbath  was  devoted  to  the
celebration  of  the  holy  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  In  the
"large  upper  room"  of  Mr  Whiting's  house,  where  "prayer  was
wont  to  be  made,"  eleven  sojourners  in  the  Holy  City,  all  Pro-
testant ministers  of  the  Gospel,  and  ten  of  them  from  the  new
world,  sat  down  in  company  with  several  female  friends  and
others,  to  celebrate  the  dying  love  of  the  Redeemer,  near  the
spot  where  the  ordinance  was  first  instituted.  The  occasion,  the
thrilling  recollections  which  it  called  up  in  connection  with  the
city  and  the  mount  of  OUves  which  lay  before  uS ;  the  unex-
pected coincidences  of  time,  place,  and  number ;  all  these  were
deeply  impressive,  and  stamped  upon  this  hour  a  character  of
sacredness  and  profound  emotion,  that  can  never  be  forgotten.
In  my  own  case,  the  thought  that  this  was  the  one  only  time  of
my  life,  that  I  could  hope  to  enjoy  this  high  privilege,  was  inex-
pressibly solemn.  •

In  occupations  and  enjoyments  like  these,  there  was  enough
to  fill  up  usefully  and  agreeably  aU  my  time,  had  I  been  so  dis-
posed. But  I  had  other  duties.  The  object  of  my  journey  to
Jerusalem  was  not  to  visit  friends,  nor  to  inquire  into  the  char-
acter of  the  present  population,  nor  to  investigate  their  political
or  moral  state,  except  as  incidental  points.  My  one  great  object
was  the  city  itself,  in  its  topographical  and  historical  relations,  its
site,  its  hUls,  its  dales,  its  remains  of  antiquity,  the  traces  of  its
ancient  population ;  in  short,  every  thing  connected  with  it  that
could  have  a  bearing  upon  the  illustration  of  the  Scriptures.  In
all  these  respects,  our  friends,  who  had  been  long  upon  the
ground,  were  ready  and  desirous,  to  lend  a  helping  hand ;  and
although  they  were  much  occupied  with  the  business  before
them,  yet  we  often  found  time  at  morning  or  evening,  and  occa-
sionally during  the  day,  to  take  frequent  and  sometimes  long
walks  through  the  more  interesting  portions  of  the  city  and  its
environs.  Time  and  again  we  visited  the  more  important  spots,
and  repeated  our  observations ;  comparing  meanwhile  what  we

i.  334-336

228

JERUSALEM. — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS,

[Sec.  VL

had  seen  ourselves  with,  the  accounts  of  ancient  writers  and
former  travellers,  until  at  length  conjectures  or  opinions  were
ripened  into  conviction  or  gradually  abandoned.  Our  motto  was
in  the  words,  though  not  exactly  in  the  sense  of  the  apostle :
"  Prove  all  things  ;  hold  fast  that  which  is  good. "  During  the
same  interval,  I  also  took  many  measurements  both  within  and
around  the  city.

These  repeated  examinations  of  the  same  objects  gave  hence-
forth to  our  researches  in  J erusalem  a  more  desultory  character ;
which  renders  it  difficult,  or  at  least  not  advisable,  to  record
them  any  further  in  the  form  of  a  journal.  It  will  therefore  be
my  endeavour,  after  describing  a  few  of  our  most  interesting
wj\jlks  in  and  around  Jerusalem,  and  some  of  the  incidents  of  our
residence  there,  to  bring  together  in  another  Section  the  results
of  our  researches  relative  to  the  topography  and  antiquities  of
the  city,  interweaving  so  far  as  may  be  necessary  the  slighter
incidents  personal  to  ourselves ;  thus  presenting  a  general  de-
scription of  the  place  and  its  environs.  In  this  way,  and  with
the  aid  of  the  accompanying  Plan,  the  reader  will  be  best  able
to  follow  out  our  researches ;  and  judge  for  himself  of  the
grounds  on  which  our  conclusions  rest.

In  these  walks,  our  main  object  was,  not  so  much  to  investi-
gate, as  to  obtain  a  general  impression  of  the  city  and  its  envi-
rons, in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  more  particular  examination
at  another  time.  I  describe  them  here  with  the  same  intent,  and
in  order  to  impart  the  same  general  impression  to  the  reader ;  re-
serving a  more  detailed  •account  of  the  various  objects,  and  the
questions  as  to  their  identity,  to  the  subsequent  pages.

ZION,  SILOAM,  ETC.

Our  first  walk  was  on  Tuesday,  April  17th,  after  having
dined  with  our  friend  Mr  Nicolayson,  at  his  house  near  the
Jews'  quarter  on  the  northern  part  of  Zion.  Towards  evening,
our  host,  Mr  Smith,  and  myself,  went  out  of  the  city  by  the
Yafa  gate,  and  turning  to  the  left  descended  the  slope  along  the
side  of  the  deep  trench  which  here  skirts  the  castle.  This
brought  us  to  the  bottom  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  along  which
leads  for  a  time  the  road  to  Bethlehem  by  which  we  had  ap-
proached on  Saturday.  Another  path  quits  this  almost  imme-
diately towards  the  left,  and  begins  to  ascend  obliquely  the
slope  of  Zion  towards  the  soiithwest  corner  of  the  city  wall,
which  lies  high  above  the  valley.  Reaching  this  latter  point,  we
came  out  upon  the  high  level  part  of  Zion,  not  included  in  the
modem  city.  It  is  mostly  an  open  tract,  in  some  parts  tilled,
with  a  few  scattered  buildings.    The  chief  of  these  are  the

i.  336,  337

Sec.  VI.]

CEMETERIES  ON  ZION.

229

House  of  Caiphas,  so  called,  now  an  Armenian  convent ;  and
the  Muslim  tomb  of  David  vritli  a  mosk.  A  few  enclosures  of
stone  walls  are  seen  round  about  these  buildings  and  in  other
parts.  But  what  chiefly  attracted  our  attention  now,  was  the
Christian  cemeteries,  all  of  which  lie  upon  this  open  place  ;  firet
that  of  the  Armenians,  nearest  to  their  great  convent  in  the
southwest  corner  of  the  city ;  south  of  this,  that  of  the  Greeks  ;
and  more  to  the  eastward  that  of  the  Latins.  The  graves  in
these  cemeteries  are  simply  marked  (if  marked  at  all)  by  a  flat
stone  laid  upon  them  with  an  inscription.

In  the  Latin  quarter  one  inscription  struck  my  eye  particu-
larly ;  it  contained  the  name  of  my  own  country,  and  marked
the  grave  of  a  young  American.  Ten  years'  ago  I  had  known
him  in  Paris  in  the  flower  of  his  youth,  a  favourite  in  the  family
of  Lafayette,  and  moving  in  the  gay  circles  of  that  gay  metropo-
lis. He  had  soon  after  wandered  off  to  Egypt  and  the  east ;
and  in  1830  died  here  alone  and  friendless  in  the  Latin  convent.
The  epitaph  with  which  the  monks  have  honoured  him,  declares,
that  "of  his  own  accord  he  abjured  the  errors  of  Luther  and
Calvin,  and  professed  the  Cathohc  religion."  Poor  youth  !  he
knew  too  little  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Keformers,  and  still  less
of  those  of  the  Romish  church.  No  friend  was  near  to  watch
over  his  last  moments ;  and  the  strongest  inference  that  can  be
drawn  from  the  above  language  is,  that  in  order  to  be  left  in
quiet  he  gave  assent  to  all  their  questions.  Or,  not  improbably,
the  assertion  may  rest  merely  on  the  fact,  that  in  his  dying  hour,
when  consciousness  perhaps  was  gone,  they  administered  to  him
extreme  unction.  The  stone  purports  to  have  been  placed  by
"weeping  friends," — rejoicing  Catholics  of  course;  for  no  others
could  have  put  an  inscription  like  the  following  over  his  grave :

D.  0.  M.

HIC  JACET
C.  B.  EX  Amebic^  Regionibtjs,
Lugduni  Gallise  Consul,  Hierosolymis  tactns  intrinsecus  sponte
Erroribus  Lntheri  et  Calvini  abjectis
Catholicam  religionem  professus,  synanche  correptus,
E  vita  decessit  IV  nonas  Augusti  MDCCCXXX,
jEtatis  suas
XXV.

Amici  moerentes  posuere.
Orate  pro  eo.

Near  by  is  the  grave  of  another  Frank,  whose  death  took
place  under  circumstances  of  peculiar  interest.  I  mean  that  of
Costigan,  the  Irish  traveller,  who  died  in  1835  in  consequence
of  his  romantic  though  rash  attempt  to  explore  the  Dead  Sea  in
an  open  boat  in  the  middle  of  July.  He  had  contrived  to  have
a  small  boat  carried  over  on  camels  from  the  shore  of  the  Medi-

VoL.  1,-20  i.  337-339

230

JERUSALEM  FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec.  VL

terranean  to  the  lake  of  Tiberias  ;  and  thence  followed  the  Jor-
dan down  to  the  Dead  Sea.  Here  he  launched  forth  alone  with
his  Maltese  servant  upon  these  waters,  and  succeeded  in  reach-
ing the  southern  extrenaity  ;  but  by  some  mismanagement  they
were  left  for  two  or  three  days  without  fresh  water,  exposed  to
the  fierce  rays  of  a  cloudless  sun,  and  compelled  to  row  hard  to
get  back  to  the  northern  end.  After  reaching  the  shore  they  lay
for  a  whole  day,  too  weak  to  move,  and  trying  to  regain  strength
by  laving  each  other  with  the  heavy  waters  of  the  lake.  At
length  the  servant  made  shift  to  crawl  up  to  Jericho,  where
Costigan  had  left  his  horse  ;  which  was  immediately  sent  to  him
with  a  supply  of  water.  He  was  brought  to  the  village  ;  and
the  next  morning  despatched  a  messenger  on  his  own  horse  to
Mr  Nicolayson,  requesting  medicine  and  expressing  fears  of  his
case.  This  gentleman  immediately  set  off  to  visit  him  ;  and
reached  him  at  2  o'clock  on  Thursday  morning.  He  found  him
very  ill,  with  a  high  intermittent  fever.  As  there  could  be  no
hope  of  his  recoveiy  at  Jericho,  Mr  N.  tried  every  means  to  get
persons  to  carry  him  to  Jerusalem  in  a  litter  ;  but  without
success.  The  only  way  of  removing  him,  was  to  sling  a  large
sack  of  straw  on  each  side  of  a  horse,  and  then  place  his  bed
upon  the  horse's  back.  In  this  way  the  sufferer  was  brought  to
the  city  with  great  difficidty  ;  leaving  Jericho  on  Friday  evening,
and  reaching  Jerusalem  at  8  o'clock  the  next  morning.  The
journey  exhausted  him  much  ;  no  medicine  could  be  brought  to
operate  ;  and  he  died  on  Monday  morning  in  the  Latin  convent,
where  he  had  a  room.  No  notes,  nor  any  account  of  his  voyage,
were  found  among  his  papers.  These  circumstances  were  related
to  us  by  Mr  Nicolayson,  as  we  stood  around  his  grave.'

A  little  to  the  southward  of  the  Latin  cemetery,  and  adjacent
to  the  northwestern  enclosures  connected  with  the  mosk  and  tomb
of  David,  is  a  small  plat  of  ground,  which  has  been  purchased
by  the  American  missionaries  as  a  place  of  burial  for  their  dead.
To  this  measure  they  were  driven  almost  by  necessity.  Two  of
their  members,  Mrs  Thomson  and  Dr  Dodge,  had  already  died
in  J erusalem.  For  the  former  a  grave  was  sought  and  obtained
without  difficulty  in  the  cemetery  of  the  Greeks.  In  the  case
of  the  latter,  the  same  permission  was  granted,  and  a  grave  dug  ;
but  as  they  were  about  to  proceed  to  the  burial,  word  was
broiight,  that  the  permission  had  been  recalled  and  the  grave
filled  up.  On  a  strong  representation  of  the  case  to  the  heads
of  the  Greek  convent,  the  burial  was  allowed  to  take  place,  with

'  Mr  Stephens  saw  the  servant  of  Cos-  Sea  which  Mr  S.  added  from  this  report,

tigan  at  Beirut,  and  endeavoured  to  extract  lies  before  me  as  I  write  ;  it  has  little  re-

from  him  information  as  to  the  voyap^e  ;  semblance  to  that  sea,  except  in  being

but  all  that  he  obtained  is  confused  and  longer  than  it  is  broad.     liicideuts  of

of  little  vahie.    The  sketch  of  the  Dead  Travel,  Vol.  II.

i.  330,  340

Sec.  VI.]

CEMETERIES.  SILOAM.

231

the  express  understanding,  that  a  like  permission  would  never
more  be  given.  In  consequence,  the  missionaries  purchased  this
little  spot  upon  Mount  Zion,  and  enclosed  it  with  a  common  waU
of  stone.  The  plat  contains  two  ot  three  olive  trees,  and  looked
green  and  peaceful ;  but  it  was  yet  untenanted.  After  the  pur-
chase had  been  made  and  possession  delivered,  the  authorities  of
the  city  hesitated  to  give  it  the  last  legal  sanction.  They  did
not  object  to  the  transaction  itself;  but  as  they  wanted  a  bribe
of  some  fifty  dollars  in  their  own  pockets,  they  professed  to  en-
tertain scruples,  whether  it  was  fitting  that  Christian  corpses
should  be  buried  so  near  the  sacred  tomb  of  David.  The  matter
had  not  at  that  time  been  brought  to  a  close  ;  and  until  this  was
done,  the  missionaries  did  not  choose  to  transfer  thither  the
rehcs  of  their  friends.  I  have  since  learned,  that  during  the  last
year  (1840)  the  Mission  caused  a  permanent  wall  to  be  erected
around  the  plat,  with  a  door  under  lock  and  key ;  and  shortly
afterwards,  on  the  death  of  a  child  of  Mr  Nicolayson,  the  body
was  interred  with  all  due  formalities  within  the  precincts.  All
this  was  done  without  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  authorities ;
and  as  such  matters  are  here  usually  settled  by  full  possession
and  prescription,  no  further  difficulty  was  apprehended.

From  the  cemeteries  we  proceeded  eastward  along  the  south-
em  wall  of  the  city ;  passing  by  the  Zion  gate,  and  then  de-
scending along  the  slope  towards  the  valley  of  the  Tyropoeon  or
Cheesemakers.  A  path  soon  leaves  the  wall  and  leads  obliquely
down  the  slope  southeast  in  the  direction  of  Siloam.  In  this
part  it  becomes  steep ;  and  the  Tyropoeon,  as  it  comes  down
from  the  wall  near  the  great  mosk,  is  also  steep,  and  forms  a  deep
ravine  with  banks  almost  precipitous.  At  its  lower  end  it  turns
east  and  issues  into  the  vale  of  the  Kidron.

Here,  still  within  the  Tyropoeon,  is  the  pool  of  Siloam,  a
small  deep  reservoir  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  into  which
the  water  flows  from  under  the  rocks,  out  of  a  smaller  basin
hewn  in  the  solid  rock  a  few  feet  further  up  ;  to  which  is  a  de-
scent by  a  few  steps.  This  is  wholly  an  artificial  work ;  and  the
water  comes  to  it  through  a  subterraneous  channel  from  the
fountain  of  Mary,  so  called,  higher  up  in  the  valley  of  Jehosha-
phat.  The  hill  or  ridge  Ophel  lying  between  the  Tyropoeon  and
the  valley  of  J ehoshaphat,  ends  here,  just  over  the  pool  of  Siloam,
in  a  steep  point  of  rock  forty  or  fifty  feet  high.  Along  the  base
of  this  the  water  is  conducted  from  the  pool  in  a  small  channel
hewn  in  the  rocky  bottom  ;  and  is  then  led  off  to  irrigate  gar-
dens of  fig  and  other  fruit  trees  and  plants,  Ipng  in  terraces
quite  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  vaUey  of  Jehoshaphat ;  a  de-
scent still  of  some  forty  or  fifty  feet.  The  waters  of  Siloam,  as
wo  saw  them,  were  lost  in  these  gardens.    On  the  right,  just

i.  340-342

232

JEETJSALEM. — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec.  VL

below  the  pool,  and  opposite  tlie  point  of  Opliel,  is  a  large  mul-  .
berry  tree,  witb  a  terrace  of  stones  surrounding  its  trunk,  where
they  say  Isaiah  was  sawn  asunder.    Here  are  also  traces  of  a
former  larger  reservoir.

We  now  passed  along  up  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  which  is
here  narrow  and  the  sides  high  and  steep.  On  our  right,  cling-
ing to  the  rocky  side  of  the  mount  of  OflFence,  so  called,  are  the
stone  hovels  of  the  straggling  village  of  Siloam,  Kefr  Selwan,
many  of  which  are  built  before  caves  or  rather  excavated  sepul-
chres ;  while  in  various  places  the  sepulchres  themselves,  with-
out addition,  are  used  as  dwellings.  A  httle  further  up  the
vaUey,  under  the  western  hill,  is  the  fountain  of  the  Virgin,'  a
deep  excavation  in  the  sohd  rock,  evidently  artificial,  into  which
one  descends  by  two  successive  flights  of  steps.  The  water  is
apparently  brought  hither  by  some  unknown  and  perhaps  arti-
ficial channel ;  and  flows  off  through  a  subterraneous  passage
under  the  hill  Ophel  to  the  pool  of  Siloam.  At  a  later  period
we  crawled  through  the  whole  length  of  this  passage.  We
drank  of  the  water,  and  remarked  a  peculiar  though  not  un-
pleasant taste.  We  had  been  told  that  the  people  did  not  use
it  for  drinking ;  but  we  found  here,  as  at  Siloam,  women  filling
their  water  skins,  which  like  Hagar  they  bore  off"  on  their
shoulders.  They  said  they  used  it  now  for  drinking ;  but  when
in  summer  the  water  becomes  lower,  it  is  then  not  good  and  has
a  brackish  taste.

Above  this  fountain  the  valley  becomes  very  narrow.  It  is
everywhere  only  a  water-course  between  high  hUls ;  and  the
brook  Kidron  now  never  flows,  and  probably  never  flowed  along
its  bottom,  except  after  heavy  rains.

From  the  fountain  a  path  ascends  obliquely,  but  steeply,  to
the  southeast  corner  of  the  area  of  the  great  mosk.  This  forms
at  the  same  time  the  extreme  southeast  corner  of  the  city  wall,
and  stands  directly  on  the  brow  of  the  almost  prepipitous  side  of
the  valley,  here  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  deep.  Further
north  the  brow  juts  out  a  little  more,  leaving  a  narrow  strip  of
level  ground  outside  of  the  wall,  which  is  occupied  as  a  Muham-
medan  cemetery.  The  tombs  are  here  thickly  crowded  together ;
and  frequently,  as  we  passed  this  way  afterwards,  there  was  a
stench  arising  apparently  from  corpses  mouldering  in  their  shal-
low graves.  The  Muliaramedans  prefer  this  cemetery  to  all  the
others,  as  being  very  near  to  the  great  mosk.'^

The  lower  part  of  this  wall  in  several  places  is  composed  of
very  large  hewn  stones,  which  at  once  strike  the  eye  of  the  be-

'  Called  by  some  travellers  the  fountain       '  Hist,  of  Jorus.  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.
of  Siloani  ill  distinction  from  the  pool  of    p.  134.
Siloam  below ;  but  without  iiiiy  good  reason.

i.  31 2,  343

Seo.  VI.]

VIA  DOLOROSA.

233

holder  as  ancient ,  as  being  at  least  as  old  as  the  time  of  Herod,
if  not  of  Solomon.  The  upper  part  of  the  wall  is  everywhere
ohviously  modern ;  as  is  the  whole  wall  in  many  places.  The
Golden  gate,  which  once  led  out  from  the  area  of  the  mosk  upon
this  side,  is  now  walled  up.  Near  the  northeast  corner  of  this
area,  towards  St.  Stephen's  gate,  we  measured  one  of  the  large
stones  in  the  wall,  and  found  it  twenty-four  feet  long,  by  six
feet  broad  and  three  feet  high.  Just  north  of  the  same  gate  is
a  small  tank  or  reservoir  on  the  outside ;  and  within  the  gate,  on
the  left  hand,  is  the  very  large  and  deep  reservoir,  to  which  the
name  of  Bethesda  is  commonly  given,  though  probably  without
good  reason.  It  is  entirely  dry  ;  and  large  trees  grow  at  the  bot-
tom, the  tops  of  which  do  not  reach  the  level  of  the  street.
North  of  this,  a  little  to  the  right  of  the  street,  is  the  dilapida-
ted church  of  St.  Anne,  over  the  grotto  which  is  shown  as  the
birthplace  of  the  Virgin.  The  church  has  pointed  arches ;  and
was  obviously  the  work  of  the  crusaders.'

We  now  returned  home  along  the  Via  dolorosa  ;  in  which
monkish  tradition  has  brought  together  the  scenes  of  all  the
events,  historical  or  legendary,  connected  with  the  crucifixion.*^
Along  this  way,  they  say,  our  Saviour  bore  his  cross.  Here  one
may  see,  if  he  pleases,  the  place  where  the  Saviour,  fainting
under  his  burden,  leaned  against  the  wall  of  a  house ;  and  the
impression  of  his  shoulder  remains  unto  this  day.  Near  by  are
also  pointed  out  the  houses  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus  in  the
parable.  To  judge  from  present  appearances  the  beggar  was
quite  as  well  lodged  as  his  opulent  neighbour.  But  enough  of
these  absurdities  !

GETHSEMANE,  THE  MOUNT  OF  OLIVES,  ETC.

The  forenoon  of  the  next  day,  Wednesday,  April  18th,  taking
our  servant  Ibrahim,  I  went  alone  with  him  out  of  the  Yafa  gate,
and  keeping  ta  the  right  passed  around  the  northwest  corner  of
the  city  waU,  where  stands  a  terebinth  or  Butm  tree  of  con-
siderable size  ;  and  then  descended  to  the  Damascus  gate.  Here
I  struck  out  to  the  left  through  the  open  field  to  the  grotto  of
Jeremiah,  so  caUed  by  the  monks.   It  Kes  under  a  round  isolated

'  William  of  Tyre  mentions  on   this  Abbey  of  St.  Anne,  and  was  inhabited  by

spot  the  house  of  Anna,  as  a  place  where  an  Abbess  and  Black  nuns,  i.  e.  of  the

three  or  four  poor  women  had  consecrated  Benedictine  order;   Hist.  Hieros.  58.  p.

themselves  to  a  monastic  life.     About  1078. — Saswulf  in  1102-3  already  speaks

A.  D.  1113,  King  Baldwin  I.  compelled  of  a  church    here  ;   p.  264.  Wright's,

his  Armenian  wife  to  take  the  veil  in  this  Early  Travels  in  Palest,  p.  41.
convent;  which  at  the  same  time  he  richly         The  earliest  allusion  I  have  been  able

endowed.     WilL  Tyr.    11.    1.     Wilken  to  find  to  the  Via  dolorosa,  is  in  Manima

Gesch.  der  Kreuzz.  II.  p.  397.    According  Sanutus  in  the  fourteenth  century;  do

to  Jac.  de  Vitriaco,  this  was  called  the  Secret,  fid.  Cruc.  3.  14.  10.

Vol.  I.— 20*  i.  343-345

234  JEBTTSALEM — FIRST  IMPEESSIONS.  [Sec.  VL

rocky  hill,  the  south  side  of  which  has  apparently  heen  cut  away
to  an  irregular  face,  under  which  is  the  entrance  to  the  grotto.
In  front  is  a  small  garden  walled  in ;  but  the  door  was  closed,  so
that  I  could  not  gain  access  to  the  cavern  itself ;  nor  were  we
more  successful  at  a  subsequent  visit.  The  top  of  the  hill  is  oc-
cupied as  a  Muslim  cemetery.'  The  southern  front  of  this  hill
stands  overagainst  the  precipitous  northern  side  of  Bezetha,
crowned  by  the  city  wall ;  and  one  might  almost  imagine  that
the  two  hills  once  formed  one  ridge,  of  which  the  intervening
portion  had  been  cut  away  by  art.

Eeturning  to  the  path,  I  kept  along  the  city  wall  towards  the
east.  Before  reaching  the  northeast  corner  of  the  city,  there  is
near  the  wall,  or  indeed  in  the  trench,  a  small  reservoir  for  water,
still  in  use.  Passing  down  the  steep  hill  from  St.  Stephen's  gate
into  the  valley  of  the  Kidron,  and  crossing  the  bridge  over  the
dry  water-course,  one  has  on  the  left  the  half  subterranean
church  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  with  an  excavated  grotto  or  chapel
called  her  tomb.  Before  the  low  building  is  a  small  sunken
court  ;  from  which  there  is  a  descent  by  many  steps  into  the
church.  The  earliest  notice  of  this  tomb  and  church  is  in  the
seventh  century ;  and  it  is  also  mentioned  by  the  historians  of
the  crusades.'

Near  the  same  bridge  and  church,  on  the  right,  is  the  place
fixed  on  by  early  tradition  as  the  site  of  the  garden  of  Gethse-
mane.  It  is  a  plat  of  ground  nearly  square,  enclosed  by  an  or-
dinary stone  waU.  The  northwest  corner  is  one  hundred  and
forty-five  feet  distant  from  the  bridge.  The  west  side  measures
one  himdred  and  sixty  feet  in  length  ;  and  the  north  side  one
hundred  and  fifty  fe'et.  "Within  this  enclosure  are  eight  very  old
olive  trees,  with  stones  thrown  together  around  their  trunks.'
There  is  nothing  peculiar  in  this  plat  to  mark  it  as  Gethsemane  ;
for  adjacent  to  it  are  other  similar  enclosures,  and  many  olive
trees  equally  old.    The  spot  was  not  improbably ^xed  upon  dur-

'  Prokesch  describes  the  interior  of  this
grotto  as  nearly  round,  some  forty  paces
in  diameter,  perhaps  30  feet  high  in  tlie
middle,  and  supported  by  two  massive
pillars.  It  is  inhabited  by  a  Muslim  saint,
who  sells  places  for  graves  in  the  grotto
and  in  the  garden  before  it,  while  above
are  also  graves;  Reise  ins  heil.  Land,  p.
95.  The  place  was  in  much  the  same
state  early  in  the  sixteenth  century ;  see
Hist,  of  Jerusalem  in  Fundgr.  des  Orients,
II.  p.  laii.

'■'  First  by  Adamnanusex  Arculfo  (I.  13)
about  A.  I).  697;  then  by  St.  Willibald
about  A.  I).  76.').  Also  by  Will.  Tyr.  8.
2.  Hro(  Urdus,  c.  8.  Mar.  Sanut.  3.  14.
9, — Monkish  tradition  almost  as  a  matter
1.  3 15,  346

of  course  now  refers  the  building  of  this
church  to  Helena ;  though  Marinus  Sanu-
tus  (and  apparently  Brocardus)  gravely
supposes  it  to  have  existed  before  the  de-
struction of  the  city  by  Adrian,  and  to
have  been  thus  deeply  covered  over  by  the
ruins  then  thrown  down  into  the  valley ;
de  Secret,  fid.  1.  c.  But  Nicepliorus  Cal-
listus  in  the  same  (fourteenth)  century,  al-
ready ascribes  it  to  Helena ;  lib.  VIII.  c.
30. — Arabian  writers  call  this  church  el-
Josm;iniyeh,  i.  e.  Gethsemane ;  and  so  the
natives  at  the  present  day.  Fdrisi  par
Jaubert,  p.  314.  Hist,  of  Jerus.  in
Fundgr.  des  Orient.  II.  p.  132.

■'  111  I8r)2  we  found  this  plot  enclosed
by  a  high  wall.

Sec.  VI.]

GETHSEMANE.

235

ing  the  visit  of  Helena  to 'Jerusalem,  A.  D.  326;  when  the
places  of  the  crucifixion  and  resurrection  were  supposed  to  be
identified.  Before  that  time .  no  such  tradition  is  alluded  to.
Eusebius,  writing  apparently  a  few  years  afterwards,  says  Geth-
semane  was  at  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  was  then  a  place  of
prayer  for  the  faithful.'  Sixty  years  or  more  afterwards,  Jerome
places  it  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  and  says  a  church  had  been
built  over  it ;  which  is  also  mentioned  by  Theophanes  as  existing
near  the  end  of  the  seventh  century.'^  The  garden  is  likewise
spoken  of  by  Antoninus  Martyr  at  the  end  of  the  sixth  century,
by  Adamnanus,  and  by  writers  of  the  times  of  the  crusades.*
There  would  seem  therefore  little  reason  to  doubt,  that  the  pre-
sent site  is  the  same  to  which  Eusebius  alludes.  Whether  it  is
the  true  site,  is  perhaps  a  matter  of  more  question.^

Giving  myself  up  to  the  impressions  of  the  moment,  I  sat
down  here  for  a  time  alone  beneath  one  of  the  aged  trees.  All
was  silent  and  solitary  around  ;  only  a  herd  of  goats  were  feed-
ing not  far  off",  and  a  few  flocks  of  sheep  grazing  on  the  side
of  the  mountain.  High  above  towered  the  dead  walls  of  the  city ;
through  which  there  penetrated  no  sound  of  human  life.  It  was
almost  like  the  stillness  and  loneliness  of  the  desert.  Here,  or
at  least  not  far  off,  the  Saviour  endured  that  "  agony  and  bloody
sweat,"  which  was  connected  with  the  redemption  of  the  world  ;
and  here  in  deep  submission  he  prayed :  "0  my  father,  if  this
cup  may  not  pass  away  from  me  except  I  drink  it,  thy  will  be
done  !

From  the  bridge  three  paths  lead  up  to  the  summit  of  the
mount  of  Olives.  One,  a  mere  footpath,  strikes  up  in  a  direct
course  along  a  steep  projecting  part  of  the  hill ;  a  second  passes
up  more  circuitously  to  the  left,  where  the  hill  retires  a  little  and
has  a  more  gradual  slope  ;  and  the  third  winds  up  along  the  face
further  south.  The  sides  of  the  mountain  are  still  sprinkled  with
olive  trees,  though  not  thickly,  as  was  probably  the  case  of  old  ;
and  a  few  other  trees  are  occasionally  seen.  I  took  the  middle
path,  which  brought  me  out  at  the  church  of  the  Ascension  and
the  mosk,  situated  on  the  summit.*    Around  them  are  a  few

'  The  Itin.  Hiero".  A.  D.  333,  mentions
the  "rock  where  Judas  betrayed  Christ"
as  being  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.

'  Eusebius  et  Hieron.  Onomast.  art.
Oethsemani.  Theophan.  Chrou.  A.  D.
683.  Comp.  Reland  Pal.  p.  857.— Cyrill
of  Jems,  also  speaks  of  Gethsemane ;  Ca-
tach.  Xin.  p.  140.  ed.  Oxon.

'  Antonin.  Mart.  17.  Adamnanus  ex
Arculf.  I.  13.  Jac.  de  Vitr.  Hist.  Hiero-
8ol.  63.    Brocardus,  c.  8.

*  According  to  the  Evangelist  John,  Je-
8ns  "  went  forth  over  the  brook  Cedron,

where  was  a  garden,"  18,  1.  2.  But
Luke  says  he  "  went  out  as  he  was  vwnt
to  the  mount  of  Olives,"  22,  39.  This
last  passage,  taken  in  connection  with
Luke  21,  37,  where  it  is  said  that  he
taught  in  the  day  time  in  the  temple,  and
at  night  went  out  and  abode  in  the  mount
of  Olives,  may  suggest  a  doubt,  whether
Gethsemane  was  not  perhaps  situated
higher  up  on  the  mount  of  Olives.
'  Matt.  26,  42.

•  The  various  supposed  sites  of  scriptu-
ral events,  which  the  monks  have  fixed

i.  346-348

236

JERUSALEM — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec.  Vr.

huts,  forming  a  miserable  village.  Here  one  is  able  to  look  down
upon  the  city  and  survey  at  least  the  roofs  of  the  houses.  The
view  may  be  said  indeed  to  be  a  very  full  one ;  but  it  is  not  par-
ticularly interesting.  It  presents  a  dull  mixed  mass  of  roofs  and
domes  ;  but  the  distance  is  too  great  to  be  able  to  distinguish  the
buildings  or  the  topography  of  the  city  in  any  good  degree.  A
more  pleasing  view  is  obtained  from  various  points  lower  down
the  side  of  the  mountain.

From  the  church  on  the  summit,  only  the  city  and  the  west-
ern prospect  are  visible ;  the  eastern  view  being  cut  off  by  a
higher  part  or  ridge  of  the  hill  some  twenty  or  thirty  rods  further
east,  with  a  Wely  or  tomb  of  a  Mushm  saint  upon  it.  From
this  Wely  one  obtains  a  commanding  view  of  the  northern  end
and  portion  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  also  of  the  adjacent  country,
including  a  large  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  as  well  as
the  naked  dreary  region  lying  between  Jerusalem  and  Jericho,  and
between  Bethlehem  and  the  Dead  Sea.  The  course  of  the  river
Jordan  could  be  traced  by  the  narrow  strip  of  verdure  which
clothes  its  banks.  Beyond  its  valley,  the  eastern  mountains
stretch  off  northward  and  southward  in  a  long  even  ridge,  ap-
parently unbroken.  They  present  to  the  view,  as  here  seen,  no
single  peak  or  separate  summit,  which  could  be  taken  for  the
Nebo  of  the  Scriptures.  At  a  considerable  distance  north  of
Jericho,  indeed,  a  loftier  summit  is  seen,  forming  the  highest
point  of  the  mountains  of  Gilead,  just  north  of  es-Salt ;  but  this
could  not  have  been  Nebo.

The  atmosphere  was  at  the  time  perfectly  clear,  and  the
waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  lay  bright  and  sparkling  in  the  sun-
beams, seemingly  not  more  than  eight  or  ten  miles  distant,
though  actually  much  further  off.  I  unfortunately  neglected  to
look  for  Kerak,  which  would  doubtless  have  been  visible  in  so
clear  a  day.  When  we  sought  for  it  in  a  later  visit,  the  haziness
of  the  atmosphere  prevented  us  from  distinguishing  it.  Towards
the  west  and  northwest  the  view  extends  to  the  Terebinth  valley
so  called,  and  the  high  point  and  mosk  of  Neby  Samwil.

I  returned  down  the  mount  by  the  more  southern  path ;
from  which  a  branch  led  me  across  the  Jewish  cemetery  to  the
tombs  of  Absalom  and  Zcchariah  so  called,  at  the  bottom  of  the
valley,  just  under  the  southeast  corner  of  the  wall  of  the  mosk
and  city.  Here  is  the  narrowest  path  of  the  valley.  Close  by
the  tombs  is  a  well,  which  then  had  water,  though  it  seemed  not
to  be  used  ;  and  here  is  also  another  bridge  of  stone  over  the

upon  the  side  of  the  mount  of  Olives,  may  ably  the  same  mentionod  by  Sir  J.  Maun-

bo  seen  in  Maundrell,  Prokescli  (p.  80),  deville,  as  on  or  near  the  spot  where  Jesus

and  other  travellers. — Edrisi  speaks  of  a  taught  liis  disciples  the  Lord's  prayer ;  p.

large  church  on  the  acclivity,  called  I'atcr  96.  Lend.  1839.
Noster ;  p.  344,  ed.  Joubert.    This  is  prob-

i.  348.  349

Sec.  VI.]

jews'  place  of  wailing.

23t

torrent  bed  with  a  fine  arch.  From  this  point  a  rugged  footpath
ascends  towards  St.  Stephen's  gate ;  entering  ■which,  I  returned
home  by  the  Via  dolorosa.

jews'  place  of  wailing,  etc.

In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  I  went  with  Mr  Lanneau
to  the  place  where  the  Jews  are  permitted  to  purchase  the  right
of  approaching  the  site  of  their  temple,  and  of  praying  and  wail-
ing over  its  ruins  and  the  downfall  of  their  nation.  The  spot  is
on  the  western  exterior  of  the  area  of  the  great  mosk,  considera-
bly south  of  the  middle ;  and  is  approached  only  by  a  narrow
crooked  lane,  which  there  terminates  at  the  wall  in  a  veiy  small
open  place.  The  lower  part  of  the  wall  is  here  composed  of  the
same  kind  of  ancient  stones,  which  we  had  before  seen  on  the
eastern  side.  Two  old  men,  Jews,  sat  there  upon  the  groimd,
reading  together  in  a  book  of  Hebrew  prayers.  On  Fridays  they
assemble  here  in  greater  numbers.  It  is  the  nearest  point  in
which  they  can  venture  to  approach  their  ancient  temple ;  and
fortunately  for  them,  it  is  sheltered  from  observation  by  the  nar-
rowness of  the  lane  and  the  dead  walls  around.  Here,  bowed  in
the  dust,  they  may  at  least  weep  undisturbed  over  the  fallen
glory  of  their  race ;  and  bedew  with  their  tears  the  soil,  which
so  many  thousands  of  their  forefathers  once  moistened  with  their
blood.

This  touching  custom  of  the  Jews  is  not  of  modem  origin.
Benjamin  of  Tudela  mentions  it,  as  connected  apparently  with
the  same  spot,  in  the  twelfth  century ;  and  very  probably  the
custom  has  come  down  from  still  earlier  ages.^  After  the  cap-
ture of  Jerusalem  imder  Adrian,  the  Jews  were  excluded  from
the  city ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  age  of  Constantine  tha^  they
were  permitted  to  approach,  so  as  to  behold  Jerusalem  from  the
neighbouring  hills.*  At  length  they  were  allowed  to  enter  the
city  once  a  year,  on  the  day  on  which  it  was  taken  by  Titus,  in
order  to  waH  over  the  ruins  of  the  temple.  But  this  pri^-ilege
they  were  obliged  to  purchase  of  the  Roman  soldiers.' — Accord-
ing to  Benjamin,  as  above  cited,  the  Jews  in  his  day  regarded
this  portion  of  the  waU  as  having  belonged  to  the  court  of  the
ancient  temple.

'  Benj.  of  Tud.  by  Asher,  I.  p.  70.  emerant  san<^inem  Christi,  emant  laciy-

'  Sulpic.  Sev.  Hist.  Sacr.  II.  4.5.  Eu-  mas  suas.  Et  ne  fletus  quidem  eis  gratni-
seb.  Chron. — Also  Enseb.  in  Psalm,  ed.  tns  sit :  videas  in  die  quo  capta  est  a  Ro-
Montfauc.  p.  267,  382.    Hilar,  in  Psalm,    manis  et  diruta  Jerttsalem,  venire  populum

58.  No.  12.    See  Miinter,  der  Jiidische    lugubrem  plangere   ruinas  tempi!

Krieg  unter  Trajan  nnd  Hadrian,  p.  97.       sui ;  et  miles  mercedera  postulat,  ut  illis
*  Mi'inter  1.  c.    Hieron.  in  Zephan.  c.  L    flere  plus  liceat." — See  also  Gregor.  Na-
15,  "  Et,  ut  ruinam  sua;  eis  flere  liceat  ci-    zianz.  Orat.  XII.    Valesii  Annot.  in  Eu-
vitatis,  pretio  redimunt ;  ut  qui  quondam    seb.  Hist.  Ecc.  IV.  6.

i.  349-351

238

JERUSALEM. — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec.  VL

Turning  back  somewhat  from  this  spot,  and  threading  our
way  through  other  narrow  lanes  with  sharp  corners,  and  then
through  a  tract  planted  with  the  prickly  pear,  we  came  to  the
southwest  corner  of  the  area  of  the  great  mosk,  where  the  wall
is  quite  high.  Around  this*  corner  is  an  open  level  plat  of
ground,  which  was  now  ploughed,  extending  to  the  city  wall  on
the  south.  This  latter,  which  here  runs  from  west  to  east,  is  low
on  the  inside,  but  high  on  the  outside  ;  forming  a  high  offset  be-
tween the  level  plat  above  and  the  open  fields  further  south.
Further  east  this  wall  turns  north  at  a  right  angle  and  unites
with  the  southern  wall  of  the  area  of  the  mosk,  about  one  third
of  the  way  between  the  southwest  and  the  southeast  corner.  The;
stones  in  the  lower  part  of  the  wall  of  the  area  at  the  southwest
corner,  are  of  immense  size ;  and  on  the  western  side,  at  first
view,  some  of  them  seem  to  have  been  started  from  their  places,
as  if  the  wall  had  burst  and  was  about  to  fall  down.  We  paid
little  attention  to  this  appearance  at  the  time ;  but  subsequent
examination  led  here  to  one  of  our  most  interesting  discoveries.
South  fi-om  this  corner,  in  the  city  wall,  and  near  the  bed  or  chan-
nel of  the  Tyropoeon,  is  a  small  gate  now  closed  up.  This  the
monks  in  their  zeal  to  find  an  apphcation  for  aU  scriptural
names,  have  honoured  (or  dishonoured)  with  the  name  of  the
Dung  gate ;  although  neither  the  ancient  gate  of  that  name,
nor  the  ancient  waU,  could  have  been  anywhere  in  this  vicinity.

The  present  city  wall  is  built  for  the  most  part  with  a  breast-
work ;  that  is,  the  exterior  face  is  carried  up  several  feet  higher
than  the  interior  part  of  the  wall,  leaving  a  broad  and  conve-
nient walk  along  the  top  of  the  latter  for  the  accommodation  of
the  defenders.  This  is  protected  by  the  parapet  or  breastwork,
which  has  battlements  and  loopholes.  There  are  also  flights  of
steps  "to  ascend  or  descend  at  convenient  distances  on  the  inside.
Mounting  upon  the  city  wall  in  this  manner  near  the  area  of  the
mosk,  we  kept  along  over  the  Dung  gate  so  called,  and  up
Mount  Zion,  passing  a  well  with  water  on  the  way ;  and  then
descending  from  the  wall  near  the  gate  of  Zion,  we  returned
home  through  the  Jews'  quarter  on  the  northeast  slope  of  the
same  hiU.

UPPER  POOL,  GIHON,  ETC.

In  the  afternoon  of  the  following  day,  (Thursday,  April
19th,)  Messrs  Smith  and  Nicolayson  and  myself  took  a  short
walk  to  look  at  ^he  ground  and  objects  west  and  northwest  of
the  Yafa  gate,  and  along  the  road  to  Yafii.  We  went  first  to
the  large  tank  lying  in  the  basin  which  forms  the  head  of  tho
valley  of  Hinnom,  or  more  properly  perhaps  of  the  valley  of

i.  3.31,  352

Sec.  VI.]

UPPER  POOL.     VALE  OF  HINNOM.

239

Grihon ;  since  this  wovild  seem  to  be  the  quarter  to  which  that
name  of  old  belonged.  The  tank  was  now  dry  ;  but  in  the
rainy  season  it  becomes  full ;  and  its  waters  are  then  conducted
by  a  small  rude  aqueduct  or  channel  to  the  vicinity  of  the  Yafa
gate,  and  so  to  the  pool  of  Hezekiah  within  the  city.  The  tract
around  this  tank,  especially  towards  the  northeast,  is  occupied  as
a  Muslim  cemetery,  the  largest  around  the  city.  The  tombs  are
scattered  and  old ;  some  of  the  larger  ones  indeed  have  the  ap-
pearance of  great  antiquity.

We  returned  across  the  higher  ground  on  the  north  of  this  basin,
towards  the  Damascus  gate,  in  order  to  examine  whether  per-
haps the  valley  of  the  Tyropoeon  extended  up  at  all  beyond  the
city  in  that  direction.  There  is  however  no  trace  of  any  valley
or  of  any  depression  in  this  quarter,  before  reaching  the  declivity
stretching  down  to  the  Damascus  gate.  The  whole  interval
between  this  gate  and  Gihon  is  occupied  by  a  broad  swell
of  land,  rising  somewhat  higher  than  the  northwest  part  of  the
city  itself  The  ground  on  the  west,  as  well  as  on  the  north  of
the  present  city,  would  seem  to  have  once  been  buUt  over  ;  or  at
least  occasional  buildings  once  stood  upon  it.  Fragments  of
poHshed  marble  are  often  picked  up  here  ;  and  especially  the
small  cubes  of  marble  of  different  colours,  not  much  larger  than
dice,  which  were  employed  in  the  construction  of  the  ancient
tesselated  pavements.

We  entered  the  city  again  by  the  gate  of  Yafa  or  Hebron  ;
and  threading  our  way  towards  the  left  through  several  lanes,
passed  the  Coptic  convent,  then  rebuilding,  at  the  northern  end
of  the  pool  of  Hezekiah.  This  latter  still  had  water  covering  its
bottom,  though  apparently  not  deep.  *

VALLEY  OF  HINNOM,  "WELL  OF  JOB,  ETC.

Walking  out  alone  one  day,  I  passed  over  Mount  Zion  to  its
southern  brow,  and  then  descended  its  steep  side  without  a  path
and  with  some  difficulty,  to  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  The  bottom
of  the  vaUey  has  here  more  width  and  descends  rapidly  towards
the  east ;  farther  down  it  is  narrower  and  has  a  still  steeper  de-
scent. On  the  south  the  lull  in  many  parts  rises  at  first  in  rocky
precipices,  with  other  ledges  of  rocks  higher  up  on  the  steep  side ;
and  these  rocks  and  the  whole  face  of  the  hill  are  full  of  excava-
ted tombs.  On  the  same  hill-side,  further  east  along  the  valley,
is  the  Aceldama  or  Potter's  Field,  so  called.  The  tombs  conti-
nue quite  down  to  the  comer  of  the  mountain,  where  it  bends
off  southwards  along  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.

My  course  was  along  the  side  of  the  hill  among  the  tombs  ;
and  then  descending  near  the  junction  of  the  two  valleys,  I  came

i.  352-354

240

JERUSALEM. — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec.  VI.

to  the  well  of  Nehemiali  as  the  Franks  call  it,  or  the  well  of
Job  according  to  the  natives.  Neither  name  has  apparently  any-
good  foundation.  We  shall  afterwards  see  that  this  is  without
much  doubt  the  En-Eogel  of  Scripture.  It  is  a  deep  well  of
living  water  ;  but  in  the  rainy  season  overflows.

Passing  from  hence  up  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  and  visiting
again  SUoam  and  the  tomb  of  Absalom,  I  returned  home  by  St.
Stephen's  gate.  This  walk  gave  me  a  stronger  impression  of  the
height  and  steepness  of  Zion,  than  I  had  before  received.

TOMBS  OF  THE  KINGS  AND  JUDGES,  MOUNT  ZION,  ETC.

We  visited  several  times  the  tombs  of  the  Kings,  so  called,
(probably  the  tomb  of  Helena,)  and  took  the  measurement  of
them,  as  will  be  described  in  the  proper  place.  They  lie  directly
north  of  the  Damascus  gate,  just  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  great
road  to  Nabulus.  The  way  leads  to  them  through  the  olive
grove  which  now  covers  the  level  tract  on  this  side  of  the  city.
A  considerable  portion  of  this  plain  was  once  apparently  occupied
by  buildings.  Fragments  of  marble  and  mosaic  tesserse  are  often
found  here  ;  and  many  ancient  cisterns,  now  partly  fallen  in,
furnish  unequivocal  evidence  of  former  habitations.  The  stones
with  which  the  soil  was  thickly  strewed,  have  been  gathered  into
heaps  or  laid  up  in  terraces  ;  and  the  fields  thus  cleared  have
now  been  tilled  for  centuries.

One  forenoon,  (Friday,  AprU  27th,)  Messrs  Smith  and  Lan-
neau  and  myself  went  out  to  the  tombs  of  the  Kings,  to  look  at
them  again,  and  to  inspect  the  progress  of  some  excavations
jWhich  we  had  set  on  foot.  We  remained  here  but  a  short  time  ;
and  then  proceeded  further.  Just  beyond  these  tombs  the  valley
of  the  Kidron,  which  thus  far  extends  up  north  from  the  city,
turns  to  the  west  at  a  right  angle,  and  then  shortly  again  re-
sumes its  former  direction,  running  up  north  nearly  to  the  tombs  of
the  Judges.  The  great  Nabulus  road  crosses  the  valley  here,
where  it  runs  from  west  to  east.  On  the  right  side  of  this  road,
five  minutes  from  the  tombs  of  the  Kings,  and  just  as  it  descends
into  the  valley,  is  a  Wely,  or  tomb  of  a  Muslim  saint,  with  which
is  connected  a  small  Khan  now  half  in  ruins.  Here  a  deformed
Sheikh  resides  as  keeper,  with  a  jug  of  water  and  a  coffee  pot  for
the  refreshment  of  travellers  ;  expecting  from  them  presents  in
return,  by  which  to  live.  As  Mr  L.  was  acquainted  with  the
Sheikh,  we  stopped  for  a  few  moments,  took  coffee,  and  looked  in
upon  his  Khan.  The  arched  stalls  for  the  animals  around  the
small  court  remain  ;  but  the  chambers  above  for  the  guests  are
gone.    The  name  of  the  saint  was  Husein  Ibn  'Isa  el-Jerrahy.

i.  354,  355

Sic.  VI.]

TOMBS  OF  THE  JUDGES,  ETC.

241

According  to  the  tradition  of  tlie  Sheikh,  he  was  one  of  the  com-
panions of  the  KhaUf  Omar  when  he  took  J erusalem.

Passing  along  up  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  the  sides  of
which  are  everywhere  studded  with  sepulchres  excavated  in  the
rocks,  we  came  to  the  tombs  of  the  Judges  so  called.  These  lie
near  the  head  of  the  valley,  on  the  right  hand  of  the  path,  just
beyond  the  water-summit  between  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea
and  Mediterranean.  Here  the  ground  begins  to  descend  north-
west towards  the  great  valley  usually  (though  falsely)  called  by
Franks  the  valley  of  the  Terebinth  ;  but  for  which  the  natives
have  here  no  other  name  than  Wady  Beit  Hanina.  At  this  point
we  were  in  full  view  of  Neby  Samwil,  bearing  N.  40°  W.  on  the
high  hill  beyond  that  valley  ;  and  could  also  see  Kustul  bearing  W.

After  examining  the  sepulchres,  we  returned  over  the  eastern
hill,  striking  the  great  northern  road  near  the  brow  of  the  ascent
by  which  it  rises  after  crossing  the  valley.  This  is  doubtless  the
Scopus  of  the  ancients  ;  it  affords  one  of  the  most  pleasing  views
of  the  city  ;  though  less  distinct  than  one  from  a  point  further
southeast.  Passing  again  the  tombs  of  the  Kings,  we  directed
our  course  towards  the  northwest  corner  of  Jerusalem,  in  order  to
trace  out,  if  possible,  some  foundations  we  had  before  seen,  appa-
rently belonging  to  the  third  wall  of  the  ancient  city,  as  described
by  Josephus.    In  this  we  were  partially  successful.

We  came  at  length  to  the'Yafa  gate,  shortly  after  12  o'clock,
and  found  it  shut.  It  was  Friday,  the  Muhammedan  Sabbath  ;
on  which  day  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  are  closed  for  an  hour  at
noon,  as  the  principal  season  of  Muhammedan  prayer.  Passing
around  the  city  on  the  west,  we  spent  the  hour  in  wanderng  over
Mount  Zion.  We  looked  here  also  for  traces  of  the  ancient  waU
along  the  western  and  southern  brow  ;  followed  out  for  some  dis-
tance the  aqueduct  from  Solomon's  pools,  which  winds  around  the
southeast  slope  ;  and  then  returned  up  towards  the  Zion  gate.
It  was  not  yet  opened,  and  we  went  to  call  on  the  Sheikh  of  the
Muslim  tomb  of  David,  with  whom  Mr  Lanneau  was  acquainted.
He  was  out ;  but  we  visited  the  room  over  the  tomb,  where  legen-
dary tradition  relates  that  the  Lord's  Supper  was  instituted.  It
is  a  large  dreary  "  upper  room"  of  stone,  fifty  or  sixty  feet  long
by  some  thirty  feet  in  width.  At  the  east  end  is  a  small  niche  in
the  waU,  which  the  Christians  use  at  certain  seasons  as  an  altar
to  celebrate  mass.  On  the  south  side  is  a  similar  but  larger  re-
cess, which  serves  the  Muhammedans  as  a  Mihrab  towards  which
to  direct  their  prayers.'    Thus  the  two  superstitions  stand  here

'  As  the  Muhammedans  always  turn  the  place  or  direction  towards  which  the

their  faces  towards  Mecca  during  their  face  is  turned,  is  the  Kibleh.    Mecca  lies

prayers  and  prostrations,  every  mosk  has  nearly  south  of  Syria ;   and  lience  the

a  niche  in  the  wall  to  show  the  proper  di-  word  Kibleh  is  also  in  common  use  among

rection.    This  niche  is  the  Mihrdb  ;  and  the  Syrian  Arabs  to  denote  the  south.
Vol.  I.— 21  i.  355-357

242

JERUSALEM.  FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec.  VI.

side  by  side  ia  singular  juxtaposition.  The  pretended  tomb  it-
self no  one  is  permitted  to  enter.

This  buUdiag  was  formerly  a  Christian  church  ;  and  as  such
the  site  at  least  is  of  high  antiquity.  It  is  apparently  the  same
spot,  and  perhaps  the  same  building,  referred  to  by  Cyiill  in  the
fourth  century,  as  the  church  of  the  Apostles,  where  they  were
said  to  be  assembled  on  the  day  of  pentecost.  This  implies  that
it  was  then  regarded  as  at  least  older  than  the  age  of  Constantine.
About  the  same  time  Epiphanius  speaks  of  it  distinctly  under
the  same  name ;  and  about  A.  D.  697,  Adamnanus  mentions  it
in  like  manner.  It  was  then  held  to  be  the  Coenaculum,  and  to
contain  also  the  column  to  which  Christ  was  bound  in  order  to
be  scourged.'  The  same  column  is  mentioned  in  the  Jerusalem
Itinerary  (A.  D.  333),  and  by  Jerome  near  the  close  of  the  same
century.  The  latter  writer  describes  this  column  in  his  day  as
sustaining  the  portico  of  a  church  on  Mount  Zion,  and  as  stiU
stained  with  the  Saviour's  blood  ;  but  neither  he  nor  any  of  the
earlier  writers  speak  of  any  tradition  relating  to  the  Lord's  Sup-
per.'^ Writers  of  the  times  of  the  crusades  often  aUude  to  this
church  as  the  church  of  Zion  ;  and  regard  it  as  the  place  where
the  protomartyr  Stephen  was  buried  for  a  tinie.^  According  to
Sir  J.  Maundeville  and  also  L.  de  Suchem,  it  would  seem  to
have  been  stUl  in  the  hands  of  the  Latins  so  late  as  about  A.  D.
1350  ;  and  at  that  time  it  was  one  of  the  many  churches  which
tradition  began  to  ascribe  to  the  empress  Helena.^  More  than  a
century  later,  A.  D.  1479,  Tucher  of  Nitmberg  found  the  build-
ing converted  into  a  mosk,  or  at  least  the  lower  part  of  it,  and
already  containing  the  tombs  of  David,  Solomon,  and  other  kings.
— The  adjacent  buUdings  were  formerly  a  convent  of  the  Minor-
ites or  Franciscans,  who  retained  possession  of  them  for  a  century
or  more  after  the  church  had  been  partially  at  least  wrested  from
their  hands.^  In  these  buildings  Ibrahim  Pasha  was  accustomed
to  reside  when  he  ^dsited  Jerusalem.

'  Cyrill.  Cat.  XVI.  2,  p.  225.  Oxon.
1703.  Epiphan.  de  Mensur.  et  Pond.  no.
14.  Comp.  le  Quien  Oriens  Christ.  III.  p.
105. — Adamnan.  ex  Arculfo,  I.  13.  St.
Willibald,  A.  D.  765,  calls  it  the  church
of  Zion;  Hodcepor.  18.

^  Epitaph.  Paula?,  ad  Eustooli.

'  Will.  Tyr.  8.  5.  Jac.  de  Vitr.  Hist.
Hieros.  61.    Phooas  de  Locis  Sanct.  14.

'  First  mentioned  as  one  of  Helena's
churches  by  Nicephorus  Callistus,  8.  30 ;
a  writer  of  the  fourteenth  century.

'  AdrichoniiuM  Theatr.  Terrai  Sanct.  p.
150.  Quaresmius  Torrae  Sanct.  lOlucid.
II.  pp.  51,  122.  It  appears  that  tiie  Eran-
ciscans  or  Minorites  had  their  chief  seat
here  from  A.  D.  1313  to  A.  D.  1561.

i.  357.  358

They  were  then  driven  out  by  the  Mu-
hainmedans;  and  having  purchased  the
present  Latin  convent  of  St.  Salvator  in
the  city,  which  had  formerly  belonged  to
the  Georgian  Greeks,  they  removed  to  it.
Quaresmius,  1.  c.  Comp.  Wadding  Annal.
Minor.  Ed.  2.  III.  p.  485  sq.  Belon  about
1547  lodged  in  their  convent  on  Zion,  and
speaks  of  it  as  the  only  Latin  convent;
Observations,  etc.  Paris  15t<8.  p.  313;
also  in  Paulus'  Sammlung,  Tli.  I.  p.  ^59.
So  Baunigarten  in  1512,  lib.  II.  5 ;  and
other  travellers.  Belon  likewise  remarks,
that  the  monks  had  in  his  day  regained
posse-sion  of  the  Casnaculum  ;  1.  c.  p.
315. — This  convent  was  erected  for  the
Franciscans  by  Sancia,  queen  of  Robert

Sec.  VI.]  CCENACULUM.     HOUSE  OF  CAIPHAS.

243

Further  north,  nearer  to  the  gate,  stands  an  Armenian  con-
vent, enclosing  a  small  church,  which  according  to  a  similar  tra-
dition marks  the  spot  where  once  stood  the  house  of  Caiphas.
We  entered  and  were  conducted  through  it.  Here  the  Armenian
patriarchs  of  Jerusalem  lie  buried  ;  their  monuments  are  in  the
small  court.  Under  the  altar  of  the  church  they  still  profess  to
show  the  stone  which  closed  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  They  point
out  also  what  they  call  the  prison  of  our  Lord  ;  as  well  as  the
spot  where  Peter  denied  liis  Master,  and  the  court  where  the
cock  crew.  This  church  cannot  well  be  very  ancient nor  have
I  been  able  to  find  any  mention  of  it  before  the  fourteenth  cen-
tury. It  was  then  called,  as  now,  the  church  of  St.  Salvator,  and
was  already  ascribed  to  Helena.'^  The  Armenians  appear  to  have
had  it  in  possession  very  early  after  the  crusades.^

We  reached  the  Zion  gate  just  as  it  was  opened  at  one
o'clock.  Within  the  gate,  a  little  towards  the  right,  are  some
miserable  hovels,  inhabited  by  persons  called  leprous.  Whether
their  disease  is  or  is  not  the  leprosy  of  Scripture,  I  am  unable  to
affirm  ;  the  symptoms  described  to  us  were  similar  to  those  of
elephantiasis.  At  any  rate  they  are  pitiable  objects,  and  miser-
able outcasts  from  society.  They  all  live  here  together,  and  in-
termarry only  with  each  other.  The  children  are  said  to  be
healthy  until  the  age  of  puberty  or  later ;  when  the  disease
makes  its  appearance  in  a  finger,  on  the  nose,  or  in  some  hke
part  of  the  body,  and  gradually  increases  so  long  as  the  victim
survives.  They  were  said  often  to  Uve  to  the  age  of  forty  or  fifty
years.

Our  way  home  led  us  through  the  Jews'  quarter  ;  and  we
looked  in  for  a  moment  upon  their  preparations  for  building  a
new  synagogue.  In  digging  for  its  foundations  they  had  un-
covered several  small  houses  and  rooms,  which  had  before  been
completely  buried  beneath  the  accumulated  rubbish.  These  pre-
sented nothing  of  interest.  It  was  also  reported,  that  they  had
found  pieces  of  marble,  and  even  columns  ;  but  we  were  able  to
learn  nothing  definite  on  the  subject.

of  Sicily;  who  also  repaired  or  rebuilt  844.  Niceph.  Call.  8.  .30. — The  Jerusalem
the  Coenaculum ;  see  Quaresmius,  1.  c.  p.  Itinerary,  (A.  D.  333,)  speaks  of  the
122,  and  Tom.  I.  p.  176.  Wadding,  1.  c.       house  of  Caiphas  as   having    stood  on

'  Benjamin  of  Tudela  says,  that  in  his    Mount  Zion,  "  ubi  fait  domus  Caiphoe  ;  "
day,  soon  after  A.  D.  1160,  there  was  no    but  says  nothing  of  any  building  then  ex-
building    on  Zion   save   one    Christian    isting.    Comp.  Cyrill.  Cat.  XIII.  19.
church,  doubtless  the  Coenaculum ;  I.  p.       '  Tucher  of  Niiruberg  found  it  in  their
72,  ed.  Asher.  hands  in  A.  D.  1479.    See  Reissb.  des

'■'  Marin.  Sanut.  Seer,  fidel.  Crucis,  3.    heil.  Landes,  p.  659.
14. 8.    L.  de  Suchem  Itin.  p.  78.  Reissb.  p.

i.  358-360

244

JERUSALEM. — FIRST  IMPRESSIONS.

[Sec,  VL

EL-HARAM,     TOWER  OF  DAVID.

We  made  no  attempt  to  obtain  admission  to  the  Haram  esh-
Sherif,  or  great  mosk.  This  has  been  visited  and  described  by-
others,  and  did  not  form  in  itself  any  part  of  the  object  of  our
journey.  Could  there  have  been  a  hope  of  penetrating  into  the
vaults  and  subterranean  passages  which  are  known  to  exist  be-
neath its  area,  so  as  to  explore  them,  we  would  have  spared  no
effort  to  have  obtained  the  requisite  permission.  But  as  it  was,
we  thought  it  more  prudent  to  pursue  our  researches  in  sUence,
rather  than  by  ill  timed  or  ill  advised  application  to  the  authori-
ties, to  run  the  risk  of  exciting  on  their  part  suspicion  or  jealousy.
We  found  no  difficulty  at  any  time  in  approaching  the  entrances,
and  looking  in  upon  the  long  as  we  pleased.

Wishing  however  to  obtain  a  better  view  of  the  Haram,  and
also  to  visit  the  citadel  near  the  Yafa  gate,  Mr  Smith  with  our
friends  waited  on  the  Kaim  Makam,  the  military  commander  of
the  city,  to  obtain  an  oider  for  this  purpose.  This  officer  re-
ceived them  with  great  courtesy  ;  immediately  granted  their  re-
quest ;  and  even  sent  his  secretary  to  accompany  them  and  in-
troduce them  at  each  place.  They  now  came  back  for  me  ;  and
we  went  first  to  the  building  on  the  northwest  corner  of  the  area
of  the  Haram.  This  was  formerly  the  residence  of  the  governor ;
and  stands  near  the  site  of  the  ancient  fortress  Antonia.  It  is
now  used  as  a  barrack.  From  the  flat  roof  there  is  a  fuU  view  of
the  mosk  and  its  court,  a  large  and  beautiful  area,  with  trees  scat-
tered over  it,  and  several  fountains  ;  the  whole  forming  a  fine
promenade.  We  saw  there  quite  a  number  of  females,  and  many
children  playing.

The  great  mosk  itself,  Kuhbet  es-Sukhrah,  "Dome  of  the
Eock, "  is  an  octagonal  building  with  a  noble  dome,  standing
upon  a  platform  near  the  middle  of  the  court,  elevated  by  seve-
ral steps  above  the  general  level.  Quite  on  the  southern  side  of
the  area,  stands  another  large  mosk,  el-Jdvii'a  el-Aksa ;  and
there  are  other  smaller  mosks  and  buildings  adjacent  to  the  walls
in  other  parts.  The  whole  enclosure,  with  all  its  sacred  build-
ings and  appurtenances,  is  called  el-Uaram,  "the  Holy,"  and
also  el-Haram  esh-Sher/f,  "the  noble  Sanctuary."  In  the
northern  part  of  the  area,  the  rocky  surface  is  visible,  which  has
evidently  been  levelled  off"  by  art.  The  height  of  the  wall
around  the  court  on  the  inside  we  judged  to  be  from  twelve  to
sixteen  feet. — Towards  the  west  the  houses  of  the  city  rise
steeply  one  above  another,  and  the  two  hills  of  Zion  and  Akra
are  distinctly  marked.'

'  TliP  spot  where  we  .stood  is  the  same  for  tlie  noble  Panorama  of  Jerusalem  by
from  which  the  drawings  were  taken    Catherwood,  since  destroyed  by  fire.  ■

i.  300:  3ol

Sec.  VI.]

THE  HARAM.     TOWER  OF  DAVID.

245

We  now  repaired  to  the  castle  or  citadel,  and  were  taken
through  its  various  parts ;  but  our  attention  was  confined  chiefly
to  the  one  old  tower,  apparently  ancient,  which  is  usually  called
by  the  Franks  the  tower  of  David.  This  we  measured  ;  and  it
will  be  described  in  another  place.  From  its  top  there  is  an  ex-
tensive view,  especially  towards  the  southeast,  where  a  small  por-
tion of  the  Dead  Sea  is  visible,  and  beyond  it  the  mountains  of
Arabia.  As  we  looked  down  upon  and  over  the  city  itself,  it
seemed  almost  like  a  plain  ;  the  appearance  of  descent  being  in
a  great  measure  lost.'

Both  here  and  at  the  barracks,  the  deportment  of  the  officers
and  soldiers  we  encountered,  was  extremely  civil.  The  secre-
tary who  attended  us  was  an  intelligent  man ;  and  when  we
parted,  he  politely  declined  the  hakhsMsh  we  proffered  him.
This  was,  I  think,  the  only  instance  of  the  kind  in  all  our
journey.

In  our  walks  through  the  city  and  its  environs,  we  were
struck  with  the  comparatively  few  people  we  met,  and  the  in-
difference with  which  they  seemed  to  regard  us  and  our  move-
ments. In  the  city  itself,  the  bazars  were  usually  thronged  ;  so
that  it  was  sometimes  difficult  to  make  one's  way  through  them.
In  the  larger  streets  also,  such  as  that  leading  down  from  the
Yafa  gate  to  the  great  mosk,  and  those  between  the  bazars  and
the  Damascus  gate,  there  were  commonly  many  persons  passing
to  and  fro ;  but  all  the  other  streets  were  comparatively  soUtary.
Outside  of  the  city,  a  few  peasants  with  their  asses  wending  their
way  to  or  from  the  gates  ;  a  few  shepherds  watching  their  flocks
on  the  side  of  Mount  Olivet ;  a  few  women  with  their  water-
skins  around  the  fountains  in  the  valley  of  J ehoshaphat ;  and  oc-
casionally Muslim  females  veiled  in  white  sitting  or  strolling
among  the  tombs  of  their  people  ;  these  were  ordinarily  the  only
signs  of  life  and  activity  which  the  stranger  could  perceive,  as  he
wandered  around  this  former  "city  of  the  great  King."  Yet
sometimes  we  lighted  upon  more  stirring  scenes.  One  day  as  we
were  standing  near  the  large  terebinth  at  the  northwest  corner
of  the  city  wall,  the  Mutesellim  or  governor  with  a  party  of  ten
or  twelve  horsemen  passed  by,  on  their  return  from  a  ride  and
from  practising  the  Jerid.  They  were  all  gaily  caparisoned,  and
rode  in  fine  style  ;  their  horses  prancing  and  now  and  then  dart-
ing oft'  at  full  speed  along  the  rocky  road.  At  another  time  the
dead  monotony  was  broken  in  upon,  by  the  departure  of  a  large
body  of  troops  for  Eamleh.

'  We  were  not  so  fortunate  as  Stephan  Mount  Tabor  in  the  north  !  Leitungen

Schulz;  who  professes  to  have  seen  from  des  Hochsten,  etc.  Th.  V.  p.  161.
this  tower  Mount  Horeb  in  the  south,  and

Vol.  I.— 21*  i.  361-363

246

JERUSALEM.  INCIDENTS.

[Sec.  VL

We  took  measurements  within  and  without  the  city  in  all
directions,  without  interruption,  and  without  being  subjected  to
the  slightest  inquiry  or  token  of  suspicion.  Indeed,  the  indiffer-
ence with  which  these  operations  were  apparently  regarded,  was
rather  a  matter  of  surprise.  A  few  persons  only  occasionally
stopped  to  look  at  us,  and  then  passed  on  ;  and  I  am  persuaded
that  neither  in  London  nor  New  York  could  any  thing  similar  be
undertaken,  mthout  exciting  far  more  attention,  and  probably
drawing  together  a  crowd  of  idlers.  We  just  pursued  our  own
course ;  went  where  we  would,  and  undertook  what  we  pleased ;
asked  no  leave  of  the  government  or  others,  whenever  it  could  be
avoided ;  and  thus  encountered  no  opposition.  In  the  one
instance  where  we  had  occasion  to  ask  a  favour  of  the  Kaim
Makam  or  military  commander,  it  was  courteously  granted ;  in
another  instance,  the  Mufti  declined  to  concede  what  he  previ-
ously had  expressed  a  wilhngness  to  have  take  place.

With  the  native  population  of  the  city,  we  had,  through  our
friends,  the  opportunity  of  frequent  intercourse,  to  any  extent
we  might  desire.  The  house  of  Mr  Lanneau,  in  which  we  re-
sided, was  situated  in  the  Muhammedan  quarter,  next  door  to
that  of  the  Mufti  of  J erusalem ;  and  the  circumstance  of  his
having  taken  a  house  in  their  quarter  and  among  them,  was
looked  upon  with  favour  by  the  Muslims.  His  neighbours,  some
of  the  chief  men  of  the  city,  were  in  the  habit  of  making  fre-
quent calls  ;  and  an  interchange  of  friendly  courtesies  was  sedu-
lously maintained.  A  native  Greek  merchant,  Abu  Selameh,
who  was  seeking  the  appointment  of  agent  from  the  American
consul  at  Beirut,  was  very  attentive  ;  and  through  him  and  the
chief  physician  or  apothecary  of  the  garrison,  we  received  all  the
intelligence  and  current  reports  of  the  day.

The  Mutesellim  or  governor  of  the  city  at  this  time,  was
Sheikh  Mustafa,  a  young  man  of  a  fine  figure  and  prepossessing
countenance,  the  son  of  Sheikh  Sa'id,  governor  of  Gaza.  He
was  said  however  to  be  prejudiced  against  the  Franks ;  and  to
be  in  the  habit  of  turning  an  ungracious  ear  to  all  their  applica-
tions. We  had  no  occasion  to  apply  to  him  while  in  J  erusalem  ;
except  once,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  to  send  our  Firman  for  his
inspection  before  setting  ofi"  for  the  Dead  Sea ;  but  we  after-
wards met  him  in  Hebron  and  were  struck  with  his  graceful  de-
portment. The  Kaim  Makam,  or  military  governor,  was  re-
garded as  more  frank  and  courteous ;  and  our  friends  were  in  the
habit  of  applying  to  him,  when  necessary,  rather  than  to  Sheikh
Mustafa.

Our  neighbour  the  Mufti  called  one  morning  soon  after  break-
fast, and  sat  with  us  for  an  hour.  This  dignitary  is  in  high  re-
pute among  the  Mussulmans ;  being  subordinate  in  rank  only  to

i.  303.  304

Sec.  VI.]

THE  MUFTI.

247

the  Muftis  of  Mecca  and  Constantinople.  He  was  a  fine  looking
man  between  sixty  and  seventy  years  of  age,  with,  a  long  white
beard  neatly  trimmed,  intelligent  eyes,  and  great  vivacity  for  a
Muhammedan.  He  declined  the  proffered  pipe,  assuring  us  that
he  never  smoked.  He  was  near  sighted,  and  had  an  ordinary
eyeglass ;  but  my  spectacles,  and  especially  those  of  one  of  the
missionaries,  dehghted  him  greatly.  He  was  prompt  in  offering
us  all  the  facihties  we  might  need  in  prosecuting  our  researches ;
and  so  far  as  his  own  jjersonal  feeUngs  were  concerned,  this  offer
was  perhaps  sincere.  The  flat  roof  of  Mr  Lanneau's  house  was
separated  from  his  premises  only  by  a  low  parapet ;  and  some  of
our  friends  having  casually  looked  over  it  into  his  court,  he  had
sent  a  civil  message  to  request  that  this  might  not  be  done  any
more.  One  object  of  his  present  visit  was  to  apologize,  or  rather
to  explain  the  reason,  for  sending  such  a  message.

Another  day  we  had  a  similar  call  from  Abu  Ghaush,  the
former  governor  of  Jerusalem,  noted  as  one  of  the  Sheikhs  of  the
village  of  Kuryet  el-'Enab  on  the  way  to  Yafa,  where  some  years
ago  travellers  were  often  robbed.  He  is  now  old,  with  a  keen
robber's  eye,  and  an  intelligent  face.  This  is  a  family  name  ;
and  there  are  several  brothers  Abu  Ghaush.  An  older  one,  Ibra-
him, was  the  most  notorious  as  a  robber  ;  but  he  was  said  not
now  to  be  acknowledged  as  the  head  of  the  family.

Before  we  left  Cairo,  intelligence  had  been  received  there  of
the  insurrection  of  the  Druzes  in  Hauran  ;  and  as  they  were
known  to  be  a  brave  and  injured  people,  fears  were  entertained
(and  not  unjustly)  that  a  protracted  war  might  follow,  the  end
of  which  no  one  could  foresee.  The  occasion  of  the  insurrection
was  understood  to  be,  the  attempts  of  the  Egyptian  government
to  introduce  the  conscription,  and  to  seize  upon  their  young  men
by  force  as  recruits  for  the  army.  This  kind  of  oppression  had
been  already  introduced  into  other  parts  of  Syria,  although  not
with  the  same  success  as  in  Egypt ;  but  the  comparatively  free
and  high  spirited  Druzes  could  not  brook  it.  War  ensiled.  The
Druzes  fought  with  desperation  ;  and  were  killed  outright  when-
ever taken.  Their  country  was  overrun  and  wasted  ;  -their  vil-
lages burned  with  fire  ;  their  wives  and  children  sold  as  slaves  in
the  markets  of  Damascus.  The  survivors  withdrew  to  the  rocks
and  fastnesses  of  el-Lejah  ;  for  a  time  there  would  be  a  calm,  and
then  the  war  burst  forth  again  with  redoubled  fury.  After  con-
tinuing for  more  than  a  year,  the  war  appears  to  have  been  finally
terminated  by  the  concession, *on  the  part  of  the  government,  of
all  that  for  which  the  Druzes  had  at  first  taken  up  arms  ;  a  con-
cession extorted  perhaps  by  the  indications  of  an  approaching
war  with  Turkey.

During  our  journey  through  the  deserts  south  of  Palestine,

I  361-366

248

JERUSALEM. — INCIDENTS.

[Sec.  VI.

we  of  course  heard  little  of  this  war.  The  Bedawin  knew  that  it
had  broken  out ;  but  they  had  no  definite  information  respecting
it ;  and  the  scene  of  conflict  was  too  remote  to  affect  them  di-
rectly, or  awaken  an  interest  in  their  bosoms.  When  we  ar-
rived at  J erusalem,  the  first  throes  of  the  struggle  were  not  yet
over  ;  and  the  minds  of  men  were  in  uncertainty.  For  some
time  no  definite  intelligence  had  been  received  from  the  seat  of
war  ;  and  the  city  was  full  of  riunours.  No  one  knew  where
Ibrahim  Pasha  was  ;  and  it  was  even  said,  that  a  large  body  of
his  troops  had  been  defeated,  and  another  party  of  several  hun-
dreds wholly  cut  ofi".  In  this  state  of  things,  the  unquiet  spirits
of  the  land,  who  under  the  strong  arm  of  Egyptian  rule  had  be-
come quiet  and  peaceable  citizens,  began  to  rouse  themselves,
and  desired  again  to  taste  the  sweets  of  anarchy  and  lawless  de-
predation. Several  robberies  and  murders  were  committed  in
the  vicinity  of  J  erusalem  ;  one  of  which  has  been  already  alluded
to.'  In  another  instance  a  pilgrim  was  shot,  robbed,  and  left
wounded  on  the  road  to  Yafa.  He  was  brought  to  the  city,  and
some  of  our  friends  saw  him  lying  helpless  and  apparently  dying,
in  the  open  court  of  the  Greek  convent,  waiting  until  the  au-
thorities of  the  city  or  the  convent  should  make  some  provision
for  his  need.  Reports  of  other  robberies  were  very  frequent ;  but
were  evidently  much  exaggerated,  if  not  wholly  groundless.

Under  these  circumstances,  the  prospect  before  us  was  dreary;
and  it  was  for  a  time  doubtful,  whether  we  should  be  able  to
travel  at  aU  in  the  country,  without  (or  even  with)  an  armed
guard.  Were  the  Druzes  able  to  maintain  themselves  and  make
head  against  the  Pasha's  troops,  then  all  the  roads  in  Palestine
would  become  unsafe  ;  for  however  well  affected  the  better  por-
tiuu  of  the  people  might  be,  still  this  would  not  keep  in  check
the  bands  of  lawless  adventurers,  who  were  only  waiting  for  an
opportunity  to  prowl  over  tlie  countr}'.  Many  days  however  had
not  elapsed,  before  the  certain  news  arrived,  that  Ibrahim  was  at
Damascus,  where  he  had  concentrated  his  troops  ;  and  that  he
had  totally  defeated  the  Druzes.  After  this  all  was  again  quiet ;
the  reports  of  robbery  and  murder  were  no  longer  heard  ;  and  we
subsequently  travelled  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the
land  without  fear  or  interruption  ;  indeed,  with  the  same  feeling
of  security  as  in  England  or  our  native  country.  It  was  not  un-
til two  months  later,  that  a  fresh  outbreak  of  the  insurrection  in
the  region  of  Jebel  esh-Sheikh,  hindered  us  from  approacliing
Damascus.  *

As  if  we  were  to  have  a  specimen  of  all  the  evils  to  which  the
oriental  world  is  exposed,  a  few  days  after  our  arrival  in  the  Holy
City,  rumours  of  the  plague  began  to  be  circulated.    It  had

'  See  above,  p.  219.

L366  367

SkcVI.]

WAR.     THE  PLAGUE.

249

broken  out  with  violence  in  Alexandria  ;  and  in  consequence  a
strict  quarantine  had  been  established  at  Yafa.  Yet  on  Sunday,
April  22d,  the  report  came  that  the  plague  had  made  its  appear-
ance in  Yafa  also  ;  supposed  to  have  been  introduced  by  pilgrims
from  the  southern  coast  of  Asia  Minor.  Some  of  these  pilgrims
were  known  to  have  come  up  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  now  the  inhab-
itants were  tormented  day  by  day,  with  various  rumours  of  its
existence  both  at  Yafa  and  among  themselves.  At  first  many
doubted  ;  but  several  fearful  cases  at  Yafa,  in  the  famihes  of
some  of  the  Frank  consuls,  speedily  put  the  question  beyond
doubt'  in  respect  to  that  place.  In  Jerusalem  there  were  for
some  days  no  very  decided  cases.  Deaths  indeed  occurred,  which
were  ascribed  to  the  plague  ;  but  no  one  pronounced  authorita-
tively upon  them.  Yet  all  were  in  fear  and  upon  their  guard ;
several  houses  were  barricadoed  by  the  poHce  ;  many  families  and
some  of  the  convents  put  themselves  in  quarantine  ;  and  all  took
care,  in  passing  to  and  fro  along  the  streets,  not  to  come  in  con-
tact with  any  other  person.  At  length,  after  a  few  days,  the
plague  developed  itself  decidedly  ;  aU  doubt  was  at  an  end  ;  and
the  disease  continued  to  extend  its  ravages  on  every  side  continu-
ally, though  mildly.

This  was  a  state  of  things  such  as  I  had  never  anticipated,
and  which  I  shall  never  forget.  Men's  hves  seemed  to  hang  in
doubt  before  them.  No  one  knew  what  to  do  or  whither  to  turn
himself  AU  who  could,  hurried  away  from  the  city  ;  for  they
feared  that,  according  to  despotic  custom,  Jerusalem  would  be
shut  up  and  a  cordon  of  troops  drawn  around  it,  in  order  to  pre-
vent the  plague  from  spreading  among  the  villages  of  the  coun-
try. Nor  was  this  fear  groundless.  AU  business  was  at  a  stand.
The  merchants  from  Damascus  and  other  places  left  the  city.
The  missionaries  broke  off  their  sittings,  and  those  from  abroad
hastened  to  depart  with  their  famUies.  They  left  on  the  30th
of  April.  Several  Frank  travellers  also  hurried  away  ;  and  some
who  were  upon  the  road  from  Beirut  to  J erusalem,  turned  back
at  Nabulus.

MeanwhUe  we  continued  our  investigations  without  interrup-
tion, taking  care  to  come  in  contact  with  no  one  as  we  passed
along  the  streets  ;  and  a  kind  Providence  preserved  us  from  the
dangers  by  which  we  were  surrounded.  On  the  18th  of  May  the
city  was  actuaUy  shut  up,  and  no  one  permitted  to  go  out.  "We
had  left  it  the  day  before  on  a  long  excursion  to  Gaza,  Hebron,
and  Wady  Musa  ;  and  although  we  afterwards  returned  to  its
gates,  yet  we  did  not  enter  them  again.  The  city  remained  shut
up  until  the  beginning  of  July.

Indeed,  during  our  whole  journey  in  the  east,  although  sur-
rounded by  war,  pestUence,  and  quarantines,  we  were  enabled  to

i.  367-369

250

JERUSALEM. — INCIDENTS.

[Sec.  VI.

pass  throiigli  them  all  without  harm  or  hindrance  ;  without  being
detained  from  these  causes  even  for  an  hour.

Not  all  travellers,  however,  were  thus  favoured.  On  the  2d  of
May,  I  met  at  the  house  of  Mr  Nicolayson  an  English  gentleman,
the  chaplain  of  a  ship  of  war,  who  left  Cairo  just  one  week  after
ourselves,  and  had  come  by  the  most  direct  route  to  Jerusalem.
He  had  descended  the  Nile  to  Damietta,  where  he  was  detained
seventeen  days  waiting  for  a  vessel  for  Yafa.  In  this  latter  place
he  had  performed  a  quarantine  of  fifteen  days  ;  and  then  five
more  on  his  arrival  in  Jerusalem.  These  last  had  ended  only  on
the  preceding  day.  Thus  of  the  forty-three  days  which  had  elapsed
since  his  departure  from  Cairo,  six  had  been  spent  in  travelling,
and  thirty-seven  in  quarantines  and  delay  !  Yet  he  was  not
disheartened  ;  and  actually  left  Jerusalem  the  very  next  day  for
Beirut.  It  may  also  be  mentioned,  as  showing  the  security  of  the
roads  at  the  time,  that  without  knovnng  a  word  of  Arabic,  he  set
off"  alone  with  a  single  muleteer  on  this  long  journey ;  and  reached
Beirut  without  any  other  difficulties,  than  those  which  are  of
course  incident  to  such  a  mode  of  travel.

Not  long  afterwards,  duke  Maximilian  of  Bavaria  arrived  at
Jerusalem  with  a  somewhat  numerous  suite  ;  and  left  it  again,  as
we  understood,  about  the  same  time  we  did,  just  before  the  city
was  shut  up.  He  was  less  fortunate  or  less  cautious  than  we
were,  in  respect  to  the  plague  ;  for  after  he  had  left  the  city  this
terrible  scourge  broke  out  among  his  attendants.  His  physician
died  of  it  at  Nazareth  ;  and  another  attendant,  a  mulatto,  was
left  ill  in  the  lazaretto  at  Sidon,  where  he  lingered  for  several
weeks  and  died.

Among  other  travellers  who  left  the  Holy  City,  was  M  de
Bertou,  a  Frenchman,  who  had  just  returned  from  an  excursion
to  Wady  Musa  and  'Akabah  by  way  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  Wady
el-'Arabah.  We  had  hoped  to  have  been  the  first  to  explore  the
northern  part  of  this  great  Wady ;  but  were  not  the  less  gratified
to  learn  from  him  the  results  of  his  journey.  He  spent  the  eve-
ning of  April  30th  with  us  ;  and  thought  he  had  found  the  name
of  Kadesh,  at  a  place  not  far  from  the  junction  of  the  roads  from
Hebron  and  Gaza  to  Wady  Mtisa  ;  and  also  that  of  Zoar  on  the
western  side  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Both  of  these  suppositions  we
afterwards  found,  by  inquiry  on  the  spot,  to  be  erroneous

i.  3G9,  370

SECTION  YII.

JERUSALEM.

TOPOGRAPHY  AND  ANTIQUITIES.'

We  enter  here  upon  a  more  detailed  description  of  the  Holy
City,  and  its  remains  of  antiquity.  In  doing  this,  I  must  request
the  reader  to  bear  in  mind,  that  for  the  lapse  of  more  than  fifteen
centuries,  Jerusalem  has  been  the  abode  not  only  of  mistaken
piety,  but  also  of  credulous  superstition,  not  unmingled  with
pious  fraud.  During  the  second  and  third  centuries  after  the
Christian  era,  the  city  remained  under  heathen  sway  ;  and  the
Christian  church  existed  there,  if  at  all,  only  by  sufferance.  But
when,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century,  Christianity  became
triumphant  in  the  person  of  Constantine  ;  and  at  his  instigation,
aided  by  the  presence  and  zeal  of  his  mother  Helena,  the  first
great  attempt  was  made  in  A.  D.  326,  to  fix  and  beautify  the
places  connected  with  the  crucifixion  and  resurrection  of  the  Sa-
viour ;  it  then,  almost  as  a  matter  of  course,  became  a  passion
among  the  multitudes  of  priests  and  monks,  who  afterwards  re-
sorted to  the  Holy  City,  to  trace  out  and  assign  the  site  of  every
event,  however  trivial  or  legendary,  wliich  could  be  brought  into
connection  with  the  Scriptures  or  with  pious  tradition.  The
fourth  century  appears  to  have  been  particularly  fruitful  in  the
fixing  of  these  localities,  and  in  the  dressing  out  of  the  traditions
or  rather  legends,  which  were  attached  to  them.*^  But  the  inven-

'  This  section  remains  as  it  was  in  the  sus.    Cyrill  also  speaks  of  it  in  the  same

first  edition,  excepting  a  few  slight  cor-  century;   Cat.  X.  19.     Tlie  column  to

rections.    The  results  of  our  second  visit,  which  Christ  was  hound  and  scourged,

in  1852,  are  given  in  Vol.  lU.  Sec.  IV  was  already  found ;  but  the  blood  upon  it

and  V.  is  first  mentioned  by  Jerome  nearly  a  cen-

The  Itin.  Hierosol.  A.  D.  333,  men-  tury  afterwards.    The  Ca'naculmn  con-

tions  the  palm  tree  as  still  stnnding  on  the  nected  with  it  was  the  work  of  a  still  later

side  of  Mount  Olivet,  from  which  the  peo-  age ;  as  we  have  already  had  occasion  to

pie  broke  ofl"  branches  to  strew  before  Je-  remark.    See  p.  242,  above.

i.  371,  372

252

JERUSALEM. — TOPOGRAPHY.

[Sec.YII.

tion  of  succeeding  ages  continued  to  build  upon  these  founda-
tions, •  until,  in  the  seventh  century,  the  Muhammedan  conquest
and  subsequent  oppressions  confined  the  attention  of  the  church
more  exclusively  to  the  circumstances  of  her  present  distress  ;
and  drew  off  in  part  the  minds  of  the  clergy  and  monks  from  the
contemplation  and  embelUshment  of  Scriptural  history.  Thus
the  fabric  of  tradition  was  left  to  become  fixed  and  stationary  as  to
its  main  points  ;  in  much  the  same  condition,  indeed,  in  wliich  it
has  come  down  to  our  day.  The  more  fervid  zeal  of  the  ages  of
the  crusades,  only  filled  out  and  completed  the  fabric  in  minor
particulars.*

It  must  be  further  borne  in  mind,  that  as  these  localities  were
assigned,  and  the  traditions  respecting  them  for  the  most  part
brought  forward,  by  a  credulous  and  unenlightened  zeal,  well  meant,
indeed,  but  not  uninterested  ;  so  all  the  reports  and  accounts  we
have  of  the  Holy  City  and  its  sacred  places,  have  come  to  us  from
the  same  impure  source.  The  fathers  of  the  church  in  Palestine,
and  their  imitators  the  monks,  were  themselves  for  the  most  part
not  natives  of  the  country.  With  few  exceptions  they  knew
little  of  its  topography  ;  and  were  mostly  unacquainted  with  the
Aramrean,  the  vernacular  language  of  the  common  people.'  They
have  related  only  what  was  transmitted  to  them  by  their  prede-
cessors, also  foreigners  ;  or  have  given  opinions  of  their  own,
adopted  without  critical  inquiry  and  usually  without  much  know-
ledge. The  visitors  of  the  Holy  Land  in  the  earlier  centuries,
as  well  as  the  crusaders,  all  went  thither  in  the  character  of  pil-
grims ;  and  looked  upon  Jerusalem  and  its  environs,  and  upon
the  land,  only  through  the  medium  of  the  traditions  of  the  church.

'  Thus  the  traditions  respecting  the  derstood  and  spoken  by  the  inhabitants  in

house  of  Caiaphas,  Gethsemane,  and  va-  general,  yet  there  is  reason  to  believe  that

rious  other  sites,  although  slight  traces  of  the  real  mother  tongue  of  the  common

them  are  found  quite  early,  appear  to  people  was  still  the  Aramaian.  Origen  and

have  been  decked  out  with  new  circum-  Jerome  appear  to   have  been  the  only

stances,  as  centuries  rolled  on.    In  A.  D.  fathers  in  Palestine  who  understood  He-

870  the  monk  Bernard  speaks  of  a  church  brew.    The  latter,  who  died  in  Palestine

on  the  side  of  the  mount  of  Olives,  on  the  A.  D.  420,  made  it  a  particular  study,  in

spot  where  the  Pharisees  brought  to  Jesus  order  to  translate  the  Bible.    He  mentions

the  woman  taken  in  adultery.    In  the  the  Punic  dialect,  by  which  he  probably

church  was  preserved  a  marble  tablet,  with  means  the  Phoenician,  as  a  spoken  lan-

tho  writing  which  our  Lord  there  ivrote  guage ;  Quaest.  ad  Gen.  36,  24.  ad  voc.

upon  the  ground!    Itinerar.  13,  in  Acta  c'^Q^.    See  Gesenius  Script,  et  Lingum

Sanctor.  Ord.  Benedict.  Sa:c.  III.  Pars  U.  phoenic.  Monumcnta,  pp.  331,  337.  In

P-  625.  liig  Comm.  in  Esa.  19,  18,  Jerome  also

"  A  multitude  of  the  minor  legends,  speaks  expressly  of  a  "  linqua  Cananitide,

Buch  as  those  relating  to  the  place  where  _^g,/ptiam  el  Hebrmam  media

Peter's  cock  crew,  the  houses  of  the  nch  Hebrcece  'viagua  ex  parte  confinig."

man  and  Lazarus,  and  the  like,  were  prob-  Various  other  circumstances  go  also  to

ably  the  work  of  more  modern  times,  show  the  long  continuance  of  the  Aramaian

Even  the  Via  dolorosa  seems  to  have  been  among  the  common  people.    The  subject

first  got  up  during  or  after  the  times  of  j,  ^-orthy  of  a  more  particular  investiga-

the  crusades ;  see  above,  p.  233.  tjoj,  tij^n  },a8  yet  been  bestowed  upon  it
Though  the  Greek  language  was  un-

i.  372,  373

Sec.  VII]

KCCLESIASTICAL  TRADITION.

253

And  since  the  time  of  the  crusades,  from  the  fourteenth  century
onwards  to  the  present  day,  all  travellers,  whether  pilgrims  or
visitors,  have  usually  taken  up  their  ahode  in  Jerusalem  in  the
convents  ;  and  have  heheld  the  city  only  through  the  eyes  of  their
monastic  entertainers.  European  visitors,  in  particular,  have
ever  lodged,  and  still  lodge,  almost  exclusively,  in  the  Latin  con-
vent ;  and  the  Latin  monks  have  in  general  been  their  sole
guides.

In  this  way  and  from  all  these  causes,  there  has  been  grafted
upon  Jerusalem  and  the  Holy  Land  a  vast  mass  of  tradition,
foreign  in  its  source  and  doubtful  in  its  character ;  which  has
flourished  luxuriantly  and  spread  itself  out  widely  over  the  west-
em  world.  Palestine,  the  Holy  City,  and  its  sacred  places,  have
been  again  and  again  portrayed  according  to  the  topography  of
the  monks ;  and  according  to  them  alone.  Whether  travellers
were  Catholics  or  Protestants,  has  made  little  difference.  All
have  drawn  their  information  from  the  great  storehouse  of  the
convents  ;  and,  with  few  exceptions,  all  report  it  apparently  with
like  faith,  though  with  various  fidelity.  In  looking  through  the
long  series  of  descriptions,  which  have  been  given  of  Jerusalem
by  the  many  travellers  since  the  fom-teenth  century,  it  is  curious
to  observe,  how  very  slightly  the  accounts  differ  in  their  topo-
graphical and  traditional  details.  There  are  indeed  occasional
discrepancies  in  minor  points ;  though  very  few  of  the  travellers
have  ventured  to  depart  from  the  general  authority  of  their
monastic  guides.  Or  even  if  they  sometimes  venture  to  call  in
question  the  value  of  this  whole  mass  of  tradition ;  yet  they
nevertheless  repeat  in  hke  manner  the  stories  of  the  convents ;
or  at  least  give  nothing  better  in  their  place.'

Whoever  has  had  occasion  to  look  into  these  matters  for
himself,  wiU  not  be  slow  to  admit,  that  the  views  here  expressed
are  in  no  degree  overcharged.  It  follows  from  them, — and  this
is  the  point  to  which  I  would  particularly  direct  the  reader's  at-
tention,— that  all  ecclesiastical  tradition  respecting  the  ancient
places  in  and  around  Jerusalem  and  throughout  Palestine,  is
OF  NO  VALUK,  except  so  far  as  it  is  supported  by  circumstances
known  to  us  from  the  Scriptures,  or  from  other  cotempjorary
testimony.  Thus  one  of  the  very  earliest  traditions  on  record,
that  which  points  out  the  place  of  our  Lord's  ascension  on  the
summit  of  the  mount  of  Olives,  and  which  certainly  existed  in
the  third  century,  long  before  the  visit  of  Helena,  is  obviously
false ;  because  it  stands  in  contradiction  to  the  Scriptural  ac-

'  Even  Maundrell,  shrewd  and  accu-  counts  of  Cotovicus  (Kootwyk)  sometimes
rate  as  he  is  elsewhere,  gives  in  Jerusalem  vary  from  the  usual  form.  The  inde-
little  more  than  what  he  heard  from  the  pendence  of  Dr.  Clarke  is  sufficiently
monks.  Of  other  travellers,  Rauwolf  was  manifest ;  but  it  led  him  over  into  an  op-
one  of  the  most  independent ;  and  the  ac-  posite  extreme  of  extravagant  hypothesis
Vol.  I.-22  i,  373-375

254

JERUSALEM.  TOPOGRAPHY.

[Sec.  TIL

count,  whicli  relates  that  Christ  led  out  his  disciples  "  as  far  as
to  Bethany,"  and  there  ascended  from  them  into  heaven.^  On
the  other  hand,  I  would  not  venture  to  disturb  the  traditional
location  of  Rachel's  grave  on  the  way  towards  Bethlehem ;  for
although  this  is  first  mentioned  by  the  Itin.  Hieros.  and  by
Jerome  in  the  fourth  century,  yet  the  Scriptural  narrative  neces-
sarily limits  the  spot  to  that  vicinity.*

On  the  same  general  principle,  that  important  work  the
Onomasticon,  the  production  of  the  successive  labours  of  Euse-
bius  and  Jerome,  which  gives  the  names  and  describes  the  situa-
tion of  places  in  the  Holy  Land,  can  be  regarded  in  an  historical
respect,  only  as  a  record  of  the  traditions  current  in  their  day,
sanctioned  indeed  by  the  judgment  of  those  fathers.  The
names .  thus  preserved  are  of  the  highest  importance ;  but  the
value  of  the  traditions  connected  with  them,  must  be  proved  ia
the  same  manner  as  all  others ;  although  in  general  they  were
then  far  less  corrupted  than  in  the  lapse  of  subsequent  centuries.

In  the  history  of  this  foreign  tradition,  three  ages  or  periods
are  distinctly  marked  by  documents,  which  show  us,  with  tole-
rable completeness,  its  state  and  character  at  the  time.  The
Jirst  falls  in  the  fourth  century,  about  A.  D.  333,  when  foreign
influence  had  just  acquired  a  firm  and  permanent  footing,  and
had  not  as  yet  very  greatly  swerved  from  the  tide  of  native  tra-
dition. Of  this  period  we  have  a  record  in  the  Onomasticon  of
Eusebius,  and  the  Jerusalem  Itinerary.  The  second  is  the  age
of  the  crusades,  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries ;  the
traditions  of  which  are  best  registered  in  the  tract  of  Brocardus,
about  A.  D.  1283.  The  third  period  occurs  at  the  beginning
of  the  seventeenth  century ;  when  the  volumes  of  Quaresmius
exhibit,  in  full,  the  state  of  the  tradition  then  current  in  the
convents,  the  great  source  from  which  most  European  travellers
have  drawn  their  information. — In  comparing  these  three  periods,
it  is  interesting,  though  painful,  to  perceive,  how  the  light  of
truth  has  gradually  become  dim,  and  at  length  often  been
quenched  in  darkness.  The  Onomasticon,  with  all  its  defects
and  wrong  hypotheses,  has  yet  preserved  to  us  much  of  the  tra-
dition of  the  common  people ;  and  contains  many  names  of
places  never  since  discovered,  though  stiU  existing ;  while  the
few  pages  of  Brocardus  are  worth  more,  in  a  topographical  re-
spect, than  the  unwieldy  fohos  of  Quaresmius.  It  is  certain,
that  in  the  long  interval  between  Eusebius  and  the  crusades,

'  Luke  24,  50.  51.    Compare  Acts  1,  Col.  Agr.    This  work,  according  to  Vale-

12,  where  it  is  only  said,  that  the  disciples  sius,  was  written  about  A.  D.  315,  ten

returned  from  Mount  Olivet ;  not  tliat  years  or  more  before  the  visit  of  Helena

Christ  ascended  from  it. — Tlie  tradition  to  Palestine.    Do  Vit.  et  Script.  Euseb.

alhidcd  to  in  the  text  is  mentioned  by  Ku-  '  Gen.  35,  16-20.    See  above,  pp.  218,

Bebius,  Demonstr.  Evang.  VI.  18.  p.  288.  219.
i.  375

SKC.Vn.]  FOREIGN  AND  NATIVE  TRADITION.

255

very  much  was  forgotten  by  the  church  which  still  existed  among
the  people ;  and  in  the  subsequent  period,  the  progress  of  obK-
vion  was  perhaps  not  less  rapid.  Even  within  the  last  two  cen-
turies, so  far  as  the  convents  and  travellers  in  Palestine  are
concerned,  I  fear  the  cause  of  Biblical  Geography  can  hardly  be
said  to  have  greatly  advanced.

The  preceding  remarks  apply  more  particularly  to  Jerusa-
lem, and  to  those  parts  of  Palestine  with  which  the  fathers  of  the
church  and  the  hosts  of  monks  have  chiefly  occupied  themselves.
But  there  is  in  Palestine  another  kind  of  tradition,  with  which
the  monasteries  have  had  nothing  to  do ;  and  of  which  they
have  apparently  in  every  age  known  little  or  nothing.  I  mean,
the  freservation  of  the  ancient  names  of  places  among  the  com-
mon people.  This  is  a  truly  national  and  native  tradition ;  not
derived  in  any  degree  from  the  influence  of  foreign  convents  or
masters ;  but  drawn  in  by  the  peasant  with  his  mother's  milk,
and  deeply  seated  in  the  genius  of  the  Semitic  languages.  The
Hebrew  names  of  places  continued  current  in  their  Aramaean
form  long  after  the  times  of  the  New  Testament ;  and  main-
tained themselves  in  the  mouths  of  the  common  people,  in  spite
of  the  efforts  made  by  Greeks  and  Eomans  to  supplant  them  by
others  derived  from  their  own  tongues.'  After  the  Muhamme-
dan  conquest,  when  the  Aramaean  language  gradually  gave  place
to  the  kindred  Arabic,  the  proper  names  of  places,  which  the
Greeks  could  never  bend  to  their  orthography,  found  here  a
ready  entrance ;  and  have  thus  lived  on  upon  the  lips  of  the
Arabs,  whether  Christian  or  Muslim,  townsmen  or  Bedawin,
even  unto  our  own  day,  almost  in  the  same  form  in  which  they
have  also  been  transmitted  to  us  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.*

The  nature  of  the  long  series  of  foreign  tradition  has  some-
times been  recognised  and  lamented  by  travellers  and  others ;
while  that  of  the  native  Arab  population  has  been  for  the  most
part  overlooked,  and  its  existence  almost  unknown.^  Travellers
have  in  general  been  unacquainted  with  the  Arabic  language,  and

'  It  is  sufficient  to  mention  here  the  still  survive  in  Arabic,  our  lists  exhibit

sounding  names  Diospolis,  Nicopolis,  Ptol-  only  two  or  three  in  which  it  has  been

emais,  and  Antipatris,  which  have  per-  dropped ;  and  perhaps  none  in  which  it  has

ished  for  centuries ;  while  the  more  an-  been  exchanged  for  another  letter,

cient  ones  which  they  were  intended  to  '  It  may  perhaps  be  asked,  whether

supplant,  are  still  current  among  the  peo-  there  does  not  exist  a  Jewish  tradition,

pie,  Ludd  (Lydda),  'Amwas  (Emmaus),  \^ich  would  also  be  trustworthy  ?    Not  in

'Akka,  and  Kefr  Saba.    Yet  a  few  Greek  respect  to  Jerusalem  itself;  for  the  Jews

names  thus   imposed  have   maintained  for  centuries  could  approach  the  Holy

themselves  instead  of  the  ancient  ones  ;  City  only  to  weep  over  it ;  see  p.  237,

as  Nabulus  (NeapoUs)  for  Shechem,  and  above.    In  other  parts  of  Palestine,  a

Sebustieh  (Sebaste)  for  Samaria.  regular  Jewish  tradition  could  not  well  be

"  The  Semitic  letter  'Ain  in  particular,  different  from  that  handed  down  among

80  unpronounceable  by  other  nations,  has  a  the  common  people.    Their  early  written

remarkable  tenacity.    Of  the  very  many  accounts,  as  is  well  known,  are  not  less  le-

Hebrew  names  containing  this  letter,  that  gendary  than  those  of  the  Christians.

i.  375,  376

256

JERUSALEM. — TOPOGRAPHY.

[SEcVn.

unable  to  communicate  with,  the  common  people  except  through
the  medium  of  illiterate  interpreters  ;  they  have  mostly  followed
only  beaten  paths,  where  monkish  tradition  had  already  marked
out  all  the  localities  they  sought ;  and  in  this  way  few  have  ever
thought  of  seeking  for  information  among  the  Arab  peasantry.
Yet  the  example  of  Seetzen  and  Burckhardt  in  the  countries
east  of  the  Jordan  might  have  pointed  out  a  better  course  ;  and
the  multitude  of  ancient  names  which  they  found  still  current
in  those  regions,  where  monastic  influence  had  more  rarely  pen-
etrated, might  have  stimulated  to  like  researches  in  western
Palestine.  Yet  this  had  never  been  done ;  and  in  consequence
of  this  neglect,  and  of  the  circumstances  aUuded  to  above,  it
had  become  a  singular,  though  notorious  fact,  that  notwith-
standing the  multitude  of  travellers  who  have  swarmed  through
Palestine,  the  countries  east  of  the  Jordan  were  in  many  re-
spects more  accurately  and  distinctly  known,  than  those  upon
the  west.

In  view  of  this  state  of  things,  we  early  adopted  two  general
principles,  by  which  to  govern  ourselves  in  our  examination  of
the  Holy  Land.  The  first  was,  to  avoid  as  far  as  possible  all
contact  with  the  convents  and  the  authority  of  the  monks ;  to
examine  everywhere  for  ourselves  with  the  Scriptures  in  our
hands  ;  and  to  apply  for  information  solely  to  the  native  Arab
population.  The  second  was,  to  leave  as  much  as  possible  the
beaten  track,  and  direct  our  journeys  and  researches  to  those  por-
tions of  the  country  which  had  been  least  visited.  By  acting  up-
on these  two  principles,  we  were  able  to  arrive  at  many  results,
that  to  us  were  new  and  unexpected  ;  and  it  is  these  results
alone,  which  give  a  value  (if  any  it  have)  to  the  present  work.

In  Jerusalem  itself,  circumstances  favoured  our  determina-
tion. The  presence  of  our  countrymen  and  friends  enabled  us  to
live  aloof  from  the  convents,  and  pursue  our  inquiries  with  en-
tire independence  ;  a  privilege  which  all  travellers  cannot  com-
mand. '  During  the  whole  time  of  our  sojourn  in  the  Holy  City,
it  so  happened  that  I  never  entered  the  Latin  convent,  nor  spoke
with  a  monk.  This  neglect  was  not  however  intentional  ;  for  I
several  times  made  an  appointment  to  visit  the  convent,  and  my
companion  was  there  repeatedly.  Once  only  we  visited  together
the  great  convent  of  the  Armenians,  to  call  upon  an  English
friend  who  was  residing  there  ;  and  we  took  this  opj)ortunity  to
look  at  the  richly  decorated,  but  tawdry  church  of  St.  James  con-
nected with  it,  which  former  travellers  have  sufficiently  described.

'  The   Latin   convent  has  in  former  convenience  in  such  a  city,  wliere  inns  were

years  erected  a  building,  the  Gasa  nuova,  unknown ;  and  most  travellers  were  com-

cxpressly  for  the  entertiiinnient  of  travel-  polled  to  avail  themselves  of  it.  Since

Icrs  and  Ktran,  7-9. — Joseplius
seems  studiously  to  avoiil  nsin<;  the  name
Zion,  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  find
in  liis  works.  Tlie  writer  of  the  first  book
of  Maccabees,  on  the  otlior  hand,  applies
it  to  the  site  of  the  temple ;  i.  e.  he  makes
it  include  Moriah.   1  Mace.  4,  'M.  60.  etc.

'  In  Greek,  iju(J)(Ki/pTos.  See  Ileland
Palasst.  p.  852.  lint  tliis  word  may  also
mean  nothing  more  than  that  Akra  was
"sloping  on  both  sides,"  i.  c.  was  a  ridge
running  down  into  the  city.

i.  409,  410

*  There  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  correct-
ness of  this  account.  Josephus  elsewhere
connects  this  lowering  of  the  hill  Akra
with  the  demolition  of  a  fortress  built
upon  it  by  Antiochus  and  the  S^Tians ;
Ant.  13.  6.  6.  Comp.  12.  5.  4.  But  the
■nTiter  of  the  first  book  of  Maccabees,  an
earlier  authority,  describes  this  fortress  as
having  been  in  tlie  city  of  David  ;  and  in-
stead of  its  having  been  destroyed,  Simon
Maccabeus  strengthened  it,  and  made  it  his
residence  ;  1  Mace.  I,  3.3.  [85.]  13,  50  sq.
14,  36.  37.  See  Crome,  art.  Jerumlnn,
p.  291  sq.  in  Krscli  and  G  ruber's  Encyclo-
piidie.  But  the  two  accounts  are  not  ne-
cessarily inconsistent  with  each  other;  see
Bihlioth.  Sacra,  184G,  p.  629  sq.
Joseph.  B.  J.  5.  4.  2.

SEcvn.]

TOPOGRAPHY  OF  JOSEPHUS.

279

gate  of  the  Essenes  ;  thence  it  kept  along  on  the  south  to  a  point
over  Siloam  ;  and  thence  on  the  east  was  carried  along  by  Solo-
mon's pool  and  Ophla  (Ophel),  till  it  terminated  at  the  eastern
portico  of  the  temple.' — Of  the  triple  walls,  the  following  account
is  given.  The  first  and  oldest  of  these  began  at  the  tower  of  Hip-
picus,  on  the  northern  part,  and  extending  (along  the  northern  brow
of  Zion'^)  to  the  Xystus,  afterwards  terminated  at  the  western
portico  of  the  temple.  The  second  wall  began  at  the  gate  of  Gen-
nath,  (apparently  near  Hippicus,)  and  encircling  only  the  north-
ern part  of  the  city,  extended  to  the  castle  of  Antonia,  proba-
bly at  the  northwest  corner  of  the  area  of  the  temple.^  The  tliird
waU  was  built  by  Agrippa  at  a  later  period ;  it  also  had  its
beginning  at  the  tower  of  Hippicus,  ran  northwards  as  far  as  to
the  tower  Psephinos ;  and  then  sweeping  round  towards  the
northeast  and  east  it  turned  afterwards  towards  the  south,  and
was  joined  to  the  ancient  waU.  at  or  in  the  vaUey  of  the  Kidron.
This  wall  first  enclosed  the  hill  Bezetha.

Let  us  now  for  a  moment  search  further  for  some  notices,
which  may  determine  the  relative  position  of  the  parts  of  the  an-
cient city  in  respect  to  each  other.  We  have  seen  that  the  up-
per city  or  citadel  (Zion)  was  separated  from  the  lower  city  or
Akra  by  the  Tyropoeon ;  that  the  temple  was  situated  "  over-
against  "  Akra,  and  separated  from  it  by  another  valley  distinct
from  the  Tyropoeon  ;  and  that  the  first  of  the  three  walls  on  the
north  commenced  at  Hippicus,  and  extending  along  the  brow  of
Zion  to  the  Xystus,  ended  at  the  western  portico  connected  with  the
temple.  From  other  passages  we  learn,  that  the  Xystus,  so  called,
was  an  open  place  in  the  extreme  part  of  the  upper  city,
where  the  people  sometimes  assembled  ;  and  that  a  bridge  con-
nected it  with  the  temple.^  During  the  siege  of  the  city  also,
we  are  told,^  that  Titus  having  become  master  of  the  temple,
held  a  colloquy  with  the  leaders  of  the  Jews,  who  stiU  had  pos-
session of  the  upper  city.  For  this  purpose  he  placed  himself
upon  the  western  side  of  the  exterior  temple  or  court,  where  the
bridge  joined  the  temple  to  the  upper  city  at  the  Xystus  ;  and
this  bridge  alone  was  interposed  between  him  and  the  Jews  with
whom  he  spoke. — Further  we  are  informed,^  that  on  the  western

'  Josephus,  B.  J.  5.  4.  2.  The  phrases  stood,  it  would  have  saved  great  confusion
Trphi  Sv(rtv,  vphs  v6tov,  trphs  kvaroKiiv,  among  commentators,  both  as  to  the
in  this  passage,  as  applied  to  the  wall,  can  course  of  the  wall  and  the  position  of  Si-
only  mean,  towards  or  on  the  west,  south,  loam.  See  Reland  Falsest,  p.  8.58,  and
east,  etc.  equivalent  to  the  western,  south-  his  plan  in  Havercamp's  Josephus,  Vol.  II.
ern,  eastern  wall.  This  is  shown  both  by  p.  327.
the  nature  of  the  case,  and  by  the  similar  Ibid.  5.  4.  4.
phrase  th  irphs  ava.To\))v  cto^  tov  kpov  iu        '  Ibid.  5.  5.  8.

the  same  sentence,  which  no  one  ever       *  Joseph.  B.  J.  2.  16.  3.  ib.  6.  6.  2.  ib.

thought  of  rendering  otherwise  than  the  6.  8.  1.    Comp.  Aiitiq.  14.  4.  2.
eastern  portico  of  the  temple.    Had  this       ^  Ibid.  6.  6.  2.
form  of  expression  been  always  so  under-       "  Joseph.  Ant.  15.  11.  5.

i.  411.  412

280

JERUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[SEcvn.

side  of  the  temple  area  were  four  gates  ;  one  leading  over  the
valley  to  the  royal  palace  (on  Zion)  adjacent  to  the  Xystus,'  pro-
bably by  the  bridge  just  mentioned  ;  two  conducting  to  the  sub-
urb (or  new  city)  on  the  north ;  and  the  remaining  one  leading
to  the  "other  city,"  first  by  steps  down  into  the  intervening  val-
ley, and  then  by  an  ascent.  By  this  "  other  city  "  can  be  meant
only  the  lower  city  or  Akra. — The  hill  Bezetha  lay  quite  near  on
the  north  of  the  temple.*

During  the  siege  by  the  Eomans,  Titus  made  aU  his  ap-
proaches from  the  north  ;  took  first  the  external  and  second  wall
upon  that  part ;  and  then  assaulted  the  fortress  Antonia  and  the
temple,  which  he  captured  and  destroyed.^  All  this  time  the
Jews  still  held  possession  of  the  upper  city  ;  of  which  the  north-
ern wall  ran  in  part  along  a  precipice,  so  that  the  Eomans  could
not  assail  it  with  their  machines  and  towers.^  To  work  upon  the
fears  of  the  Jews  and  overcome  their  obstinacy,  the  Eomans  now
set  fire  to  Akra,  Ophla,  and  other  parts  of  the  city,  quite  down
to  SHoam.^ — Hence  it  follows,  that  the  interior  and  most  ancient
of  the  three  walls  on  the  north,  lay  between  Akra  and  the  upper
city  ;  forming  the  defence  of  the  latter  on  tliis  part.  It  was,  no
doubt,  the  same  wall  which  ran  along  the  northern  brow  of  Zion.

The  main  results  to  be  derived  from  the  preceding  historical
notices,  so  far  as  they  are  necessary  to  our  present  purpose,  are
chiefly  the  following.  The  lull  Moriah,  on  which  the  temple
stood,  was  on  the  eastern  part  of  the  city,  overlooking  the  valley
of  the  Kidron.^  Directly  "  overgainst "  the  temple  on  the  west,
was  the  hill  Akra,  with  the  lower  city,  to  which  a  gate  led  from
the  western  side  of  the  temple  area.  Tliis  hill  was  separated
from  the  temple  by  a  broad  valley,  which  had  been  partly  filled
up  by  the  Asmonean  princes  ;  who  also  had  lowered  the  point  of
Akra.  West  of  the  southwest  part  of  the  temple  area,  lay  the
northern  portion  of  the  upper  city  or  Zion,  with  the  Xystus,  con-
nected with  the  temple  by  a  bridge,  which  led  out  from  the  west-
ern side  of  the  court  of  the  latter  over  the  intervening  valley.
Zion  therefore  lay  south  of  Akra ;  and  was  separated  from  it  by
the  Tyropoeon,  which  extended  also  down  to  Siloam;  and  likewise
by  the  waU  which  ran  from  Hippicus  along  its  brow,  on  the  north
of  the  Xystus  and  the  bridge,  to  the  western  portico  of  the  tem-
ple. The  tower  of  Hippicus  therefore  must  be  sought  at  the
northwest  corner  of  Zion. — On  those  parts  where  the  city  had  but
a  single  wall,  it  was  skirted  by  valleys  im])asBable  by  a  hostUe
force.  But  this  single  wall  existed  only  on  the  western  and
southern  sides  of  Zion,  and  on  the  east  along  by  Siloam  and

•  Joxcph.  Ant.  20.  8.  11.  *  Joseph.  B.  J.  fi.  4.  4.  ib.  6.  8.  4.

»  Joseph,  a.  J.  5.  5.  8.  '  Ihid.  (5.  (>.  3.  ib.  6.  7.  2.

'  Ibid.  5.  7.  2.  ib.  5.  8.  1,  2.  ib.  6.  1.       "  See  also  Aiitiq.  15.  11.  3.
7.  ib.  6.  c.  4.
i.  412,  413

Sec.

TOPOGRAPHY  OF  JOSEPHUS.

281

Ophel  and  tlie  temple  ;  and  here  therefore  were  the  deep  vallevs.
The  triple  wall  was  towards  the  north  and  northwest.

If  now  we  compare  these  results  -^ith  the  description  which
has  been  given  above  of  the  hills  and  valleys  connected  with  the
modem  city, — a  description  which,  I  am  happy  to  say,  was  writ-
ten before  the  preceding  notices  from  Josephus  were  collected  or
compared, — I  am  unable  to  perceive  any  other  than  a  striking
and  almost  exact  coincidence.  True,  the  valley  of  the  Tyropceon,
and  that  between  Akra  and  Moriah,  have  been  greatly  filled  up
with  the  rubbish  accumulated  from  the  repeated  desolations  of
nearly  eighteen  centuries.  Yet  they  are  still  distinctly  to  be
traced ;  the  hills  of  Zion,  Akra,  Moriah,  and  Bezetha,  are  not  to
be  mistaken  ;  while  the  deep  valleys  of  the  Kidron  and  of  Hin-
nom,  and  the  mount  of  Olives,  are  permanent  natural  features,
too  prominent  and  gigantic  indeed  to  be  forgotten,  or  to  undergo
any  perceptible  change.  The  only  topographical  notice  of  Jose-
phus as  to  which  I  have  doubts,  is  the  remark  quoted  above,  that
"  from  without,  the  hvo  hills  of  the  city  were  enclosed  by  deep
valleys."'  If  he  here  means  the  two  particular  hiUs  of  Zion  and
Aki'a,  (as  the  insertion  of  the  Greek  article  might  seem  to  imply,)
the  language  is  not  literally  exact  ;  but  if,  as  is  more  probable,
this  is  a  mere  form  of  expression  intended  to  embrace  the  whole
site  of  the  city,  then  it  presents  no  difficulty.  Indeed,  after  hav-
ing looked  through  the  whole  subject  and  studied  the  topography
of  modern  Jerusalem  upon  the  spot,  with  the  volumes  of  Jose-
phus in  my  hands,  I  am  not  aware  of  any  particulars,  which  can
excite  a  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  the  site  of  the  ancient  and
modern  cities.  Certainly  there  is  here  no  more  room  for  ques-
tion, than  in  the  parallel  cases  of  Athens  and  Rome.*

Thus  far  we  have  had  regard  to  the  general  topography  of  the
Holy  City,  and  the  correspondence  of  its  present  features  with
the  descriptions  of  it  in  ancient  times.  We  are  now  further  to
inquire,  whether  in  particular  parts  of  the  city,  there  remain  any
such  vestiges  of  antiquity,  as  may  serve  to  add  strength  to  our
general  conclusion.

Y.  AREA  OF  THE  ANCIENT  TEMPLE.

Of  the  temple  and  its  appendages,  Josephus  has  left  us  two
descriptions  ;  one  in  his  Antiquities,  where  he  nan-ates  the  recon-
struction of  the  Naos  or  body  of  the  temple  by  Herod  the  Great ;
and  the  other  in  his  Jewish  ^Yars,  just  before  the  account  of  its
destruction  by  Titus.^     The  latter  is  the  most  minute  and  con-

-  See  above,  p.  278.  '  Antiq.  15.  11.  3  sq.  B.  J.  5.  5.  1-6.

=  For  the  theories  of  Clarke  and  01s-  Comp.  Antiq.  8.  3.  9. — The  va6s  was  the

hansen  respecting  Zion  and  Akra,  see  Note  temple  or  fane  ;  the  iep6v  comprised  the

XXYI,  at  the  end  of  the  volume.  va6s  and  all  its  courts  and  appurtenances.
You  I.— 24*  i.  414r416

282

JERUSALEM.  ANTIQUITIES.

[Sec.  Vn.

sistent  ;  and  I  therefore  follow  it  here,  introducing  only  occasion-
al circumstances  from  the  other.

The  temple,  according  to  this  account,  stood  upon  a  rocky
eminence  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  city,  on  which  at  first  there
was  scarcely  level  space  enough  for  the  fane  and  altar ;  the  sides
being  everywhere  steep  and  precipitous.  Solomon  built  first  a
wall  around  the  summit ;  (probably  in  order  to  gain  space  for  the
body  of  the  temple  ;)  and  built  up  also  a  wall  on  the  east,  filled
in  on  the  inside  apparently  with  earth,  on  which  he  erected  a
portico  or  covered  colonnade.  The  temple  itself  was  thus  left
naked  on  three  sides.  In  process  of  time,  however,  the  whole  en-
closure was  built  up  and  filled  in,  quite  to  a  level  with  the  hiU,
which  in  this  way  was  enlarged  ;  a  threefold  waU  being  carried
up  from  the  bottom,  and  thus  both  the  upper  enclosure  and  the
lower  [parts  of  the]  temj)le  constructed.*  Where  these  last  were
the  lowest,  they  built  up  three  hundred  cubits  ;  and  in  some
places  more.*  Nor  yet  was  the  whole  depth  of  the  foundations
visible  ;  for  to  a  great  extent  they  filled  in  the  valleys  with  earth,
desiring  to  level  ofi"  the  abrupt  places  of  the  city.  In  the  con-
struction of  this  work,  they  used  stones  of  the  size  of  forty  cubits.
These  stones,  (according  to  the  other  account,)  were  bound  toge-
ther with  lead  and  iron  into  a  compact  mass,  immovable  for  all
time.  The  enclosure  thus  constructed  was  a  quadrangle,  mea-
suring one  stadium  on  each  side,  or  four  stadia  in  circumference.
In  another  place  the  circumference,  including  the  fortress  Anto-
nia,  is  given  at  six  stadia.^

The  interior  of  this  enclosure  was  surrounded  by  porticos  or
covered  colonnades  along  the  walls ;  and  the  open  part  was  laid  or
paved  vdth  variegated  stones.^  This  was  a  great  place  of  resort
for  Jews  and  strangers  ;  and  became  at  length  also  a  place  of
trade  and  business,  so  far  as  related  to  the  sale  of  animals  for  sac-
rifice, and  the  exchange  of  money  for  the  yearly  ofiering.*  It  is
sometimes  called  by  Christian  writers  the  court  of  the  Gentiles.* —
Near  the  middle  of  this  court,  an  ornamented  wall  or  babistrade
of  stone,  three  cubits  high,  formed  the  boundary  of  a  smaller  en-
closure ;  which  neither  foreigners  nor  the  unclean  might  pass.

'  The  word  Tpixv,  threefold,  used  liere
in  connection  with  walls  built  up  from  the
bottom  of  the  hill,  cannot  well  refer  to  any-
thing else  than  the  three  walls  built  up  on
the  three  sides  of  the  hill,  which  are  said
to  have  been  left  open  by  Solomon.  If
this  form  of  expression  is  not  very  exact,
neither  is  that  which  is  indicaterle.

'  So  I  must  venture  to  understand  the
TO^Tou  tJi  raiT(iv6Twrov  of  the  original,  in
i.  416,  417

connection  with  the  ri  xiroi  Up6v  before
it,  meaning,  not  the  part  where  the  top  of
these  walls  was  lowest,  bnt  the  part  where
the  foundations,  or  the  ground  on  which
they  stood,  was  lowest.  Takon  in  this
sense,  the  expression  is  not  unnatural;
though  still  greatly  exaggerated.  In  the
other  sense,  it  is  perfectly  unintelligible.

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  5.  5.  2.

*  Ibid.  5.  r,.  2.

"  Matt.  21,  12     Luke  19,  45.

"  Lightfoot  Opera,  Tom.  I.  pp.  415,  690.

Sec.  VII.]  THE  TEMPLE  ACCORDING  TO  JOSEPHUS.  283

Within  this  an  inner  wall,  forty  cubits  high  from  its  foundation,
eurrounded  the  second  or  inner  court ;  but  it  was  encompassed
on  the  outside  by  fourteen  steps,  leading  up  to  a  level  area
around  it  of  ten  cubits  wide  ;  from  which  again  five  other  steps
led  up  to  the  interior.  This  waU  on  the  inside  was  twenty  cubits
high.  The  principal  gate  of  this  second  court  was  on  the  east ;
and  there  were  also  three  gates  upon  the  northern  side,  and  three
upon  the  south.  To  these  were  afterwards  added  three  others
for  the  women,  one  upon  the  north,  south,  and  east.  On  the  west
there  was  no  gate.'

Within  this  second  court,  was  still  the  third  or  most  sacred
enclosure,  which  none  but  the  priests  might  enter  ;  consisting  of
the  Naos  or  temple  itself,  and  the  small  court  before  it,  where
stood  the  great  altar.  To  this  there  was  an  ascent  from  the
second  court  by  twelve  steps.''  It  was  this  Naos,  or  the  body  of
the  temple  alone,  which  was  rebuilt  by  Herod  ;  who  also  buUt
over  again  some  of  the  magnificent  porticos  around  the  area.
But  no  mention  is  made  of  his  having  had  any  thing  to  do  with
the  massive  waUs  of  the  exterior  enclosure.^  We  have  already
seen,  that  on  the  west  side  of  this  great  outer  court,  four  gates
led  out  into  the  city  ;  the  southernmost  of  which  opened  upon  the
bridge  connecting  the  area  of  the  temple  with  the  Xystus  on
Mount  Zion.*  Josephus  relates  also,  that  there  was  a  gate  in  the
middle  of  the  southern  side  of  the  same  enclosure.

Further  than  this,  our  present  object  does  not  require  us  to
enter  into  a  description  of  the  temple  or  its  appurtenances.

If  now,  with  these  accounts  before  us,  we  turn  our  eyes  upon
the  present  simdar  area  of  the  grand  mosk  of  Omar,  it  would
seem  to  be  hardly  a  matter  of  question,  that  the  latter  occupies
in  part  or  in  whole  the  same  general  location.  But  how  far  there
exist  traces  which  may  serve  to  marlf  a  connection  between  the
ancient  and  modern  precincts,  or  perhaps  establish  their  identity,
is  a  point  which,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  never  been  discussed.  It
is  to  this  point  mainly,  that  our  inquiries  wUl  now  be  directed.

The  area  of  the  great  mosk  is  an  elevated  plateau  or  terrace,
nearly  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  supported  by  and  within
massive  walls  buUt  up  from  the  valleys  or  lower  ground  on  all
sides  ;  the  external  height  varying  of  course  in  various  parts  ac-
cording to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  but  being  in  general  great-
est towards  the  south.  The  area  or  court  within  these  walls  is
level  ;  exhibiting  on  the  north  of  the  mosk,  as  we  have  seen,  and
perhaps  around  the  same,  the  surface  of  the  native  rock  levelled

>  Antiq.  15.  11.  5.    B.  J.  5.  5.  2.

"  Antiq.  15.  11.  5,  ult.    B.  J.  5.  5.  4.

'  Antiq.  15.  1 1.  3.  B.  J.  1.  21.  1.  When
Joseplius  liere  says  that  Herod  enlarged
the  area  around  the  temple  to  double  its

former  size,  he  probably  refers  to  the  adja-
cent fortress  Antonia,  as  mentioned  above  at
the  close  of  the  second  preceding  paragraph.

■*  See  above,  p.  280.  Jos.  Ant.  15,
11.  5.

i.  417-419

284

JERUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[Sec.  Vn.

off  by  art.'  The  general  construction  therefore  of  this  area,  does
not  differ  from  that  of  the  ancient  temple.

The  length  of  this  enclosure  on  the  east  side,  measured  exter-
nally along  the  wall,  is  1528  EngHsh  feet  or  nearly  510  yards;*
the  breadth  at  the  south  end  is  955  feet  or  about  318  yards.^
Neither  the  western  side  nor  the  northern  end  is  accessible  exter-
nally ;  yet  the  latter  may  be  measured  approximately  along  the
parallel  street.  Its  length  is  thus  found  to  be  not  far  from  1066
feet,  or  perhaps  350  yards  ;  the  breadth  of  the  area  being  here
some  yards  greater  than  on  the  south.  The  direction  of  the  east-
ern side,  taken  from  the  southeast  comer,  is  at  first  due  north  by
compass  ;  and  that  of  the  southern  side,  due  west.  The  course
of  the  western  wall  at  its  south  end  is  likewise  due  north.  Be-
yond the  area  towards  the  north,  the  eastern  wall  of  the  city  de-
viates slightly  from  the  magnetic  meridian  towards  the  east. —
From  these  measurements  it  is  apparent,  that  the  extent  of  the
present  area  is  much  greater  than  that  assigned  by  Josephus  to
the  ancient  temple.

The  southeast  corner  of  the  enclosure  stands  directly  on  the
very  brink  of  the  steep  descent,  and  impends  over  the  valley  of
Jehoshaphat ;  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  at  this  point  about  130
feet  deep  ;  while  just  north  the  ground  rises  some  20  feet  more.
The  height  of  the  wall  at  this  angle  we  judged  to  be  at  least  60
English  feet.^  Further  north  as  the  ground  ascends,  the  wall  is
less  elevated  above  it.  The  brow  of  the  valley  also  advances  a
little,  leaving  a  narrow  strip  of  level  ground  along  the  wall,  which
is  occupied  by  the  Muslim  cemetery  already  mentioned.^  To-
wards the  gate  of  St.  Stephen,  this  level  brow  widens  to  about
100  feet,  and  continues  of  this  breadth  along  the  city  wall  north-
wards. The  Golden  gate  on  this  side  is  not  opposite  the  mid-
dle of  the  area  ;  but  at  some  distance  further  north.

On  the  northern  side,  the  area  is  skirted  for  nearly  half  its
breadth  by  the  deep  pool  or  trench  usually  called  Bethesda,  and
vaults  connected  with  it.  At  the  northeast  corner  is  a  place  of
entrance,  and  a  way  leading  to  it  from  St.  Stephen's  gate  along
the  inside  of  the  city  wall.  Further  west  and  near  the  middle,
are  two  other  entrances  from  the  Via  dolorosa.  At  the  north-
west corner  stands  what  was  formerly  the  governor's  house,  now
converted  into  a  barrack,  and  probably  occupying  in  part  the  site

'  See  above,  p.  244.  large  stoncs,having  an  average  thickness  of

'  Ali  Bey  gives  the  interior  length  of  more  than  three  feet.    Above  tlu'se  to  the

the  enclosure  at  1369  Paris  feet ;  and  the  top  is  at  least  fifteen  feet  more. — The  wall,

interior  breadth  at  845  Paris  feet.    Trav-  I  since  learn,  was  measured  at  this  point

els  II.  p.  215.  by  Mr.  Catherwood.    The  actual  height  is

'  This  last  measurement  is  too  large  by  sixty  feet  to  the  level  of  the  area  within,

some  50  feet :  see  the  correction  in  Vol.  III.  and  fixtcen  feet  more  to  the  top  of  the

Sec.  IV,  April  29th,  1852.  battlements  ;  in  all  76  feet

*  There  arc  hero  fifteen  courses  of  very  '  See  above,  p.  232.
i.  419,  420

Sec.  YII.]

TEMPLE  AREA.  EL-HARAM.

285

of  the  ancient  fortress  Antonia.  From  the  roof  of  this  building
is  obtained  a  commanding  view  of  the  interior  and  the  edifices  of
the  court.'

The  western  wall  is  mostly  hidden  by  the  houses  of  the  city,
except  near  its  southern  end.  There  are  on  tliis  side  four  en-
trances, to  which  streets  lead  down  from  the  city.  These  streets,
after  crossing  the  hollow  or  vaUey  which  here  runs  parallel  to  the
wall,  lead  up  an  ascent  to  the  places  of  entrance  ;  some  of  which
are  reached  by  steps.  Near  the  northwest  corner,  this  ascent  is
of  course  smaller  than  it  is  further  south.  The  street  leading
down  from  the  Yafa  gate  crosses  the  valley  upon  the  mound  al-
ready mentioned.  Near  the  southwest  corner,  the  wall  is  again
exposed,  and  is  not  less  than  about  sixty  feet  in  height.

The  wall  on  the  south  is  the  highest  of  all ;  for  here  the
ground  appears  originally  to  have  sloped  down  more  rapidly  from
the  top  of  Moriah  than  in  any  other  part.  This  wall  was  ap-
parently built,  not  on  the  brow  of  a  valley,  but  on  the  side  of
a  declivity,  which  descended  steeply  for  a  time,  and  then  ran  off
in  a  more  gradual  slope,  forming  the  ridge  of  Ophel.  Here  we
judged  the  wall  of  the  enclosure  to  be  in  general  about  sixty  feet
in  height.'^  At  the  distance  of  290  feet  south  of  this  wall,  the
city  wall  runs  for  a  time  parallel  to  it ;  then  turning  at  a  right
angle,  the  city  wall  rises  by  a  considerable  ascent,  and  joins  the
high  wall  of  the  area,  in  the  manner  already  described,  at  a
point  325  feet  ^  distant  from  the  southwest  corner.  This  leaves
here  a  tolerably  level  plat  of  ground  between  the  two  walls,  near-
ly square,  said  to  belong  to  the  mosk  el-Aksa.  It  was  now  a
ploughed  field.*  Here  however  the  earth  has  evidently  been  filled
in,  in  order  to  render  the  plat  level  ;  for  the  city  wall  on  the
south,  which  within  is  very  low,  measures  on  the  outside  fifty  feet
in  height.  This  gives  110  feet  for  the  proximate  elevation  of  the
southern  wall  of  the  area  of  the  mosk  above  the  exterior  base  of
the  parallel  city  wall. — On  this  side,  viewed  externally,  there
would  seem  never  to  have  been  a  place  of  entrance  or  access  to
the  court  above.  Yet  J osephus  makes  mention  here  of  a  gate  in
the  middle  of  the  southern  side  of  the  area  ;  and  we  shall  hereafter
see,  that  an  ancient  subterranean  gateway  still  exists  under  the
mosk  el-Aksa,  with  a  passage  to  it  from  above,  bui  walled  up  on
the  outside.'

Allusion  has  already  been  made  to  the  immense  size  of  the
stones,  which  compose  in  part  the  external  walls  of  the  enclosure

'  See  above,  p.  244.

'  There  are  here  eight  courses  of  stones
having  an  average  thickness  of  at  least
3  feet ;  and  ab  ive  these  are  24  smaller
courses,  each  apparently  from  1  foot  to

feet  thick.  This  gives  very  nearly  the  es-
timate of  the  text.

^  See  note  3,  p.  284.

''  See  above,  p.  238.

'  Joseph,  Antiq.  15.  11.  5.

i.  420-422

286

JERUSALEM — ANTIQUITIES.

[Sec.  -VTI.

of  the  mosk.'  The  upper  part  of  these  walls  is  obviously  of  mo-
dern origin;  but  to  the  most  casual  observer  it  cannot  be  less  ob-
vious, that  these  huge  blocks  which  appear  only  in  portions  of
the  lower  part,  are  to  be  referred  to  an  earlier  date.*  The  ap-
pearance of  the  walls  in  almost  every  part,  seems  to  indicate  that
they  have  been  built  upon  ancient  foundations  ;  as  if  an  ancient
and  far  more  massive  wall  had  been  thrown  down,  and  in  later
times  a  new  one  erected  upon  its  remains.  Hence  the  hne  be-
tween these  lower  antique  portions  and  the  modern  ones  above
them,  is  very  irregular  ;  though  it  is  also  very  distinct.  The  for-
mer, in  some  parts,  are  much  higher  than  in  others ;  and  occasion-
ally the  breaches  in  them  are  filled  out  with  later  patch-work.
Sometimes  too  the  whole  wall  is  modern.

We  first  noticed  these  large  stones  at  the  southeast  comer  of
the  enclosure  ;  where  perhaps  they  are  as  conspicuous,  and  form
as  great  a  portion  of  the  wall,  as  in  any  part.  Here  are  several
courses,  both  on  the  east  and  south  sides,  alternating  with  each
other,  in  which  the  stones  measure  from  17  to  19  feet  in  length,
by  3  or  4  feet  in  height  ;  while  one  block  at  the  corner  is  7^  feet
thick.  Here  also,  on  the  east  side,  the  lower  part  is  patched  in
spots.  Further  to  the  north,  the  wall  is  mostly  new  until  to-
wards the  northeast  corner  of  the  area,  where  the  ancient  stones
again  appear  ;  one  of  them  measuring  24  feet  in  length,  by  3  feet
in  height  and  6  feet  in  breadth. — On  the  northern  and  western
sides,  the  walls  are  less  accessible,  until  we  reach  the  J ewish  place
of  waUing,  considerably  south  of  the  middle  of  the  latter.  Here
the  stones  are  of  the  same  dimensions,  and  the  wall  of  the  same
character,  as  in  the  parts  already  described.' — At  the  southwest
corner,  huge  blocks  become  again  conspicuous  for  some  distance
on  each  side,  and  of  a  still  greater  size.  The  comer  stone  on  the
west  side  now  next  above  the  surface  of  the  ground,  measures  30
feet  10  inches  in  length  by  6^  feet  broad  ;  and  several  others  vary
from  20^  to  24^  feet  long,  by  5  feet  in  thickness.

It  is  not  however  the  great  size  of  these  stones  alone  which
arrests  the  attention  of  the  beholder  ;  but  the  manner  in  which
they  are  hewn,  gives  them  also  a  peculiar  character.  In  common
parlance  they  are  said  to  be  bevelled;  which  here  means,  that
after  the  wholp  face  has  first  been  hewn  and  squared,  a  narrow
strip  along  the  edge  is  cut  down  a  quarter  or  half  an  inch  lower
than  the  rest  of  the  surface.  When  these  bevelled  stones  are  laid

'  See  above,  pp.  232,  233,  238.

"  Such  lias  been  tlie  conviction  of  many
travellers,  judgii  g  merely  from  the  aspect
of  the  stones.  See  llaumer's  Paliistina,  p.
261,  2(iL',  ed.  3.

■  I  h'am  from  Mr  Cathcrwood,  who
examiiieij  and   measured  the  area  and

buildings  of  the  Haram,  both  within  and
without,  very  minutely  in  1833,  that  the
western  wall,  as  seen  from  the  courts  in  the
rear  of  the  houses  north  of  the  Jews'  place
of  w;iiliTig,  consists  of  large  ancient  stones
of  the  same  character  as  those  above  do-
scribeJ,  to  the  height  of  tliirty  feet  or  more.

Sec.  Vn.]

BEVELLED  STONES.     ANCIENT  ARCH.

287

up  in  a  wall,  the  face  of  it  of  course  exhibits  lines  or  grooves
formed  by  these  depressed  edges  at  their  junction,  marking  more
distinctly  the  elevation  of  the  different  courses,  as  well  as  the
length  of  the  stones  of  which  they  are  composed.  The  face  of  the
wall  has  then  the  appearance  of  many  pannels.  The  smaller
stones  in  other  parts  of  the  walls  are  frequently  bevelled  in  like
manner  ;  except  that  in  these,  only  the  bevel  or  strip  along  the
edge  is  cut  smooth,  while  the  remainder  of  the  surface  is  merely
broken  off  or  rough-hewn.  In  the  upper  parts  of  the  wall,  which
are  obviously  the  most  modern,  the  stones  are  smaU  and  are  not
bevelled.

At  the  first  view  of  these  walls,  I  was  led  to  the  persuasion,
that  the  lower  portions  had  belonged  to  the  ancient  temple  ;  and
every  subsequent  visit  only  served  to  strengthen  this  conviction.
The  size  of  the  stones  and  the  heterogeneous  character  of  the  walls,
render  it  a  matter  beyond  all  doubt,  that  the  former  were  never
laid  in  their  present  places  by  the  Muhammedans  ;  and  the  pecu-
har  form  in  which  they  are  hewn,  does  not  properly  belong,  so
far  as  I  know,  either  to  Saracenic  or  to  Roman  architecture.^
Indeed,  everything  seems  to  point  to  a  J ewish  origin  ;  and  a  dis-
covery which  we  made  in  the  course  of  our  examination,  reduces
this  hypothesis  to  an  absolute  certainty.

I  have  already  related  in  the  preceding  section,  that  during
our  first  visit  to  the  southwest  corner  of  the  area  of  the  mosk,  we
observed  several  of  the  large  stones  jutting  out  from  the  western
waU,  which  at  first  sight  seemed  to  be  the  effect  of  a  bursting  of
the  waU  from  some  mighty  shock  or  earthquake.*  We  paid  lit-
tle regard  to  this  at  the  moment,  ovir  attention  being  engrossed
by  other  objects  ;  but  on  mentioning  the  fact  the  same  evening,
in  a  circle  of  our  friends,  we  found  that  they  also  had  noticed  it  ;
and  the  remark  was  incidentall}-  dropped  by  Mr  Whiting,  that  the
stones  had  the  appearance  of  having  once  belonged  to  a  large
arch.  At  this  remark  a  train  of  thought  flashed  upon  my  mind,
which  I  hardly  dared  to  follow  out,  untd.  I  had  again  repaired  to
the  spot,  in  order  to  satisfy  myself  with  my  own  eyes,  as  to  the
truth  or  falsehood  of  the  suggestion.  I  found  it  even  so  !  The
courses  of  these  immense  stones,  which  seemed  at  first  to  have
sprung  out  from  their  places  in  the  wall  in  consequence  of  some
enormous  violence,  occupy  nevertheless  their  original  position ;
their  external  surface  is  hewn  to  a  regular  curve  ;  and  being  fit-
ted one  upon  another,  they  form  the  commencement  or  foot  of  an
immense  arch,  which  once  sprung  out  fromt  his  western  wall  in

'  Something  of  a  similar  kind  is  indeed
found  in  the  later  Roman  architecture,
under  the  later  emperors.  But  the  edges
of  the  stones  are  there  usually  merely
danted  off,  or  else  the  surface  is  left  rough  ;

giving  to  the  whole  a  different  and  more
rustic  character.     See  Hirt's  Baukunst
nach  den  Grundsiitzen  der  Alten,  Berl.
1809.  foL  p.  152,  und  PI.  XXXL
"  See  above,  p.  238.

i.  423-425

288

JEBUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[Sec.  til

a  direction  towards  Mount  Zion,  across  tlie  valley  of  the  Tvro-
poeon.  TMs  arch  could  only  have  belonged  to  the  Bbidge,  widch
according  to  Josephus  led  from  this  part  of  the  temple  to  the
Xystus  on  Zion  ;  and  it  proves  incontestably  the  antiquity  of
that  portion  of  the  wall  from  which  it  springs.

The  traces  of  this  arch  are  too  distinct  and  definite  to  be
mistaken.  Its  southern  side  is  thirty-nine  English  feet  distant
from  the  southwest  comer  of  the  area,  and  the  arch  itself  measures
fifty-one  feet  along  the  wall.  Hiree  courses  of  its  stones  still
remain  ;  of  which  one  is  five  feet  four  inches  thick,  and  the  others
not  much  less.  One  of  the  stones  is  20^  feet  long  ;  another  24^
feet  :  and  the  rest  in  like  proportion.  The  part  of  the  curve  or
arc.  which  remains,  is  of  course  but  a  fragment  ;  but  of  this  frag-
ment the  chord  measures  twelve  feet  six  inches  ;  the  sine  eleven
feet  ten  inches  ;  and  the  versed  sine  three  feet  ten  inches. — The
distance  from  this  point  across  the  valley  to  the  precipitous  na-
tural rock  of  Zion,  we  measured  as  exactly  as  the  intervening
field  of  prickly  pear  would  permit  ;  and  found  it  to  be  350  feet
or  about  116  yards.  This  gives  the  proximate  length  of  the  an-
cient bridge.  We  sought  carefully  along  the  brow  of  Zion  for
traces  of  its  western  termination  ;  but  without  success.  That
quarter  is  now  covered  with  mean  houses  and  filth  ;  and  an  ex-
amination can  be  carried  on  onlv  in  the  midst  of  disgusting  sights
and  smells.

The  existence  of  these  remains  of  the  ancient  bridge,  seems
to  remove  all  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  this  part  of  the  enclosure
of  the  mosk  with  that  of  the  ancient  temple.  How  they  can
have  remained  for  so  manv  ases  unseen  or  unnoticed  bv  anr
writer  or  traveller,  is  a  problem,  which  I  would  not  imdertake
fully  to  solve.  One  cause  has  probably  been  the  general  obUvion,
or  want  of  knowledge,  that  any  such  bridge  ever  existed.  It  is
mentioned  by  no  writer  but  Josephus  ;  and  even  by  him  only  in-
cidentally, though  in  five  different  places. '  The  bridge  was  doubt-
less broken  down  in  the  general  destruction  of  the  city  ;  and
was  in  later  ages  forgotten  by  the  Christian  population,  among
whom  the  writings  of  Josephus  were  little  known.  For  a  like
reason,  we  may  suppose  its  remains  to  have  escaped  the  notice
of  the  crusaders  and  the  pilgrims  of  the  following  centuries.  An-
other cause  which  has  operated  in  the  case  of  later  travellers,  is
probably  the  fact,  that  the  spot  is  approached  only  through  nar-
row and  crooked  lanes,  in  a  part  of  the  city  whither  their  mo-
nastic guides  did  not  care  to  accompany  them  ;  and  which  they

'  Antiq.  14.  4.  2.  B.  J.  1.  7.  2.  ib.  2.  isted  inthe  time  of  Pompey  about  63  B.  C.

16.  3.    ib.  6.  6.  2.   ib.  6.  8.  1.    Comp.  (Antiq.  1.  c.)  it  was  probably  then  ancient.

Antiq.  1.5.  11.  5. — There  is  no  mention  of  At  any  rate  it  could  not  have  been  the

the  time  when,  nor  of  the  person  by  whom,  work  of  Herod,
the  bridge  was  built.    As  however  it  ex-

i.  425,  426

Sec.  m]

ANCIEXT  ARCH  AKD  BBIDGE.

289

themselves  could  not  well,  nor  perhaps  Scafely,  explore  alone.  Or
if  any  have  penetrated  to  the  place,  and  perhaps  noticed  these
large'  stones  springing  from  the  wall,  they  have  probably  (as  I
did  at  first)  regarded  their  appearance  as  accidental ;  and  have
passed  on  without  further  examination.'

Here  then  we  have  indisputable  remains  of  Jewish  antiquity,
consisting  of  an  important  portion  of  the  western  wall  of  the  an-
cient temple  area.  They  are  probably  to  be  referred  to  a  period,
long  antecedent  to  the  days  of  Herod ;  for  the  labours  of  this
splendour-loving  tyrant  appear  to  have  been  confined  to  the  body
of  the  temple  and  the  porticos  aroimd  the  court.^  The  magnitude
of  the  stones  also,  and  the  workmanship  as  compared  with  other
remaining  monuments  of  Herod,  seem  to  point  to  an  earlier  origin. '
In  the  accounts  we  have  of  the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  the
Chaldeans,  and  its  rebuilding  by  Zerubbabel  under  Darius,  no
mention  is  made  of  these  exterior  walls.  The  former  temple  was
destroyed  by  fire,  which  would  not  afiect  these  foundations ;  nor
is  it  probable  that  a  feeble  colony  of  returning  exiles  could  have
accomplished  works  hke  these.'  There  seems  therefore  little
room  for  hesitation  in  referring  them  back  to  the  days  of  Solomon,
or  rather  of  his  successors  ;  who,  according  to  Josephus,  built  up
here  immense  walls,  "  immovable  for  all  time."*  Ages  upon  ages
have  since  rolled  away ;  yet  these  foundations  still  endure,  and
are  immovable  as  at  the  beginning.  Xor  is  there  aught  in  the
present  physical  condition  of  these  remains,  to  prevent  them  from
continuing  as  long  as  the  world  shall  last.  It  was  the  temple  of
the  living  God  ;  and,  like  the  everlasting  hills  on  which  it  stood,
its  foundations  were  laid  "  for  all  time."

Thus  then  we  have  here  the  western  wall  of  the  ancient  tem-
ple area ;  on  which  is  built  up  the  same  wall  of  the  modem
enclosure,  though  with  far  inferior  materials  and  workmanship.
The  ancient  southern  wall  is  at  the  same  time  determined  ia
like  manner ;  for  at  the  southwest  corner  the  lower  stones  to-
wards the  south  have  precisely  the  same  character  as  those  on
the  west ;  they  are  laid  in  alternate  courses  with  the  latter  ;  and
the  whole  corner  is  evidently  one  and  the  same  original  substruc-

'  MaTiniJrell  must  have  passed  near  ttis  as  probably  among  the  most  ancient  re-
spot,  when  he  saw  the  large  vaults  with  mains  in  or  aronnd  Jerusalem ;  but  had  no
columns  which  he  describes  as  running  in  suspicion  of  their  historical  import.  See
on  the  south  side  of  Moriah.  Pococke  was  more  in  Note  XX^^I,  end  of  the  volume,
also  appaxentlv  here,  and  speaks  of  the  '  See  above,  p.  283.
large  stones:  Vol.  H.  i.  p.  15. — Since  the  '  Ezra  c.  1.  c.  3,  8  sq.  c.  6.  Joseph,
above  was  written,  I  have  been  informed  Antiq.  10.  8.  5.  ib.  11.  3.7.  ib.  11.  4.  2.
by  both  Messrs  Bonomi  and  Catherwood,  Here  also  it  is  the  yaSs,  not  the  Up6r,
the  well  known  artists,  that  thev  likewise  which  w.is  destroyed  and  afterwards  re-
remarked  these  large  stones  in  1833,  and  built  by  Zerubbabel.

recognised  in  them  the  beginning  of  an  '  Autiq.  15.  11.  3,  a/cna'iTouj  xojtI

immense  arch.    They  regarded  them  too  ■}(p6vm  Mecca  and  Me-
dina.' This  grand  temple  or  mosk  they  regarded  as  the  largest
in  the  world,  except  that  at  Cordova  in  Spain.-

The  walls  aroimd,  and  even  the  ground  itself,  bear  evidence
of  bein^  in  part  composed  of  the  materials  of  former  structures.
Fragments  of  marble  colxmms  and  mas.«es  of  rubbish  are  visible
in  places  where  the  ground  is  turned  up  or  the  sward  broken  ;^
and  the  famous  seat  of  Muhammed,  where  he  is  to  sit  and  judge
the  wc.rld,  is  nothing  more  than  the  br<;>ken  shaft  of  a  column,
bruit  in  horizontally  across  the  upper  part  of  the  eastern  waU,
instead  of  a  square  stone.  Being  longer  than  the  thickness  of  the
wall,  it  projects  somewhat  externally  and  overhangs  the  valley  of
Jehoshaphat ;  thus  affording  an  occasion  for  the  legend.*  Other
similar  tragments  are  seen  in  various  parts  of  the  wall.

TVe  heard  much  of  the  large  reservoirs  or  cisterns  which  are
said  to  exist  under  the  surfece  of  the  Haram ;  and  which  have
been  often  mentioned  by  travellers.'  The  Muslim  worship,  with
its  many  ablutions,  requires  an  abimdant  supply  of  water  in  or
near  the  mosks  ;  and  the  construction  of  cisterns  was  here  almost
a  matter  of  course.  The  ancient  subterranean  vavdts  in  this  quar-
ter, appear  to  have  been  in  part  used  for  this  purpose.  These
cisterns  are  filled,  as  in  the  private  houses  of  the  city,  partly  by
rain  water  trom  the  roofs  of  the  buildings ;  and  j>artly  also  by
the  aqueduct  which  brings  water  from  S<">lomon's  pools.  At  the
time  of  our  visit,  this  was  dry.  Between  the  mosks  es-Sukhrah
and  el-Aksa  there  is  a  marble  basin  or  fountain,  bordered  with  olive,
orange,  and  cypress  trees  ;  apparently  connected  with  the  tank
or  ciscem  described  here  in  the  times  of  the  crusaders,  which  had
a  basin  and  a  dome  supported  by  columns,  and  famished  water

^  The /<7sn*e  temple :     Stmt  iU

the  HistoiT  of  die  Temple  bv  -JeLJ  ed-  excepturia  magnm  aqns  sobterraneae  et

Din,  trandated  hy  BermcUs,  Lood.  1836.  pt"*™'  magno  opere  sdificats.'
See  also  Ali  Bey's  Travds,  VoL  IL  c  16.

Vol.  L— 26  .  L  111  116

302

JERUSALEM,  ANTIQUITIES.

[Sec.  Vn.

for  tlie  besieged  and  their  cattle.*  In  the  lower  part  of  the  city,
around  the  enclosure  of  the  mosk,  are  several  public  fountains  of
Muslim  construction,  wliich  appear  once  to  have  been  fed  from,
the  cisterns  of  the  Haram ;  but  they  have  long  ceased  to  flow.

The  spacious  crypts  or  vaults,  which  are  known  to  exist  be-
neath the  mosk  el-Aksa  and  the  southern  part  of  the  enclosure,
are  a  matter  of  intense  interest  ;  and  we  may  hope  that  the  time
is  not  far  distant,  when  they  will  become  more  accessible  to  a
complete  examination.  They  are  mentioned  by  travellers,  who
heard  of  them  as  early  as  the  fifteenth  century.*  An  Arabian
writer  of  about  the  same  age  speaks  of  a  structure  beneath  the
mosk,  which  was  called  the  "  ancient  temple,"  and  was  referred
to  Solomon  on  account  of  its  massive  architecture.^  In  A.  D.
1697,  Maundrell  appears  to  have  seen  these  vaults,  and  describea
them  as  extending  one  hundred  feet  or  more  under  Mount  Moriab
on  the  south  side,  and  consisting  of  columns  of  a  single  stone,
each  four  feet  in  diameter,  and  arched  over  with  very  large  stones.
How  he  can  have  seen  these  from  the  outside,  from  any  point
tvithin  the  city  wall,  is  to  me  inexplicable  ;  unless  there  may  have
been  at  the  time  a  breach  in  the  wall.  At  present  there  is  no
trace  of  any  door  or  entrance  on  this  part.  A  few  small  holes  or
windows  high  up,  are  all  the  openings  now  visible.'*  So  far  as
I  know,  the  only  Frank  travellers  who  have  been  permitted  to
descend  into  the  vaults  from  within,  are  Eichardson  in  1818,  and
Messrs  Bonomi,  Catherwood  and  Arundale  in  1833.'  The  usual
entrance  from  above  is  at  the  southeast  corner  of  the  enclosure,  where
a  flight  of  steps  leads  down  to  "  a  square  subterraneous  chamber,
in  the  middle  of  which,  laid  on  the  floor,  is  a  sculptured  niche"  in
the  foriu  of  a  sarcophagus,  with  a  canopy  above.  This  is  called
the  cradle  of  Jesus.  "From  this  chamber,"  Mr  Bonomi  says,
"  we  descended  a  staircase  to  a  spacious  ciypt,  or  series  of  vaults,
extending  beneath* a  considerable  portion  of  the  enclosure. —
These  noble  substructions  consist  entirely  of  Roman  arches  of
large  dimensions  and  admirable  workmansliip,  probably  of  the
age  of  Herod."^    Eichardson  remarks,  that  the  stones  of  which

'  Albert.  Aq.  6.  22,  in  Gesta  Dei,  p.  280.

'  Breydenbach,  A.  D.  148.3,  relates  that
they  could  contain  600  horses ;  Keissb.  p.
111.  Fabri  in  the  same  year  says,  they
were  held  to  have  been  the  stables  of  Solo-
mon ;  and  he  entered  them  through  a  hole
in  the  outer  wall ;  ibid.  p.  279.  Baum-
parten  in  A.  I).  1507  heard  of  them  as
spacious  and  magnificent,  and  capable  ot'
receiving  many  thousand  men  ;  Percgri-
natio,  p.  86.

'  History  of  Jerusalem,  etc.  Fundgr.
des  Or.  II."  p.  95.

■*  Muundrell's  Journey,  etc.  Apr.  5.  De

i.  440.  447

Bmyn  (le  Bran)  appears  to  speak  of  the
same  vaults  a  few  years  before.  He  calls
them  the  Temple  of  the  Presnitation  ;
they  were  under  a  mosk  and  could  be  sceu
only  with  lights ;  Voyage,  etc.  p.  2G2.
Morison  also  entered  tlie  vaults  from  be-
low; p.  879.

'  Richardson's  Travels,  II.  p.  308  sq.
Bonomi  in  Hogg's  Visit  to  Alexandria,  etc.
II.  p.  281  sq.  Ali  Bey  also  heard  of^  the
vaults,  but  did  not  visit  them  ;  Travels  II.
p.  227.

"  Bonomi,  1.  c  II.  pp.  281,  282.  I
have  since  had  the  pleasure  of  receivuig

SKa  YH.]

TEMPLE  AREA.     ANCIENT  VAULTS.

303

the  square  columns  are  composed,  are  five  feet  long  and  are  bevel-
led at  the  ends  and  corners  ;  they  are  disintegrated,  and  have  a
much  older  appearance  than  the  arches  which  they  support.'

From  information  and  plans  kindly  communicated  to  me  by
Mr  Catherwood,  who  with  his  companions  examined  and  mea-
sured these  subterranean  structures  without  hindrance  in  1833,  it
appears  that  these  vaults,  so  far  as  they  are  now  accessible  to
strangers,  were  originally  formed  by  some  fifteen  rows  of  square
pillars  measuring  about  five  feet  on  a  side,  built  of  large  bevelled
stones,  and  extending  from  the  southern  wall  northwards  to  an

South  Wall  of  the  Harem.

unknown  extent.  The  intervals  between  the  rows  are  usually,
though  not  entirely,  regular  ;  and  the  pillars  of  some  of  the  ran-
ges are  of  a  somewhat  larger  size.  In  each  row  the  pillars  are
connected  together  by  semicircular  arches  ;  and  then  the  vault,
resting  upon  every  two  rows,  is  formed  by  a  lower  arch,  consisting
of  a  smaller  segment  of  a  circle.  The  circumstance  mentioned
by  Richardson,  that  the  pillars  have  a  much  older  appearance
than  the  arches  which  they  support,  was  not  noticed  by  the
three  artists.    From  the  entrance  at  the  southeast  corner  of  the

from  Mr  Bonom!  himself  a  full  confiima-       '  Travels,  IL  pp.  309,  310.
tion  of  the  account  given  in  the  text.

i.  447.  448

304

JERUSALEM. — ANTIQIHTIES,

[Sec.  Vn.

Haram  for  about  one  liimdred  and  twenty  feet  westward,  tliese
ranges  of  vaults  extend  northwards  nearly  two  hundred  feet ;
where  they  are  shut  up  by  a  wall  of  more  modem  date.  For
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  further  west,  the  vaults  are
closed  up  in  hke  manner  at  less  than  a  hundred  feet  from  the
southern  wall ;  and  to  judge  from  the  wells  and  openings  above
ground,  it  would  seem  as  if  they  had  thus  been  walled  up,  m  or-
der that  the  northern  portion  of  them  might  be  converted  into
cisterns.  Beyond  this  part,  towards  the  west,  they  again  extend
still  farther  north.  They  are  here  terminated  on  the  west,  be-
fore reaching  el-Aksa,'  by  a  like  wall  filling  up  the  intervals  of
one  of  the  rows  of  pillars.  How  much  further  they  originally
extended  westward,  is  unknown ;  not  improbably  quite  to  the
western  wall  of  the  enclosure,  where  are  now  said  to  be  immense
cisterns.*

The  ground  in  these  vaults  rises  rapidly  towards  the  north  ;
the  southernmost  columns  with  the  double  arches  being  about
thirty-five  feet  iu  height ;  while  those  in  the  northern  parts  are
little  more  than  ten  feet  high.  The  surface  of  the  ground  is
everj-where  covered  with  small  heaps  of  stones  ;  the  memorials  of
innumerable  pUgrims  who  have  here  paid  their  devotions.  It  is
a  singular  circumstance,  that  the  roots  of  the  large  ohve  trees
growing  upon  the  area  of  the  Haram  above,  have  in  many  places
forced  their  way  down  through  the  arches,  and  still  descending
have  again  taken  root  in  the  soil  at  the  bottom  of  the  vaults. —
The  accompanying  plan  of  these  vaults  is  from  the  skilful  pencil
of  Mr  Catherwood ;  and  was  made  out  from  his  own  very  full
and  exact  measurements.'

At  about  thirty  feet  in  front  of  el-Aksa,  just  on  the  east  of
its  principal  porch  or  door,  a  passage  leads  down  by  steps  through
the  pavement  and  under  the  mosk,  and  continues  to  descend
partly  by  steps  and  partly  without,  until  it  terminates  in  a  noble
ancient  gateway  adjacent  to  the  southern  wall  of  the  enclosure.
This  gateway  is  forty-two  feet  in  breadth  by  fifty  or  sixty  feet  in
length  from  south  to  north.  It  is  described  by  Mr  Catherwood
as  entirely  similar  in  its  character  and  arcliitecture  to  the  Golden
gateway  spoken  of  above/  except  that  it  would  seem  to  be  of  a

'  The  distance  from  the  southeast  cor-
ner of  the  Haram  to  the  eastern  wall  of
el-Aksa,  according  to  Mr  Catherwood's
plans,  is  about  475  feet ;  while  from  the
same  comer  to  the  wcst«m  side  of  the
vaults  now  open  to  visitors,  is  only  about
320  feet.

'  Ihc  vatilts  described  by  Manndrell
i.  446-450

would  seem  to  have  been  on  the  west  of
el-Aks;i.

^  This  lanfniage  refers  to  the  cut  in  the
former  edition.  The  present  cut  is  from
Fer-fuson's  Essay  on  the  Ancient  Topo-
graphy of  Jerus;ileni,  Plate  V. ;  for  which
it  was  likewise  furnished  by  Mr  Cather-
wood.

Sec.  VIL]

TEMPLE  AREA.     AyCIENT  VAULTS.

305

somewhat  earlier  date ;  the  same  groined  roof  and  marble  col-
umns of  the  Corinthian  order,  indicating  a  Roman  origin  or  at
least  a  Roman  style.  Like  that  too  it  is  a  double  gateway ;  and
the  middle  row  of  columns  extends  up  through  the  whole  pas-
•  sage.'

There  can  be  little  question,  that  this  is  the  ancient  gate
mentioned  by  Josephus,  in  the  middle  of  the  southern  side  of  the
temple  area.*  It  may  have  been  erected,  or  at  least  decorated
by  Herod ;  and  perhaps  rebuilt  by  Adrian  or  at  the  same  time
with  the  church  under  Justinian.  At  present  the  floor  of  it  is
about  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  above  the  ground  on  the  outside.
Probably  an  external  flight  of  steps  originally  coimected  it  with
the  part  of  the  city  below.  The  present  southern  wall,  here
wholly  modem,  entirely  covers  this  gateway  from  view ;  so  that
a  person  by  merely  looking  at  the  outside,  would  have  no  sus-
picion of  its  existence  ;  although  to  one  already  acquainted  with
it,  certain  traces  in  the  wall  serve  to  mark  its  place.  This  is
just  on  the  east  of  the  spot,  where  the  city  wall,  coming  up  from
the  south,  meets  the  wall  of  the  Haram ;  it  is  consequently  very
near  the  middle  of  the  southern  side  of  the  ancient  temple  area.
At  present  neither  this  gateway,  nor  the  passage  leading  down
to  it,  have  any  communication  with  the  vaults  above  described. —
The  existence  of  this  ancient  gateway  goes  to  confirm  indubitably
the  view  already  taken,  that  the  present  southern  wall  of  the
Haram  occupies  the  identical  site  of  the  same  wall  of  the  ancient
temple  area.'

The  crypts  too  are  doubtless  ancient ;  and  may  be  referred,
partly  perhaps  to  the  vaulted  substructions  which  were  built  up,
or  very  probably  only  repaired,  for  the  area  of  Justinian's  church;*
and  partly  either  to  Herod,  or  with  greater  probability  to  a  still
earlier  date.  Herod  indeed  appears  not  to  have  meddled  to  any
great  extent  with  the  substructions  of  the  temple ;  except  per-
haps so  far  as  to  construct  a  subterraneous  passage  to  it  from
the  fortress  Antonia.'  In  doing  this  he  doubtless  made  use  in
part  of  older  vaults  or  excavations ;  and  we  know  from  J osephus,

'  See  the  description  of  the  Grolden  gate-  measTirements  and  plana  of  the  snbter-

way  above,  p  296.  ranean  and  Golden  gatewajs  :  as  well  as  of

'  Joseph.  Ant.  1.5.  IL  5.  both  the  mosks  el-Atsa  and  el-Siikhrah,

'  See  above,  p.  289.    The  reader,  I  am  and  of  the  Haram  in  general    It  is  greatly

sure,  win  join  with  me  in  thanking  Mr  to  be  desired,  that  these  too  may  be  given

Catherwood  for  this  very  specific  and  vain-  to  the  pnblic. — This  hope  has  never  been

able  information  respecting  the  vaults  and  fnltilled,  and  probably  never  will  be.  The

this  gabterranean  gateway.    The  very  ex-  lamented  Catherwood  perished  in  the  ca-

istence  of  sach  a  gate  now  becomes  known  tastrophe  of  the  Ul  fated  Arctic,  in  1854.
to  the  pablic  for  the  first  time.    Besides       *  See  above,  p.  297.
the  preceding  plan  of  the  vaults,  the  same       '  See  above,  p.  283.  Joseph.  Antiq.  15.

gentleman  has  in  his  possession  .gimflar  11.  7.

YoL.  I.— 26*  L  450-452

306

JERUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES,

[Shc.  vn.

that  such  existed  in  connection  with  the  temple.  This  historian
relates,'  that  near  the  close  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,
Simon,  one  of  the  Jewish  tyrants  in  the  upper  city,  withdrew
with  a  company  of  friends  and  stonecutters,  furnished  with  tools
and  provisions,  into  a  subterraneous  cavern,  with  the  hope  of  •
being  able  through  connecting  passages  and  by  occasional  min-
ing, to  make  their  escape  without  the  walls  of  the  city.  In  this
purpose  however  they  were  frustrated ;  their  provisions  faUed ;
and  after  Titus  had  departed  from  the  city,  Simon,  arraying
himself  in  white  and  purple,  emerged  from  the  ground  on  the
spot  where  the  temple  had  stood,  in  the  vain  hope  of  terrifying
the  guards  who  were  there  stationed,  and  thus  making  his  es-
cape. He  was  however  seized,  and  reserved  for  the  triumph  of
Titus. — Tliis  account  implies  at  least,  that  there  had  been  sub-
terranean vaults  or  passages  beneath  the  temple,  corresponding
to  the  cavati  sub  terra  monies  of  Tacitus.**

Of  the  living  fountain  deep  under  the  site  of  the  temple,
mentioned  perhaps  by  Aristeeus  and  apparently  referred  to  by
Tacitus,  I  shall  speak  in  another  place,  in  treating  of  the  waters
of  Jerusalem.

VI.  TOWER  OF   HIPPICUS,  AND  OTHER  TOWERS.

Having  thus  obtained,  in  the  substructions  of  the  former
temple,  a  fixed  and  definite  point  in  the  ancient  topography  of
Jerusalem  ;  and  having  found  in  the  same  a  specimen  and  stand-
ard of  the  Jewish  mural  architecture  ;  we  afterwards  turned  our
attention  to  other  like  remains,  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  de-
tennine  the  places  and  the  direction  of  some  of  the  ancient  towers
and  walls,  which  stood  in  connection  with  those  of  the  temple.

Hippicus.  The  most  important  spot  in  a  topographical
respect  yet  to  be  ascertained,  was  the  exact  situation  of  the  an-
cient tower  Hippicus  ;  which  Josephus,  as  we  have  seen,  assumed
as  the  starting  point  in  his  description  of  all  the  city  walls  ;  and
which  was  to  be  sought  for  at  the  northwest  corner  of  the  upper
city  or  Mount  Zion.^  Of  this  tower  the  historian  has  left  us  a  tole-
rably minute  description.''  It  was  built  by  the  first  Herod,  and
named  after  a  friend  of  his  who  had  fallen  in  battle.  The  form
was  a  quadrangle,  twenty-five  cubits  on  each  side  ;  and  built  up
entirely  soUd  to  the  height  of  thirty  cubits.    Above  this  solid

•  Joseph  B.  J.  7.  c.  2.  proof,  entitled :  Von  den  Ocwolhcrn  unter

'  So  .)os.  B.  J.  5.  3.  1,  fU  Tovs  vvovA-  (Inn  Bcrr/f  Zion  wid  des  Tempcls,  in  his

novs.    Tacit.  Hist.  5.  12,  "  Teniphini  in  Zerstrcute  kl.  Sdiriften,  p  427  sq.  Mun-

modum  arcis, — fons  percnnis  aqua?,  cavati  tcr  Antiquarische  Abhamilungen,  p.  87  sq.

Bub  terra  inontes,  et  piscinso  cistcrnaiquo       '  See  above,  pp.  271),  280.    Joseph.  B.

servandis  iml)ribn3."    See  generally  on  this  J.  5.  4.  2.

tiubjcct,  an  essay  of  J.  D.  Michaclis,  which        *  Ibid.  6.  4.  3,  4.

exhil)its  mnch  more  of  hypothesis  than  of

i.  4r)2.  '153

Sec.  VII.]

TOWER  OF  HIPPICUS.

307

part  was  a  cistern  twenty  cubits  high  ;  and  then,  for  twenty-fivo
cubits  more,  were  chambers  of  various  kinds  ;  with  a  breastwork
of  two  cubits  and  battlements  of  three  cubits  upon  the  top.  The
altitude  of  the  whole  tower,  accordingly,  was  eighty  cubits.  The
stones  of  which  it  was  buUt,  were  very  large,  twenty  cubits  long
by  ten  broad  and  five  high ;  and  (probably  on  the  upper  part)
were  of  white  marble. — It  must  here  be  borne  in  mind,  that  Jo-
sephus  (as  above  mentioned)  probably  had  no  such  specific  mea-
surements ;  he  was  writing,  after  the  lapse  of  years,  at  Rome  ;
and  the  numbers  here  given  must  therefore  be  regarded  only  in
the  fight  of  conjectural  estimates.'  On  the  other  hand,  the  soli-
dity of  the  lower  part  of  the  tower  is  a  circumstance  so  remark-
able, and  was  probably  of  such  publicity,  that  it  cannot  well  be
referred  to  the  imagination  of  the  historian.

On  the  same  northwestern  part  of  Zion,  a  little  south  of  the
Yafa  gate,  fies  at  present  the  fortress  or  citadel  of  the  modern
Jerusalem.  It  is  an  irregular  assemblage  of  square  towers,  sur-
rounded on  the  inner  side  towards  the  city  by  a  low  waU  ;  and
having  on  the  outer  or  west  side  a  deep  fosse.  The  towers  which
rise  from  the  brink  of  the  fosse,  are  protected  on  that  side  by  a
solid  sloping  bulwark  or  buttress,  which  rises  from  the  bottom  of
the  trench  at  an  angle  of  about  45°  This  part  bears  e\'ident
marks  of  antiquity  ;  and  this  species  of  sloping  bulwark,  of  which
we  saw  several  other  specimens  in  Palestine,  I  am  disposed  to
ascribe  to  the  times  of  the  Romans.  In  respect  to  the  present
instance,  Adrian,  in  rebuilding  and  fortifying  the  city,  would  very
naturally  build  up  again  a  citadel  upon  the  commanding  site  of
the  former  one  ;  and  to  his  age  I  am  inclined  to  refer  these  mas-
sive outworks. — At  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  by  the  crusaders  in
A.  D.  1099,  this  fortress  was  the  strongest  part  of  the  city,  and
the  last  to  be  surrendered.'^  The  historians  of  those  times  speak
of  it  under  the  name  of  the  tower  or  citadel  of  David  ;  and  de-
scribe it  as  built  of  large  hewn  stones  and  of  immense  strength.^
When  the  walls  of  the  city  were  thrown  down  A.  D.  1219  by  the
Muslims,  this  fortress  was  spared  ;*  and  continued  to  bear  among
Franks  only  the  name  of  the  tower  of  David  down  to  the  six-
teenth century.'  It  then  apparently  began  also  to  be  called  the
castle  of  the  Pisans  ;  in  consequence,  it  is  said,  of  having  for-
merly been  rebuilt  or  repaired  by  citizens  of  the  Pisan  repubfic'

'  See  above,  p,  277.  fid.  Cruc.  3.  7.  2.    F.  Fabri  in  1483;

"  Will.  TjT.  8.  24.  Reissb.  p.  245.

^  Will.  Tyr.  8.  3.  ib.  9.  3.    Jac.  de  Vit.       '  Pisanum  Castellum,  Pisanorwn  Cas-

c.  60,  "ex  lapidibus  quadris  casmento  et  truDi,  Adriohomius,  p.  156     Cotovicua  in

pluinbo  fusili  quasi  indissolubiliter  compa-  1598,  Itiii.  p.  279. — The  use  of  this  name

ginatis  coustructam."  appears  to  have  grown  up  in  tlie  sixteenth

*  Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kreuzz.  VI.  p.  238.  century.    I  find  it  first  in  tlie  Itinerary  of

'  So  Marin.  Sanut.  A.  D.  1321,  Seer.  B.  Salignac,  who  travelled  in  A.  D.  1522,

i.  453-455

308

JERUSALEM. — AXTIQUITIES.  [Sbc.  VU.

"Within  this  fortress,  as  the  traveller  enters  the  city  by  the

Y&fa  gate,  the  northeastern  to^er  attracts  his  notice  ;  and,  even
to  the  unpractised  eye,  bears  strong  marks  of  antiquity.  The
upper  part  is  apparently  modem,  and  does  not  differ  from  the
other  towers  and  walls  around  ;  but  the  lower  part  is  built  of
larger  stones,  bevelled  at  the  edges  ;  and  apparently  still  occu-
pying their  original  places.  Among  the  Franks  this  is  now  known
as  the  tower  of  David  ;  while  they  sometimes  give  also  to  the
whole  fortress  the  name  of  the  castle  of  David.

Judging  from  the  external  appearance  of  this  tower,  and  its
situation  in  respect  to  Zion  and  the  ancient  temple,  it  early  oc-
curred to  us,  that  the  antique  lower  part  of  it  was  very  probably
a  remnant  of  the  tower  of  Hippicus  erected  by  Herod  ;  which,
as  Josephus  informs  us,  was  left  standing  by  Titus,  when  he  de-
stroyed the  city. '  Tliis  impression  was  strengthened  as  we  daily
passed  and  repassed  the  fortress,  and  became  more  at  home  in
the  topography  of  the  city  ;  and  especially  was  this  the  case,
after  we  had  discovered  the  remains  of  the  ancient  bridge  con-
nected with  the  temple.  We  now  repaired  to  the  citadel,  as
already  related  ;^  and,  from  a  careful  inspection  and  measure-
ments, found  our  former  impressions  confirmed.

This  tower  has  been  built  up  at  the  top  like  the  other  towers,
in  later  times  ;  and  is  of  about  the  same  altitude  as  the  rest.  It
is  quadrangular,  though  not  a  square  ;  the  eastern  side  measuring
56  feet  4  inches  ;  and  the  southern  side,  70  feet  3  inches.  The
bearings  of  the  sides,  taken  from  the  southeast  comer,  are  N.  11°
W.  and  W.  1 1°  S.  The  height  of  the  antique  portion  is  40  feet,  but
there  is  mi;ch  rubbish  in  the  fosse  at  the  bottom ;  and  an  allow-
ance must  be  made  of  several  feet  more  on  this  accoimt.  The
large  stones  of  which  this  part  is  built,  have  evidently  never  been
disturbed  ;  they  have  neither  been  thrown  down  nor  relaid  ;
and  the  general  impression  which  they  make  upon  the  beholder,
is  precisely  like  that  of  the  remains  of  the  ancient  walls  aroimd  the
temple.  One  of  these  stones  measured  9|  feet  long,  4^  feet  broad,
and  3  feet  10  inches  high  ;  another,  10  feet  2  inches  long,  4  feet
1  inch  high  ;  a  third,  12|  feet  long,  3  feet  5  inches  broad.  They
are  therefore  smaller  than  the  stones  of  the  temple  walls  ;  and
although  hke  them  bevelled,  yet  the  rest  of  the  surface  is  only
roughly  hewn.  These  two  circumstances  indicate  a  less  massive
and  less  careful  style  of  architecture  ;  and  probably  imply  a
later  date.

(Tom.  yn.  c.  1,)  from  whom  Adrichomius  at  the  time,  that  the  same  snggestion  had
quotes  it;  and  also  in  HelfiFrich,  A  D.  1565,  hcen  made  on  similar  gromids  by  Scholz,
Kcissb.  p  717  ;  Zuallardo,  A.  D.  1586,  p.  de  Golgatha  Hlii,  p.  8.  See  also  Ravmier's
261 ;  Cotovicus,  as  above  ;  Sandys  in  A.  D.  Patistina,  edit.  3.  p.  312,  Schubert's
1610,  p.  123,  etc.  Rcise,  H.  p  532.

*  Joseph.  B.  J.  7.  1.  1. — I  was  not  aware       '  See  above,  p.  245.
L  455.  45G

Sec.VIL]

TOTTEK  OF  PHASAELUS,  ETC.

309

The  entrance  of  the  present  tower  is  in  the  western  side,
about  half  wav  up,  in  the  upper  or  modem  part.  To  the  lower
or  antique  part  there  is  no  known  nor  risible  entrance,  either
from  above  or  below  ;  and  no  one  knows  of  any  room  or  space  in
it.  The  officer  who  accompanied  us,  said  there  was  a  tradition
among  them,  that  there  was  formerly  an  underground  passiige
leading  to  it  ;  but  no  one  knew  any  thing  of  it  now. — We  made
all  our  measurements  in  the  presence  of  the  soldiers  ;  and  sen  e
of  them  even  went  so  far  as  to  assist  us.

All  these  circumstances,  compared  with  the  account  of  Jo-
sephus,  and  taking  into  view  the  conjectural  and  exaggerated  na-
ture of  his  statements,  tally  well  enough  with  the  description  of
Hippicus  ;  while  the  position  of  the  tower  and  the  apparent
solidity  of  the  antiq[ue  part,  leave  Httle  room  to  doubt  of  its  iden-
tity.

Towers  of  Phasaelue  and  Mariamne.  Josephus  describes
also  two  other  towers,^  built  by  Herod  in  the  same  general  form,
but  of  somewhat  larger  dimensions  ;  one  called  Phasaelus  after
his  friend,  and  the  other  Mariamne  after  his  favourite  wife.
They  stood  not  far  from  Hippicus,  on  the  first  or  ancient  wall,
which  ran  from  the  latter  tower  eastward  to  the  temple,  along  the
northern  brow  of  Zion.  This  brow  was  here  thirty  culaits  above
the  valley  of  the  Tyropoeon,  and  added  greatly  to  the  apparent
height  of  the  towers.  Connected  with  these  towers  and  Hippicus,
was  the  royal  castle  or  palace  of  the  first  Herod,  which  was  en-
closed by  the  said  wall  on  the  north  ,  and  on  the  other  sides  by  a
wall  thirty  cubits  high.  The  whole  was  finished  with  great
strength  and  regal  splendour  ;  and  famished  with  halls,  and  gal-
leries, and  cisterns,  and  apartments  without  number.^

But  of  aU.  this  strength  and  splendour  not  a  vestige  now  re-
mains, except  the  lower  solid  part  of  Hippicus,  as  above  described.
Tittis,  indeed,  on  beholding  the  massive  nature  of  these  works,
gave  orders  to  let  these  three  towers  be  left  standing,  as  memo-
rials to  posterity  of  the  impregnable  nature  of  the  fortificarions,
which  Roman  valour  had  been  able  to  subdue.^  But  not  unpro-
bably  AdriJin,  while  he  retained  the  foimdations  of  Hippicus
within  his  fortress,  may  have  demolished  the  remains  of  the  others
for  the  sake  of  their  materials.

Th.e  Tower  Psephinos.  Josephus  describes  a  fourth  tower,
called  Psephinos,  situated  overagainst  Hippicus  and  the  other
towers  towards  the  north,  at  the  northwest  comer  of  the  third  or
exterior  wall  of  the  city.*  This  would  seem  to  have  b^en  biult
by  Agrippa,  or  at  least  in  coimecrion  with  the  third  or  later  walL
It  was  of  an  octagonal  form,  seventy  cubits  highj  and  from  it  could.

'  R  J.  5.  4.  3,  4.  '  Ibid  6.  9.  1.  ib.  7.  L  1.

'  Ibid.  5.  4.  4  *  Ibid,  5.  4.  2,  3,

L  456-4-58

310

JERUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[SEC.m

be  seen  Arabia  towards  the  rising  sun,  and  the  inheritance  of  the
Hebrews  quite  to  the  sea.'  All  this  shows  that  this  tower  must
have  stood  upon  the  high  swell  of  ground  which  extends  up  N.
N.  W.  from  the  northwest  corner  of  the  present  city.  Here,
at  the  distance  of  700  feet  from  that  comer,  on  the  highest  part
of  the  ridge,  (which  indeed  is  higher  than  Zion,)  are  traces  of  an-
cient substructions,  apparently  of  towers  or  other  fortifications,
extending  along  the  high  ground  for  650  feet  further  in  the  same
direction.  This  must  always  have  been  an  important  spot  in
every  siege  of  the  city  ;  and  although  none  of  these  substructions
may  perhaps  be  actually  those  of  Psephinos  ;  yet,  in  connection
with  the  traces  of  walls,  of  which  I  shall  speak  hereafter,  they
serve  to  render  it  probable,  that  the  tower  in  question  stood
somewhere  in  this  vicinity.

Vn.     ANCIENT  AND  LATER  WALLS.

We  have  thus  ascertained  two  fixed  points  in  the  ancient  to-
pography of  the  city,  viz.  the  tower  of  Hippicus  and  the  temple.
At  the  former  of  these  J osephus  makes  all  the  walls  of  the  city
begin  ;  while  they  all  terminated  at  or  near  the  latter.  An  out-
line of  their  several  courses  has  already  been  given.'

First  or  earliest  Wall.  We  follow  again  the  order  of  Jose-
phus.^  The  first  and  most  ancient  wall,  beginning  at  Hippicus
on  the  north,  ran  first  (eastward)  along  the  northern  brow  of  Zion
and  so  across  the  valley  to  the  western  side  of  the  temple  area.
In  this  wall  were  the  other  two  towers  Phasaelus  and  Mariamne  ;
and  adjacent  to  it  on  the  south  were  the  palace  of  Herod,  the
Xystus,  and  the  bridge  leading  from  the  upper  city  to  the  tem-
ple. The  length  of  this  wall,  between  Hippicus  and  the  temple,
as  near  as  we  could  estimate  by  paces,  must  have  been  about  630
yards.

From  the  tower  of  Hippicus  again,  this  first  or  ancient  wall
on  the  west  ran  (southwards)  along  the  western  brow  of  Zion,
through  a  place  called  Bethso  to  the  gate  of  the  Essenes.  Both
these  are  now  unknown.  Thence  it  turned  along  on  the  south
over  Siloam  ;  and  bending  round  on  the  east  to  Solomon's  pool
and  the  place  called  Ophla,  it  joined  itself  to  the  eastern  portico
of  the  temple.*  This  accoimt  is  not  very  definite  ;  and  whether
any  traces  of  this  wall  remain,  is  doubtful.  Along  the  western
brow  of  Zion,  outside  of  the  present  city,  is  a  narrow  higher  ridge,
which  may  not  improbably  be  composed  of  rubbish  and  the

'  This  must  of  course  mean  the  Dead  ever,  within  or  around  the  city  of  Jerusa-

Sea.     The  Mediterranean  is  not  visible  lem.

from  the  mount  of  Olives  ;  and  much  less       *  See  above,  pp.  278,  279.

co-jld  it  be  seen  from  any  tower,  or  any       '  B.  J.  ti.  4.  2.

part  of  the  walls,  or  from  any  spot  what-       '  See  Note  1,  on  page  279.

i.  458,  459

Sec.  Vn.]

ANCIENT  FIRST  WALL.

311

foundations  of  the  ancient  wall.  Quite  at  the  southwest  corner
of  Zion  also,  just'  below  the  brow,  we  found  detached  ledges  of
rock  scarped  in  several  places,  as  if  they  had  once  formed  part  of
the  foundation  of  the  wall ;  and  these  we  could  trace  for  some
distance  eastward.'  We  were  told  also,  that  in  digging  deeply
for  the  foundations  of  the  new  barracks,  just  south  of  the  castle,
many  remaiifs  of  walls  and  buildings  had  been  discovered  ;  but
we  were  too  late  to  examine  this  point  ourselves  ;  the  excavations
having  been  aheady  filled  up. — From  a  remark  of  Benjamin  of
Tudela,  about  A.  D.  1165,  it  would  seem  that  traces  of  some  part
of  the  ancient  wall  of  Zion  were  visible  in  his  day.^

In  respect  to  the  waU  upon  the  eastern  side,  from  Siloam  to
the  temple,  the  question  arises,  whether  it  so  ran  as  to  include
the  waters  of  Siloam  and  the  fountain  of  the  Virgin  within  the
city.  On  this  point  there  is  nothing  very  definite  in  J osephus  or
elsewhere  ;  but  it  seems  hardly  probable,  that  the  wall  should
have  been  carried  close  along  by  the  only  living  fountains  in  the
whole  region  of  the  citv,  and  vet  exclude  them.  It  would  seem
too,  from  a  passing  notice  of  Josephus,  that  the  city  extended
quite  down  to  Siloam  ;  and  that  there  was  a  wall  or  fortification
around  that  fountain.'  This  is  also  more  distinctly  evident
from  the  language  of  Nehemiah.*  From  Siloam  the  wall  ran  to
the  pool  or  reservoir  of  Solomon  ;  and  this  cannot  well  have  been
any  other  than  the  fountain  of  the  Virgin,  which  is  deep  and  ex-
cavated in  the  rock.  At  least  there  is  nothing  else  in  all  this
quarter  which  answers  to  that  pool  ;  nor  is  there  any  other  pas-
sage in  Josephus  which  can  be  apphed  to  this  ancient  fountain.'
The  eastern  wall  then  probably  ran  along  the  valley  of  Jehosha-
phat  ;  or  else,  crossing  the  point  of  the  narrow  ridge  northeast  of
Siloam,  swept  down  into  that  valley  so  as  to  include  the  fountain.^
Then,  passing  by  Oplila  (Ophel),  it  ascended  and  terminated  at
the  eastern  portico  of  the  temple.  This  circumstance  serves  to
show,  that  the  wall  did, not  run  along  the  brow  of  the  ridge  above
the  valley  ;  for  in  that  case  it  could  have  tenninated  only  on  the
southern  side  of  the  temple,  and  not  upon  the  eastern.  Indeed,
from  another  passage  of  Josephus,  it  would  appear,  that  a  portion
of  the  valley  of  the  Kidron  was  included  in  this  wall.'  The  third
wall  too,  coming  from  the  north  towards  the  temple,  is  said  to  ter-
minate, not  at  the  temple  itself,  but  at  this  ancient  wall  in  the

'  See  the  account  of  the  English  ceme-
tery in  VoL  III.  Sec.  IV.

^  Benj.  of  Tud.  ed.  Asher,  I.  p.  73.
'  B.  J.  6.  7.  2.  ib.  6.  8.  5.

*  NeL  3,  1.5.

'  This  is  not  improbably  the  "  King's
pool"  of  Xeh.  2,  14.

*  On  the  narrow  ridge  north  of  Siloam

and  south  of  the  temple,  at  the  distance  of
960  feet  from  the  city  wall,  are  scarped
rocks,  apparently  the  foundations  of  a  wall
or  some  other  like  structure

'  Jos.  B.  J.  5  6.  1.  Here  John  is  said
to  have  held  possession  of  the  temple  and
the  parts  thereto  adjoining,  as  also  Ophla
and  the  valley  of  the  Kidron.

i.  459-461

312

JERUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[Sec.  VIL

valley  of  the  Kidron.* — Hence,  the  place  Ophel  would  appear
to  have  been  situated  on  the  south  of  the  temple,  perhaps  extend-
ing down  towards  the  fountain  of  the  Virgin.  It  was  inhabited  by
the  Netliinim,  who  performed  the  menial  offices  of  the  temple  and
therefore  dwelt  in  its  vicinity.*

In  the  account  of  the  siege  of  J erusalem  by  Titus,  it  appears,
as  we  have  seen,  that  after  the  Romans  had  got  possession  of  the
lower  city,  the  temple,  and  all  the  tract  south  of  it  as  far  as  to
Sdoam,  they  were  yet  unable  to  enter  the  upper  city,  into  which
the  Jews  had  withdrawn  themselves.'  We  are  therefore  under
the  necessity  of  supposing  a  wall  along  the  eastern  brow  of  Zion,
above  the  Tyropoeon,  extending  from  the  Xystus  probably  to  a
point  near  Siloam.^  Such  a  wall  is  not  mentioned  by  Josephus
or  any  other  writer  ;  but  the  circumstances  of  the  case  obviously
imply  its  existence.^

Second  Wall.  Josephus'  description  of  the  second  wall  is
very  short  and  unsatisfactory.  It  began  at  the  gate  called  Gen-
nath  in  the  first  wall,  and  encircling  only  the  tract  lying  north,
extended  to  Antonia.^  This  gate  of  Gennath  in  the  first  wall
doubtless  was  near  the  tower  of  Hippicus  ;  and  was  probably  not
included  witliin  the  second  wall,  in  order  to  allow  a  direct  passage
between  the  upper  city  and  the  country.''  The  two  extremities
of  this  wall  are  therefore  given  ;  but  its  course  between  these
points  is  a  matter  of  some  difficulty  to  determine.

Did  this  wall  perhaps  run  from  its  beginning  near  the  tower
of  Hippicus  on  a  straight  course  to  the  fortress  Antonia  ?  This
question  I  feel  compelled  to  answer  in  the  negative,  for  several  rea-
sons. First,  the  express  language  of  Josephus,  that  it  took  a
circular  course.  Secondly,  the  pool  of  Hezekiah,  which  is  of  high
antiquity  and  lay  within  the  ancient  city,  must  then  have  been
excluded.  Thirdly,  the  whole  space  included  in  the  lower  city,
would  in  this  way  have  been  reduced  to  a  small  triangle,  of  about
600  yards  on  the  south  side  and  some  4Q0  yards  on  the  east  side.
And  lastly,  this  wall,  built  for  the  defence  of  this  part  of  the  city,
would  thus  have  passed  obliquely  across  the  very  point  of  the  hill
Akra,  and  have  been  overlooked  and  commanded  on  the  west  by
every  other  part  of  the  same  hill.

These  reasons  constrain  me  to  suppose,  that  the  second  wall

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  5.  4.  2.  scribed  by  Josephus,  from  Siloam  by  Solo-

'  Neb.  3,  2C.  27.    11,  21.    Comp.  Jos.  mon's  pool  to  the  eastern  side  of  tlie  tem-

B.  J.  5.  6.  1.  pie  ?

=  Jos.  B.  J.  6.  6.  2,  3.  ib.  6.  7.  2.  »  Jos.  B.  J.  5.  4.  2,  KvKKoifxtvov  Se
*  Comp.  Jos.  B.  J.  6.  8.  5.  rh  irpoKTioy  Kki/ia  fi6vov,  iyi^fi  fitxp^  '''V^
"  In  2  Chr.  33,  14,  king  Manas.sch  is  'AvTuvtas.
said  to  have  "  compassed  about  Ophel,  and  '  It  niu.-^t  have  been  on  the  east  of  Hip-
raised  it  up  a  very  great  height."    May  it  picus,  for  the  thi'd  wall  begun  at  that
not  have  been  the  case,  tliat  the  more  an-  tower.    It  could  not  however  have  been
cient  wall  on  this  side  included  only  Zion  ;  far  distant ;  because  that  part  of  Zion  was
while  this  wall  of  Mauassuh  ran,  as  de-  then  high  and  steep.    Jos.  B.  J.  6.  4.  4.
i.  4G1,  402

Sec.  VII.]

ANCIENT  SECOND  WALL.

313

ran  first  from  near  Hippicus  northwards  across  the  higher  and
more  level  part  of  Akra ;  and  then  sweeping  round  to  the  valley
between  Ahra  and  Bezetha  somewhere  in  the  vicinity  of  the  pre-
sent Damascus  gate,  afterwards  took  a  direction  across  the  high
ground  of  Bezetha  down  to  the  northwest  corner  of  Antonia  ;  al-
though the  whole  of  Bezetha  certainly  was  not  included  by  it. —
In  favour  of  this  general  hypothesis,  we  have  not  only  the  express
language  of  Josephus,  as  above  quoted,  and  the  fact  that  it  re-
moAJes  all  the  difficulties  just  enumerated  as  incident  to  a  straight
course  ;  but  it  also  receives  some  support  from  another  incidental
remark  of  the  Jewish  historian.  Having  described  the  manner
in  which  the  Romans,  after  many  fierce  assaults,  got  possession  of
the  second  wall,  he  informs  us,  that  Titus  immediately  caused
all  the  northern  part  to  be  thrown  down  ;  but  placed  troops  in
the  towers  along  the  southern  part.  Had  the  wall  run  in  a  direct
course  from  Hippicus  to  Antonia,  the  writer  could  well  have  spo-
ken only  of  the  eastern  and  western  parts.

The  same  h}^othesis  seems  to  receive  further  confirmation
from  a  fact  which  we  noticed  near  the  Damascus  gate  ;  and  which
apparently  has  not  been  mentioned  by  any  writer.  Every  travel-
ler has  probably  observed  the  large  ancient  hewn  stones,  which
lie  just  in  the  inside  of  that  gate  towards  the  east.  In  looking  at
these  one  day,  and  passing  around  them,  we  were  surprised  to
find  there  a  square  dark  room  adjacent  to  the  wall ;  the  sides  of
which  are  entirely  composed  of  stones  having  precisely  the  char-
acter of  those  still  seen  at  the  corners  of  the  temple  area, — large,
bevelled,  with  the  whole  surface  hewn  smooth,  and  thus  exhibit-
ing an  earlier  and  more  careful  style  of  architecture  than  those
remaining  in  the  tower  of  Hippicus.  Connected  with  this  room
on  its  west  side  is  a  Avinding  staircase,  leading  to  the  top  of  the
wall,  the  sides  of  which  are  of  the  same  character.  Following  out
this  discovery,  we  found  upon  the  western  side  of  the  gate,  though
fiirther  from  it,  another  room  of  precisely  the  same  kind,  corres-
ponding in  all  respects  to  that  upon  the  eastern  side  ;  except
that  it  had  been  much  more  injured  in  building  the  present  wall,
and  is  in  part  broken  away.  Of  the  stones,  one  measured  7^  feet
long  by  3,^-  feet  liigh  ;  and  another  6i  feet  long  by  a  like  height.
Some  of  them  are  much  disintegrated"  and  decayed  ;  but  they  all
seem  to  be  lying  in  their  original  places,  as  if  they  had  never  been
disturbed  or  moved  from  the  spot,  where  they  were  first  fitted  to
each  other. — The  only  satisfactory  conjecture  which  I  can  form
respecting  these  structures  is,  that  they  were  aiicient  towers,  of  a
date  anterior  to  the  time  of  Herod,  and  probably  the  guard-houses
of  an  ancient  gate  upon  this  spot.  This  gate  could  have  belonged
only  to  the  second  wall.'

'  Another  conjecture  is  indeed  possible,  viz.  that  when  Adrian  rebuilt  the  city,  the
Vol.  I.— 27  i.  4G2-464

314

JERUSALEM.  ANTIQUITIES,

[Sec.  Vn.

Except  these,  no  traces  whatever  of  the  second  wall  are  visible,
so  far  as  we  could  discover.  Heaps  of  rubbish  out  of  various  cen-
turies, and  modern  houses,  cover  the  whole  ground.'

Third  Wall.  This  began  also  at  Hippicus  ;^  ran  northwards
as  far  as  to  the  tower  Psephinos  ;  then  passed  down  opposite  the
sepulchi-e  of  Helena  ;  and  being  carried  along  through  the  royal
sepulchres,  turned  at  the  corner  tower  by  the  Fuller's  monument ;
and  ended  by  making  a  junction  with  the  ancient  wall  in  the  val-
ley of  the  Kidron.  Tliis  wall  was  commenced  by  the  elder
Agrippa  under  the  emperor  Claudius  ;  but  he  desisted  from  it  for
fear  of  offending  that  emperor  ;  and  it  was  afterwards  carried  on
and  completed  by  the  Jews  themselves,  though  on  a  scale  of  less
strength  and  magnificence.'  Before  the  erection  of  this  wall,  the
buildings  of  the  city  had  extended  themselves  far  to  the  north,
covering  also  the  hill  Bezetha  ;  and  were  "  whoUy  naked  "  of  de-
fence.

The  tower  Psephinos,  as  we  have  seen,  must  have  stood  upon
the  high  ground  N.  N.  W.  of  the  northwest  corner  of  the  modern
city.  The  tomb  of  Helena,  if  not  identical  with  the  present
tombs  of  the  Kings,  (as  is  most  probable,)  was  doubtless  near
them.^  The  wall  is  not  said  to  have  been  carried  so  far  as  this
monument ;  but  only  passed  opposite  or  overagainst  it.  Of  the
other  points  mentioned,  nothing  definite  is  known.  The  conclu-
sion is  a  probable  one,  that  the  wall  passed  from  Psephinos  in  an
easterly  or  northeasterly  direction  to  the  brow  of  the  valley  of
J ehoshaphat  ;  and  thence  along  that  valley,  until  it  met  the  an-
cient wall  coming  up  from  the  south  on  the  east  of  the  temple.

In  correspondence  with  this  conclusion,  we  suppose  that  we
found  traces  of  the  foundations  of  Agrippa's  wall  on  its  north-
west part.  I  first  came  upon  them  accidentally,  in  returning
one  evening  with  Mr  Whiting  from  the  tombs  of  the  Kings  along
the  path  leading  up  to  the  Yaf3,-gate.  A  few  days  after,  in  pass-
ing the  same  way  with  Messrs  Smith  and  Lannoau,  we  exam-
ined them  more  leisurely.    On  the  cast  of  the  said  path,  in  the

Romans  may  have  t.aken  stones  from  tlie
ruins  of  the  temple  and  bnilt  these  tow-
ers. But  this  seems  inconsistent  with  the
style  of  arcliitccturt,  the  evident  fitting  of
the  stones  to  ciich  other,  and  also  with
their  decay  apparently  in  their  original
plates.  Nor  is  such  a  conjecture  sup-
ported by  anything  analogous  in  other
parts  of  the  city.

'  See  further  upon  this  second  wall  in
Vol.  III.  Sec.  V. — In  describing  tlie  siege
of  .lemsalem  by  Ilerod,  before  the  third
Willi  was  built,  Josephus  speaks  also  of  u
first  and  second  wall;  Ant.  14.  16.  2.
But  \\U  first  wall  there  is  evidently  that  to

i.  4G4,  4G5

which  the  besiegers  first  came,  and  which
they  first  took,  viz.  the  second  wall  of  the
text  above,  which  was  then  the  exterior
wall  on  tliis  part.  By  the  second  wall  in
the  same  passage,  lie  obviously  means  tlie
wall  around  the  court  of  the  temple.
Jos.  B.  J.  .5.  4.  2.
'  As  Claudius  ascended  the  throne  in
A.  D.  41,  and  Agrippa  is  generally  held  to
have  died  in  A.  1>.  44,  the  date  of  the
commencement  of  this  wall  is  pretty  defi-
nitely fixed.  It  was  begun  ten  or  twelve
years  after  our  Lord's  crucifixion.

See  "  Tombs  of  the  Kings,"  further

on.

SEc.m]

ANCIENT  THIKD  WALL.

315

field  about  half  way  between  those  tombs  and  the  northwest  cor-
ner of  the  city,  we  noticed  foundations,  which  belonged  very  dis-
tinctly to  the  third  wall ;  consisting  of  large  hewn  blocks  of  stone,
of  a  character  corresponding  to  other  works  of  those  ages.  On  the
west  of  the  path,  and  running  up  the  hill  in  a  line  with  the  above,
were  other  similar  foundations  ;  and  still  further  up  were  stones
of  the  Uke  kind  apparently  displaced.  By  following  the  general
direction  of  these,  and  of  several  scarped  rocks  which  had  appa-
rently been  the  foundations  of  towers  or  the  like,  we  succeeded
in  tracing  the  wall  in  zigzags  in  a  westerly  course  for  much  of
the  way  to  the  top  of  the  high  ground.  Here  are  the  evident
substructions  of  towers  or  other  fortifications,  extending  for  some
distance  ;  and  from  them  to  the  northwest  corner  of  the  city,
the  foundation  of  the  ancient  wall  is  very  distinctly  visible  along
the  hard  surface  of  the  ground.  Within  the  corner  of  the  mod-
ern walls  is  also  a  trace  of  the  ancient  one  ;  to  which  we  shall
recur  again  presei^ly.'

The  next  da;^  April  28  th,  we  took  measurements  of  these
foimdations,  so  far  as  we  could  determine  the  various  points,  as
follows  ;  beginning  at  the  northwest  corner  of  the  city.

1.  N.  26°  "W.  700  feet.    To  the  foundations  of  a  large  tower.

2.  N.  20°  W.  650  Across  other  foundations  of  towers,  etc.

3.  N.  10°  E.  336  To  another  point ;  the  intervening  wall  not  traceable.

4.  N.  100  To  foundations,  etc.

5.  E.  400  To  the  path.

6.  N.  20°  E.  465  Along  the  path.

7.  N".  75°  E.  204  To  the  end  of  the  large  hewn  stones  first  seen.

In  the  courses  No.  5  and  6,  there  was  some  uncertainty.
Hewn  rocks  lay  to  the  west  in  a  line  with  the  course  No.  7.  We
therefore  returned  to  the  end  of  No.  4,  and  measured  new  courses
as  follows :

5.  N.  40°  E.  To  hewn  rocks,  apparently  the  foundation  of  a  tower.

6.  N.  75°  E.  300  feet.    To  the  path,  at  the  end  of  the  former  No.  6,

7.  F.  75°  E.  264  To  the  hewn  stones,  as  before.

Beyond  this  point  we  were  unable  to  trace  anything  ;  unless
perhaps  the  foundation  of  a  tower  hewn  in  the  rock  towards  the
northeast,  but  quite  uncertain.  A  like  search  along  the  brow  of
the  valley  of  J ehoshaphat,  was  also  in  vain.  Indeed,  the  level
ground  on  this  side  of  the  city  has  now  been  ploughed  over  for
ages,  and  the  stones  carried  off"  or  thrown  together  to  form  ter-
races ;  so  that  all  traces  of  former  foundations  have  nearly  disap-
peared. Many  ancient  cisterns  however  still  remain  ;  and  mar-
ble tesserae  are  often  picked  up.

Circumference  of  the  Ancient  Citij.    The  ancient  southern

'  See  below,  under  "  Walls  of  the  Middle  Ages."

1.  466,467

316

JERUSALEM. — AKTIQUITIES.

[SEcvn.

wall,  we  know,  included  the  whole  of  Zion  ;  the  eastern  wall  ran
probably  ^long  or  near  the  bottom  of  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat ;
while,  as  we  have  now  seen,  the  northern  wall  passed  some  forty  or
fifty  rods  north  of  the  present  city.  Hence  I  am  disposed  to  allow
full  credit  to  the  assertion  of  Josephus,  that  the  ancient  city  was
33  stadia  in  circumference,  equivalent  to  nearly  3^  geographical
miles.  The  present  circumference,  as  we  have  seen,  is  about  2|
geographical  miles  ;  but  the  extent  of  Zion  now  without  the  walls,
and  that  of  this  tract  upon  the  north,  are  sufficient  to  account
for  the  difference.

Walls  of  Adrian,  and  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The  new  city
of  -Sllia,  erected  by  Adrian  on  the  ruins  of  Jerusalem,  would  ap-
pear to  have  occupied  very  nearly  the  limits  of  the  present  city.
The  portion  of  Zion  which  now  lies  outside,  would  seem  then
also  to  have  been  excluded  ;  for  Eusebius  and  Cyrill  iu  the  fourth
century  speak  of  the  denunciation  of  the  prophet  as  having  been
fulfilled,  and  describe  Zion  as  "a  ploughed  fi(^."'  On  the  north
the  extent  of  the  second  wall  and  the  remains'f  the  ancient  gate
formed  an  appropriate  boundary  ;  the  wall  being  carried  across
to  the  brow  of  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  pn  the  east,  so  as  to  in-
clude the  hill  Bezetha,  instead  of  bending  southward,  as  an-
ciently, to  the  corner  of  Antonia.

The  walls  of  Adrian  appear  to  have  remained  xmtil  the  times
of  the  crusaders  ;  having  probably  been  more  or  less  repaired
and  strengthened  by  the  Muhammedans,  after  they  became  mas-
ters of  the  city.  About  A.  D.  697,  Arculfus  speaks  of  the  south-
ern wall  as  running  across  the  northern  part  of  Zion  ;^  and  when
the  crusaders  came,  they  also  found  the  greater  part  of  Zion  still
without  the  city.  When  they  invested  J erusalem,  the  Count  of
Toulouse  pitched  his  camp  on  this  side,  between  the  city  and
the  church  of  Zion,  which  was  a  bowshot  distance  from  the
wall.^

Thus  from  the  time  of  Adrian  onward,  even  to  our  day,  the
limits  of  the  Holy  City  appear  to  have  undergone  no  important
change.  But  the  walls  themselves  have  been  subjected  to  many
vicissitudes.  Towards  the  close  of  the  period  in  which  the  cru-
saders had  possession  of  the  city,  the  walls  in  several  parts  had
fallen  down  from  age  ;  and  on  this  account  a  subscription  was
entered  into  in  A.  D.  1178,  among  the  princes  of  Europe  both

'  Mic.  3,  12.    Ewseb.  Demonstr.  Evan-  Keyaiv  rrh  vvv  i.
opera  lorum  iirari  ct  scminari." — ("vrill.        '  Adaniiian.  ex  Arculf.  1.  1.
Uieros.  Catech.  16.  18.  p.  25:!.  ed.  Tout-       »  WUl.  Tyr.  8.  5.
t6e  :  'S.iu.  v  is  ayphs  h.poTj>ia(T^i)(ma{  •  vpo-

i.  407,  408

Sec.  VIL]  "WALLS  OF  ADKIAN.     LATER  WALLS.

317

secular  and  ecclesiastical,  in  order  to  rebuild  them  ;  they  engag-
ing to  pay  a  sum  of  money  annually  xmtil  the  work  should  he
completed.'  This  labour  was  probably  in  part  accomplished  ;  for
in  A.  D.  1187,  the  city  sustained  a  siege  of  several  weeks,  before
it  yielded  to  the  power  of  Saladin.  Some  years  later,  in  the  be-
ginning of  A.  D.  1192,  Jerusalem  being  threatened  with  a  siege
by  Richard  of  England,  Saladin  spent  the  whole  winter  in  strength-
ening the  fortifications.  New  walls  and  bulwarks  were  erected,
and  deep  trenches  cut.  The  Sultan  himself  rode  daily  around
the  works  to  encourage  the  labourers  ;  and  sometimes  brought
stones  to  them  upon  the  saddle  of  his  own  horse.  In  like  man-
ner the  high  officers  and  learned  men  took  part  in  the  work ;
which  was  completed  in  six  months,  and  had  all  the  firmness  and
solidity  of  a  rock.  Indeed  the  fortifications  were  now  stronger
than  ever  before  ;  and  the  population  of  the  city  increased
greatly.^

In  A.  D.  1219,  the  Sultan  Melek  el-Mu'adh-dhem  of  Damas-
cus, who  now  had  possession  of  Jerusalem,  ordered  aU  the  walls
and  towers  to  be  demolished,  except  the  citadel  and  the  enclo-
sure of  the  mosk ;  in  the  fear  lest  the  Franks  should  again  be-
come masters  of  the  city,  and  thus  find  it  a  place  of  strength.
This  order  occasioned  great  grief  to  the  Muslim  inhabitants,
great  numbers  of  whom  abandoned  the  city ;  but  it  was  carried
into  effect  during  that  and  the  following  year.'  In  this  defence-
less state  the  city  continued,  until  it  was  again  delivered  over
to  the  Christians  in  consequence  of  the  treaty  with  the  emperor
Frederick  II.  in  A.  D.  1229 ;  with  the  express  understanding,
according  to  Arabian  writers,  that  the  walls  should  not  be  re-
built.'* Yet  ten  years  later,  in  A.  D.  1239,  the  barons  and
knights  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  made  no  scruple  to  break
the  terms  of  the  truce  ;  and  began  anew  to  build  up  the  walls,
and  erected  a  strong  fortress  on  the  west  of  the  city.^  Their
progress  however  was  interrupted  by  an  assault  of  the  Emir
David  of  Kerak,  who  seized  the  city,  strangled  the  Christian
inhabitants,  and  threw  down  again  not  only  the  walls  and  the
fortress  just  erected,  but  also  dismantled  the  tower  of  David,
which  had  before  been  spared.*

Four  years  later,  in  A.  D.  1243,  Jerusalem  was  again  by
treaty  given  over  into  the  hands  of  the  Christians  without
reserve ;  to  the  great  indignation  of  all  good  Mussulmans,  who
now  beheld  their  sacred  places  again  profaned.^  The  fortifica-
tions appear  to  have  been  immediately  repaired  ;  for  they  are

'  Wm.  TjT.  21.  25,  "  propter  nimiam  ^  Wilken  ib.  VI.  pp.  237,  370.

vetastatem  cum  muri  jam  ex  parte  corruis-  Ibid.  pp.  478,  480.

sent,"  etc.  s  ibid.  p.  587.

'  Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kreuzzuge,  TV.  p.  ^  Ibid.  p.  596.

457.  VI.  p.  236.  _    '  Ibid.  p.  628.

Vol.  I.— 27*  i,  469,  470

318

JERUSALEM.  ANTIQUITIES.

[Sec.  Vn.

mentioned  as  existing  in  the  storm  of  the  city  by  the  wild  Kha-
rismian  hordes  in  the  next  year,  A.  D.  1244;'  shortly  after
which  the  city  reverted  for  the  last  time  into  the  hands  of
its  Muhammedan  masters,  with  whom  it  has  remained  nnto  the
present  day.*  Of  its  walls  we  have  no  further  account ;  except
the  fact  of  their  having  been  rebuilt,  as  already  described,  in
A.  D.  1542.^

These  modern  walls,  as  I  have  already  remarked,*  appear  to
occupy  the  site  of  the  former  ones  ;  a  slight  deviation  only  be-
ing ^aslble  around  the  northwest  corner  of  the  city.  Here  both
along  the  western  and  northern  sides,  the  remains  of  a  former
wall  may  be  traced  for  some  distance  on  the  outside,  evidently
belonging  to  the  times  of  the  crusades.  A  more  important  frag-
ment of  the  same  wall  lies  on  the  inside,  just  within  the  north-
west corner  of  the  present  walls,  not  far  from  the  Latin  convent.
It  consists  of  a  large  square  area  or  platform,  built  up  solidly  of
rough  stones,  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  in  height,  and  paved  on  the
top.  This  was  probably  the  former  northwest  bastion  of  the
city.'  At  the  southwest  corner  of  this  platform  are  the  remains
of  a  higher  square  tower,  built  of  small  unhewn  stones  cemented
together.  All  these  works  seem  to  have  been  erected  on  the
ruins  of  a  still  older  wall ;  for  at  the  southwest  corner  of  the
mass,  near  the  ground,  are  three  courses  of  large  bevelled  stones,
rough  hewn,  passing  into  the  mass  diagonally,  in  such  a  way  as
to  show  that  they  lay  here  before  the  tower  and  bastion  were
built.  These  are  probably  remains  of  the  ancient  third  wall ;  *
the  foundations  of  which  we  had  already  traced  from  near  this
point  on  the  outside  of  the  city.  These  ancient  stones  bore  from
Hippicus  N.  36°  W.

VIII.  ANCIENT  AND  LATEB  GATES.

Ancient  Gates.  In  regard  to  the  gates  of  ancient  Jerusalem,
there  exists  so  much  uncertainty,  that  it  would  seem  to  be  a  vain
undertaking  to  investigate  the  relative  positions  of  them  all.  Of
the  ten  or  twelve  gates  enumerated  in  the  book  of  jsohemiah
and  other  parts  of  the  Old  Testament,  Reland  remarks  with

'  Chorosini,  Chorosmini,  Chowaristnii;  Quaresmins,  II.  p.  41.   Le  Bruii's  Voyage

Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kreuzz.  VI.  pp.  C3I,  etc.  p.  298.    Kortens  Rei^e,  p.  216.
6.34.   Comment,  de  Bell.  cruc.  Hist.  p.  202.       *  See  above,  p.  261.

'  AV  ilken.  Gesch.  der  Kreuzz.  VI.  p.       '  Not  improbably  the  "  Tancred's  Tow-

646.  er "  "f  the  cnisadors,  which  according  to

'  After  these  historical  notices,  it  is  up-  William  of  Tyre  (8.  5)  was  at  the  north-
parent  that  the  story  can  he  only  a  fable,  west  angle  of  the  city.  The  present  tradi-
whicb  is  related  by  Quaresmius,  and  also  tion  has  transported  it  to  the  northeast
by  Le  lirim  and  by  Korte,  respecting  the  corner ;  see  Prokesch  Rcise  etc,  p.  80.
architect  employed  by  the  Sultan  to  Imild  "  Unless  we  take  them  as  having  per-
np  the  present  walls,  viz.  that  he  lost  his  haps  belonged  to  the  ancient  second  walL
head  for  leaving  out  Motint  Zion.  See.

i.  470,  471

Sec.  VII.]

ANCIENT  GATES.

319

truth,  that  it  is  uncertain,  first,  whether  they  all  were  situated
in  the  external  walls,  or  perhaps  lay  partly  between  the  different
quarters  of  the  city  itself,  as  is  common  even  now  in  oriental
cities ;  secondly,  whether  some  of  them  were  not  gates  leading
to  the  temple,  rather  than  out  of  the  city  ;  and  again,  whether
two  or  more  of  the  names  enumerated,  may  not  have  belonged  to
the  same  gate.'  Indeed,  it  is  certain,  that  there  must  have  been
gates  forming  a  passage  between  the  upper  and  lower  city  ;  and
we  know  that  there  were  several  on  the  western  side  of  the  area
of  the  temple.  There  must  also  probably  have  been  a  gate  and
way  leading  from  Akra  to  the  quarter  south  of  the  temple,  pass-
ing perhaps  beneath  the  bridge.  But  of  all  those  gates,  who
can  ascertain  the  names  ?

It  must  however  be  borne  in  mind,  that  all  the  accounts  of
the  Old  Testament  relate  to  the  city  only  as  bounded  on  the
north,  by  the  second  wall  of  Josephus.  There  can  of  course  be
no  allusion  to  any  of  the  gates  of  the  subsequent  third  wall.
Hence,  for  example,  the  suggestion  that  the  present  gate  of  St.
Stephen  may  correspond  to  the  ancient  Sheep  gate,  is  wholly  un-
tenable ;  since  apparently,  until  the  time  of  Agrippa,  no  waU  ex-
isted in  that  quarter.

The  chief  passages  relating  to  the  gates  and  walls  of  the  an-
cient city,  are  found  in  the  book  of  Nehemiah  ;  ^  and  these  are
occasionally  illustrated  by  other  incidental  notices.  It  is  obvious
in  the  account  of  the  rebuilding  of  the  walls  by  Nehemiah,  that
the  description  begins  at  the  Sheep  gate;  and  proceeds  first
northwards,  and  so  towards  the  left  around  the  city,  tUl  it  again
terminates  at  the  same  gate.^  This  gives  the  probable  order  in
which  the  ten  gates  there  mentioned  stood ;  and  the  other  two
named  elsewhere  can  be  easily  inserted.*  But  where  was  the
beginning,  or  what  the  intervals  between,  or  where  the  positions
of  the  several  gates  ?  These  are  questions  which  can  never  be
answ^ed,  except  in  a  general  and  unsatisfactory  manner.

Yet  in  regard  to  the  probable  position  of  a  few  of  the  gates,
we  may  arrive  at  some  more  definite  conclusion.  Thus  the  Foun-
tain gate,  without  much  doubt,  was  situated  near  to  Slloam  and
was  not  improbably  the  same  as  the  "  gate  between  two  walls,"  by

'  Reland  Pal.  p.  855.  Miphkad  ;  and  the  gate  of  Ephr^.im.  Then

"  Neh.  2,  13-15.  3,  1-32.  12,  31-40.  again  mention  is  made  of  the  Corner  gate,

Neh.  3,  1.  32.  2  Chr.  25,  23;  and  the  gate  of  Benjamin,

''  The  ten  gates  mentioned  in  Nehem.  Jer.  37,  13.    Tlie  latter  is  probaldy  the

c.  3,  are  the  following  :  Sheep  gate,  vs.  1,  same  as  the  gate  of  Ephraim. — Josephus

32  ;  Fish  gate,  vs.  3 ;  Old  gate,  vs.  6 ;  mentions  further  the  gate  called  Geunath,

Valley  gate,  vs.  13;  Dung  gate,  vs.  14;  near  the  tower  of  Hippicus  ;  and  that  of  the

Fountain  gate,  vs.  15  ;  Water  gate,  vs.  26 ;  Essenes  on  the  south  part  of  the  city  ;  B.

Horse  gate,  vs.  28 ;  East  gate,  vs.  29  ;  Gate  J.  5.  4.  2.
Miphkad,  vs.  31.    Also  in  12,  39,  we  find       '  Neh.  3,  15.  12,  37.
the  Prison  gate,  perhaps  the  same  with

i.  471-473

320

JERUSALEM.  ANTIQUITIES.

[SecVIL

which  king  Zedekiah  attempted  to  escape.*  There  was  also
doubtless  upon  the  northern  side  of  the  city  a  gate  leading  towards
the  territory  of  Benjamin  and  Ephraim  ;  and  this  would  natu-
rally take  the  name  of  those  tribes.  It  may  very  probably  have
been  the  ancient  gate,  which  we  found  upon  the  site  of  the  present
Damascus  gate.  The  notices  of  the  Valley  gate  and  Dung  gate
are  less  distinct.  In  passing  around  the  city  towards  the  left,
they  are  mentioned  before  reaching  the  Fountain  gate  or  Siloam;
and  are  therefore  to  be  sought  probably  on  the  western  or  south-
ern part  of  Zion.  Now  the  northwestern  corner  of  Zion  lies
just  at  the  bend  of  the  valley  of  Gihon  or  upper  part  of  Hinnom  ;
and  here  would  naturally  be,  and  so  far  as  we  know  always  has
been,  a  gate,  the  Gennath  of  Josephus.  Here  probably  stood  the
Valley  gate,  overagainst  the  Dragon  fountain  or  Gihon.*  We  must
look  then  for  the  Dung  gate  on  the  southern  part  of  Zion  ;  and
as  the  nature  of  the  ground  in  this  part  does  not  admit  of  frequent
gates,  there  seems  good  reason  for  regarding  it  as  identical  with
the  gate  of  the  Essenes  mentioned  by  Josephus.'

In  this  way  the  course  of  Nehemiah  during  his  night  excur-
sion becomes  plain.  Issuing  from  the  Valley  gate  on  the  west,  he
followed  down  the  valley  of  Hinnom  and  around  to  Siloam  and
the  King's  (Solomon's)  pool,  or  fountain  of  the  Virgin.  Beyond
this  the  narrow  valley  was  full  of  ruins,  so  that  there  was  "  no
place  for  the  beast  that  was  under  him  to  pass."  He  therefore
went  up  "  by  the  brook  "  on  foot,  and  then  returned  by  the  same
way.^

Further  than  this,  I  would  not  venture  to  advance.  The  no-
tices respecting  the  other  gates  are  too  indefinite  to  enable  us  to
determine  anything  more,  than  that  some  of  them  probably  did
not  belong  to  the  external  city  wall.  Thus  the  Horse  gate  evi-
dently lay  between  the  temple  and  the  royal  palace  and  the
Water  gate  was  apparently  on  the  western  part  of  the  area  of
the  temple.'

'  2  K.  25,  4.  *  NeL.  2,  13-15.

"  Neh.  2,  13.  »  2  K.  11,  16.    2  Chr.  23,  15.

^  Josephus  says  the  wall  ran  from  Hip-  "  Neh.  8,  1.  3.  Comp.  3,  26. — Of  the

picus  through  the  place  called  Bethso  to  Fish  gate,  Jerome  says  that  it  led  to  Dios-

the  gate  of  the  Essenes,  and  thence  on  the  polls  iind  Joppa,  and  of  course  was  on  the

south  to  Siloam ;  li.  J,  5.  i.  2.  This  would  west  or  northwest  side  of  the  city ;  but  this

fix  the  probable  site  of  this  gate  on  the  is  inconsistent  with  the  order  in  Nehemiah

southwest  part  of  Zion.    The  name  Bethso  c.  3.    See  Hieron.  in  Sophon.  1, 10. — The

(BrjAcci)  which  Josephus  does  not  translate,  diflTerent  hypotheses  respecting  the  ancient

seems  to  be  the  Hebrew  nxis  n^S, 'Dung  g-itcs  maybe  seen  in  Bachiene's  Paliist.

place  ; '  aud  not  improbably  marks  the  spot  '^'i-  'I-  §  94-107.    Faber's  Archaol.  der

where  the  filth  of  this  part  of  the  city  was  "eb.  I.  p.  336.    Hamelsveld  BibL  Geogr.

thrown  down  from  Zion  into  the  valley  P-  ^5  sq.    Roscnmueller  Bibl.  Geogr

below.    From  this  circumstauco,  the  ad-  I^-      P-  216.    Gesen.  Thcsaur.  Hcb.  art

jaccnt  gate  might  naturally  receive  the  Pi^g^  1460.
synonymous  name  noi^xri  "IS^  '  Dung
gate."

i.  473.  474

SecVH.]

GATES  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES.

321

Gates  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Of  the  gates  erected  by  Adrian
in  his  new  city  ^lia,  we  have  no  account.  As  however  the  walls
of  that  city  apparently  occupied  very  nearly  the  same  place  as
the  present  ones,  the  nature  of  the  ground  renders  it  almost  cer-
tain that  there  must  have  been,  as  now,  one  or  more  gates  on  the
west,  north,  and  east  ;  and  probably  also  on  the  south.

The  earliest  mention  of  gates  in  the  subsequent  ages,  is  by
Adamnanus,  from  the  information  of  Arculfus,  about  A.  D.  697.'
Then  follow  the  notices  of  both  Christian  and  Arabian  writers  in
the  times  of  the  crusades  and  later.

On  the  west  side  there  appears  to  have  been  formerly  two  gates.
The  first  and  principal  was  the  Porta  David,  Gate  of  David,
mentioned  by  Adamnanus,  and  also  by  the  historians  of  the  cru-
sades.^ At  that  period  it  was  called  by  the  Arabs  Bah  el-Mihrdh.^
This  corresponds  to  the  present  Yafa  gate  or  Bab  el-Khulil. —
The  second  was  the  Porta  Villa;  Fidlonis,  Gate  of  the  FuUer's
field,  of  Adamnanus.*  It  seems  to  have  been  the  same  which
Brocardus  calls  Porta  Judiciaria  in  the  wall  of  those  days,
somewhere  overagainst  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  leading
to  Silo  (Neby  Samwil)  and  Gibeon.  Probably  also  it  was  the
same  which  Arabian  writers  call  Serb.^  There  is  no  trace  of  it
in  the  present  waU. — There  would  seem  also  to  have  been  a  smaU
portal  contiguous  to  the  Armenian  convent  in  the  southwest.'

On  the  no7ih,  there  were  also  two  gates  ;  and  all  Christian
writers  speak  of  the  principal  one  in  those  days  as  being  called
the  gate  of  St.  Stephen.  There  can  be  no  question  on  this  point;
for  they  all,  from  Adamnanus  down  to  Ludolf  de  Suchem  (A.  D.
1336-50),  mention  this  gate  and  the  place  of  St.  Stephen's  mar-
tyrdom, as  upon  the  north  side  of  the  city.''  The  tradition  of  the
monks  on  this  point,  was  changed  apparently  about  that  time
and  before  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  ;  since  they  now,  as
we  have  seen,  caU  the  eastern  gate  of  the  city  by  this  name,  and
show  the  place  of  martyrdom  near  it.'  The  same  northern  gate
is  aLso  sometimes  called  the  gate  of  Ephraim,  in  reference  to  its

'  Lib.  L  1,  "  Portas  bis  temas,  quamm  '  Adamnanus  I.  c.  WilL  Tyr.  8.  5,  "por-

per  circnitum  civitatis  ordo  sic  ponitur.  ta  qnae  hodie  dicitur  Saru:ti  Stephani,  qnas

1.  Porta  David  ad  occidentalem  partem  ad  Aqnilonem  respicit."    9.  19.  Gesta

mentis  Sion.    2.  Porta  villa  Fullonis.    3.  Dei,  p.  572.     Marin.  Sannt.  3.  l-t.  8. —

Porta  S.  Stephani.     4.  Porta  Benjamin,  That  Stephen  was  here  stoned,  is  expressly

5.  Portula,  hoc  est  parvnla  porta,  ab  hac  said ;  IrV'ill.  Tvr.  8.  2,  "  a  Septentrione  .  .  .
per  gradns  ad  vallem  Josaphat  descenditur.  nbi  usque  hodie  locus  in  quo  protomartyr

6.  Porta  Teeuitis."  Stephanus  a  Judaeis  lapidatus."  Gesta
'  Gesta  Dei,  p.  572.  Will.  Tyr.  8.  5.  Dei,  p.  572.  Brocardus  c.  8.  fin.  Lnd.  do
'  Edrsi  about  A.  D.  1150,  ed.  Jaubert,    Suchem,  p.  83,  and  in  Reissb.  p.  846.— Yet

I.  p.  341.    Hist,  of  Jerusalem  in  Fundgr.  Sir  .J.  Mannde\-ille,  about  1325,  sp'feaks  of

des  Or.  II.  p.  129.  a  church  of  St.  Stephen,  where  he  was

*  So  called  from  Isa.  7,  3.  stoned,  as  already  existing  on  the  east  of
'  Brocardus,  c.  8.  fin.     Mejr  ed-Din  the  city  by  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat ;  p.

Hist,  of  Jerus.  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.  p.  129.    80.    The" tradition  had  begun  to  waver.

•  Mejr  ed-Din,  L  c,  *  St  Stephen's  gate  appears  on  the  east

i.  474-476

322

JERUSALEM — ANTIQUITIES.

probable  ancient  name.'  Arabic  writers  give  it  the  name  of  Bah
'  Anutd  eJ-Ghurob of  which  the  present  Arabic  form,  Bab  el-
'Amnd,  is  only  a  contraction. — Further  east  was  the  Porta
Benjaminis,  Gate  of  Benjamin/  corresponding  apparently  to  the
present  gate  of  Herod.

Towards  the  east  there  seem  to  have  been  also  at  least  two
gates.  The  northernmost,  corresponding  to  the  present  gate  of
St.  Stephen,  is  described  by  Adamnanus  as  a  "  small  portal  fi-om
which  steps  led  down  into  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat."  The
crusaders  called  it  the  gate  of  Jehoshaphat,  from  the  valley.*
Arabian  writers  mention  it  as  Bcih  el-  Usbat,  gate  of  the  Tribes,
another  form  of  the  modem  Arabic  name  Bab  es-Subat.'  The
four  lions  sculptured  over  the  present  gate  on  the  outside,  as
well  as  the  architecture,  show  that  this  structure  did  not  proceed
from  the  Muhammedans,  and  must  be  older  than  the  present
walls.  Not  improbably  the  earlier  "  small  portal "  on  this  spot
was  rebuilt  on  a  larger  scale  and  thus  ornamented  by  the  Franks,
when  they  built  up  the  walls  of  the  city,  either  about  A.  D.  1178
or  in  A.  D.  1239.^ — The  other  gate  on  this  side  is  the  famous
Golden  gate,  Porta  aurea,  in  the  eastern  wall  of  the  Haram  esh-
Sherif  ;  now  called  by  the  Arabs  Bab  ed-Dahariyeh,  but  formerly
named  by  the  Arabian  writers  Bab  er-RoTiraeh,  Gate  of  Mercy.^
The  name  Porta  aiirea  as  apphed  to  this  gate,  I  have  not  been
able  to  trace  back  further  than  to  the  historians  of  the  crusades.'
It  probably  comes  from  some  supposed  connection  with  one  of  the
ancient  gates  of  the  temple,  which  are  said  to  have  been  covered
with  gold.'  We  have  seen  above,  that  it  is  apparently  of  Eoman
origin.'"  This  gate  was  already  closed  up  in  the  times  of  the  cru-

side  of  the  city,  as  at  present,  in  the  jour-
nals of  Steph.  von  Gnmpenberg,  A.  D.
1W9  :  Tucher,  A.  D.  U79  ;  Breydenbach
and  F.  Fabri,  D.  1483,  etc.  See  Reissb.
des  h.  Landes,  pp.  444,  665,  111,  252.—
Qnaresmius  gravely  undertakes  to  remove
the  idea  of  any  change  of  place,  by  suppos-
ing that  the  present  gate  formerly  faced
towards  the  north  !  Elucid.  IT.  p.  295.

'  Brocardus  c.  8,  fin.  Marinus  Sanutus
calls  it,  probably  erroneously,  the  gate  of
Benjamin  ;  de  Secret.  3.  14.  8.

^  Edrisi  ed.  Jaubert,  p.  341.  Hist,  of
Jems,  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.  p.  129.

'  Adamnanus,  as  above.  Brocardus  c.
8,  fin.  The  latter  writer  calls  it  also
Porta  AnguH.  Comp.  De  Saligrnaco,
Tom.  \'1II.  c.  5.  It  is  not  mentioned  by
Edrisi.  Mejr  ed-Din  in  his  Hist  of  Jeru-
salem speaks  here  of  two  gates  ;  Fundgr.
des  Orients,  II.  p.  129.

*  WiU.  TjT.  11.  1.  Gesta  Dei,  p.  572.
B«Dj.  of  Tudela  ed.  Asher,  I.  pp.  70,  71.

i.  47G,  477

— Brocardus  speaks  of  another  gate  further
north,  which  he  calls  the  Dung  gate ;  c.  8,
fin.

'  Edrisi  ed.  Jaubert,  I.  p.  344.  Hist,
of  Jems,  in  Fnndtrr.  des  Or.  II.  p.  129.

'  See  above,  pp.  316,  317.

'  Edrisi  ed.  Jaubert,  I.  pp.  341,  344.
Hist,  of  Jems,  in  Fundgr.  des  Or.  II.  f .  96.

'  Will.  Tyr.  8.  3.  Gesta  Dei,  p.  572.—
Quaresmius  professes  to  quote  Jerome  for
the  name,  but  gives  no  reference  whatever ;
Elucid.  n.  p.  336.  The  name  Porta  au-
rm  occurs  indeed  in  Hegesippns  <{■'  Exridio
H'leros.  lib.  5.  c.  42,  in  the  IJililioth.  Max.
Patrmn,  Tom.  V.  p.  1203.  But  the  au-
thor is  there  obviously  speaking  of  a  gate
of  the  ancient  interior  temple  or  fane  it-
self.

•  Joseph.  B.  J.  5.  5.  3.  It  may  per-
haps have  been  regarded  as  the  ancient
Porta  orieutalis  ;  see  Lightfoot  Opp.  I.  p.
555  sq.

>°  See  above,  p.  296,

LATEE  GATES.  WATER.

323

sades  ;  but  was  thrown  open  once  a  rear  on  Palm  Sunday,  in  cel-
ebration of  our  Lord's  supposed  triumphal  entry  through  it  to
the  temple.*  It  remains  still  walled  up  ;  because  (according  to
the  Franks)  the  Muhammedans  believe  that  a  king  is  to  enter  by
it,  who  will  take  possession  of  tbe  city  and  become  Lord  of  the
whole  earth.-  But  Muhammedan  writers  describe  it  as  having
been  closed  up  for  the  security  of  the  city  and  sanctuary ;  because
it  is  on  the  side  towards  the  desert,  and  there  would  be  no  great
advantage  in  having  it  open.  Some  say  it  was  walled  up  by
Omar  ;  and  will  not  be  opened  again  until  the  coming  of  Christ.^

On  the  south  side  were  likewise  two  gates.  Of  the  eastern-
most, the  present  Dung  gate  of  the  Franks.  I  find  no  mention
earlier  than  Brocardus.  ab^i-ut  A.  D.  12S3.  who  regards  it  as  the
ancient  Water  gate.*  It  may  have  been  the  Poi-ta  Tecuitis  of
Adamnanus.  An  Arabian  writer  speaks  of  it  in  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury as  the  Bab  el-Mugharibeh,  its  present  native  name.' — Fur-
ther west,  between  the  eastern  brow  of  Zion  and  the  Porta  David
(Yiifa  gate),  there  was  according  to  Adamnanus.  no  gate  in  his
day.*  Yet  the  crusaders  foimd  one  here,  which  they  called  the
gate  of  Zion,  corresjionding  to  that  which  now  bears  the  same
name.'  It  is  also  called  by  Arabian  writers.  Bab  Sahyiin
though  the  present  native  usage  gives  it  the  ruime  of  Davii'

Thus  it  appears,  that  betbre  the  rebuilding  of  the  walls  of  Je-
rusalem by  Suleiman  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  principal  gates
of  the  city  were  much  the  same  as  at  the  present  day.

IX.     SUPPLY  OF  WATEB.

Jerusalem  lies  in  the  midst  of  a  rocky  limestone  region,
throughout  which  foimtains  and  wells  are  comparatively  rare.  In
the  city  itself,  little  if  any  Hviog  water  is  known  :  and  in  its  im-
mediate vicinity  are  only  the  three  small  fountains  along  the
lower  part  of  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  Tet  with  aU  these  dis-
advantages of  its  position,  the  Holy  City  would  appear  always  to
have  had  a  fall  supply  of  water  for  its  inhabitants,  both  iri  ancient
and  in  modem  times.  In  the  numereus  sieges  to  which  in  all
ages  it  has  been  exp^^sed.  we  nowhere  read  of  any  want  of  water
within  the  city  :  while  the  besiegers  have  often  suffered  severely,
and  have  been  compelled  to  bring  water  from  a  great  distance.
During  the  siege  by  Titus,  when  the  Jews,  pressed  with  famine,

'  Gesa  Dei,  p.  572.  ssiv.    Edtia  ed,       '  WiH  Ttt.  &  6,  19.    Gesta  Dei,  p.

Jaaberc  p.  541.  572.

'  Qnaresmins  IL  p.  34a  '  Edrisi  ed.  Janbert,  p.  341.    Hist,  of

'  Hist,  of  Jernsdlein  in  Fondgr.  des   Jems.  L  c  p.  129.

Orients,  IL  p  9&  'In  Wilken's  Geschichte  der  Kmizi.

*  Brocardos  c  8,  fin.  HL  iL  p.  315,  mention  is  made  of  a  gate
'  Hist,  of  Jems.  L  e.  p.  129.  of  St.  Lazartis  in  the  southern  wall  :"bnt

*  Adams,  ex.  AiciilC  1 .  L  of  this  I  hare  found  no  other  nodoe.

L  477-479

324

JERUSALEM, — ANTIQUITIES.

[SecVIL

had  recourse  to  the  most  horrible  expedients,  and  thousands
daily  died  of  hunger,  there  is  no  hint  that  thirst  was  added  to
their  other  sufferings. '  Yet  when  Antiochus  Pius  had  previously
besieged  the  city,  his  operations  were  at  first  delayed  for  want  of
water  ;  and  Josephus  regards  it  as  the  result  of  a  divine  inter-
position, that  the  Eomans  under  Titus  were  not  in  like  manner
straitened.^  So  too  in  the  siege  by  the  crusaders,  A.  D.  1099,  the
inhabitants  were  well  supplied  ;  while  the  besiegers  were  driven
to  the  greatest  straits  by  thirst  under  the  burning  sun  of  June.^
Thus  in  every  age  the  truth  of  Strabo's  brief  description  has  been
manifest :  "  Jerusalem,  a  rocky  well-enclosed  fortress  ;  within
well-watered,  without  wholly  dry."^

It  becomes  therefore  a  matter  of  some  historical  importance,
as  well  as  interest,  to  ascertain  as  far  as  possible,  how  this  sup-
ply of  water  has  been  furnished  to  the  city.  To  this  inquiry  I
address  myself  here,  in  giving  an  account  of  the  Cisterns,  the  Ee-
servoirs,  and  the  Fountains,  in  and  around  the  city,  with  some
notices  of  the  aqueduct  from  Solomon's  pools.

Cisterns.  The  main  dependence  of  Jerusalem  for  water  at
the  present  day  is  on  its  cisterns  ;  and  this  has  probably  always
been  the  case.  I  have  already  spoken  of  the  immense  cisterns
now  and  anciently  existing  within  the  area  of  the  temple  ;  sup-
plied partly  from  rain  water,  and  j^artly  by  the  aqueduct.^
These  of  themselves,  in  case  of  a  siege,  would  ftirnish  a  tolerable
supply.  But  in  addition  to  these,  almost  every  private  house  in
Jerusalem,  of  any  size,  is  understood  to  have  at  least  one  or  more
cisterns,  excavated  in  the  soft  limestone  rock  on  which  the  city
is  built.  The  house  of  Mr  Lanneau,  in  which  we  resided,  had  no
less  than  four  cisterns  ;  and  as  these  are  but  a  specimen  of  the
manner  in  which  all  the  better  class  of  houses  are  supplied,  I  sub-
join here  the  dimensions  :

Lenffth.  Breadth.  Depth.

I.  15  Feet.  8  Feet,  12  Feet.

II.  8  4  15
,      III.    10                  10  15

IV.    30  30  20

This  last  is  enormously  large,  and  the  numbers  given  are  the

'  Jos.  B.  J.  5.  12.  3.    ib.  .5.  13.  4,  7.  says,  were  nbundaiitly  supplied,  both  with

'  Jos.  Ant.  13.  8.  2.    B.  J.  5.  9.  4.  p.  rain  water  and  that  brought  by  aqueducts

350.  cd.  Haverc.  from  abroad  ;  in  which  way  two  immense

'  Albert.  Aq.  6.  22,  in  Gesta  Dei,  p.  resenoirs  (maximce  quantitatis)  near  tlio

280.  Will.  Tyr.  8.  7,  "  Interca  siti  fatiga-  enclosure  of  the  temple  were  supplied  ;  8.

batur  exercitus  vebementissima. — Auficbat  4  fin.    Comp.  also  8.  24.

deniquo  sitis  importunitatem,  et  angoris       *  Strabo's  still  briefer  text  is  as  follows :

geminabat  molestiam,  aistatis  iiiclementia  10.  '2.  iO,  ra'UpoffiiKvfia — Jjv  yiip  wfTpwSfs

et  ardcns  Junius,"  etc.    The  distress  of  tiitpKh  tpvfia  •  ivrhs  ixtv  (tivSpov,  iKrhs  Si

the  host  appears  to  have  been  very  great.  Trovrt Auj  Sffirip6v.

On  the  other  hand,  the  inhabitants,  he       '  See  abovo,  p.  301.

i.  479.  4

Sbt,  vn.]

CISTERXS.

325

least  estimate.  The  cisterns  Lave  usually  merely  a  roimd  open-
ing at  the  top,  sometimes  built  up  with  stonework  above,  and
furnished  with  a  curb  and  a  wheel  tbr  the  bucket  ;  so  that  they
have  externally  much  the  appearance  of  an  ordinary  well.  The
water  is  conducted  into  them  from  the  roofs  of  the  houses  during
the  rainy  season  ;  and,  with  proper  care,  remains  pure  and  sweet
during  the  whole  summer  and  autumn. — In  this  manner  most  of
the  larger  houses  and  the  public  buildings  are  supplied.  The
Latin  convent  in  particular  is  said  to  be  amply  furnished  ;  and
in  seasons  of  drought  is  able  to  deal  out  a  sufficiency  for  all  the
Christian  inhabitants  of  the  city.'

Most  of  these  cisterns  have  undoubtedly  come  down  from
ancient  times  ;  and  their  immense  extent  fiirnish'&s  a  full  solution
of  the  question,  as  to  the  supply  of  water  for  the  city.  Under
the  disadvantages  of  its  position  in  this  respect,  Jerusalem  must
necessarily  have  always  been  dependent  on  its  cisterns  f  and  a
city  which  thus  annually  laid  in  its  supply  for  seven  or  eight
months,  could  never  be  overtaken  by  a  want  of  water  duiiag  a
siege.  Xor  is  this  a  trait  pecuhar  to  the  Holy  City ;  for  the
case  is  the  same  throughout  aU  the  hill  coimtrv  of  Judah  and
Benjamin.  Fountains  and  streams  are  few,  as  compared  with
Europe  and  America  ;  and  the  inhabitants  therefore  collect
water  during  the  rainy  season  in  tanks  and  cisterns  in  the  cities,
in  the  fields,  and  along  the  high  roads,  for  the  sustenance  of
themselves  and  of  their  flocks  and  herds,  and  for  the  comfort  of
the  passing  traveller.^  Many,  if  not  the  most  of  these  are  ob-
viously antique ;  and  they  exist  not  unfrequently  along  the
ancient  roads  which  are  now  deserted.  Thus  on  the  long  for-
gotten way  from  Jericho  to  Bethel,  broken  cisterns  "  of  high
antiquity  are  found  at  regidar  intervals. — That  Jerusalem  was
thus  actually  supphed  of  old  with  water,  is  apparent  also  iiom
the  numerous  remains  of  ancient  cisterns  still  existing  in  the
tract  north  of  the  city,  which  was  once  enclosed  within  the  walls.

A  few  wells  are  occasionally  fotmd,  both  in  and  around  the
city ;  but  they  are  either  dry,  or  the  water  is  low  and  bad.  One
of  these  has  been  already  mentioned  near  the  tombs  in  the  val-
ley of  Jehoshaphat ;  and  another  near  the  wall  on  mount  Zion.*

'  According  to  Scholz,  the  Latin  con-  colligere,  et  per  tottim  annum  ad  ilsus  ne-

rent  Las  28  cisterns ;  Reise.  p.  197.    So  cessarios  conservare."    So  too  Jac.  de  Vi-

also  Salzbacher,  Erinneningen  II.  p.  95.  triaco,  c  55.    Benjamin  of  Tndela,  ed,

'  Such  was  also  the  case  during  the  Asher,  p.  71.
times  of  the  crusades.    Will.  Tyr.  8.  4,       'So  Jerome,  ^ting  at  Betlilehem,

"  Est  autem  locus  in  quo  civitas  sita  est,  savs  :  "  In  his  enim  locis  in  qnibus  nunc

aridus  et  inaquosus,  rivos,  fontes  ac  flu-  degimns,  pneter  parvos  fontes  omnes  cis-

mina  non  habens  penitus,  cujns  habitatores  temamm  aquae  sunt ;  et  si  imbres  divina

aquis  tantum  utuntur  plurialibns.    Mensi-  ira  suspenderit,  majussitis  qnam  famis  pe-

bus  enim  hjbemis  in  cistemis  quas  in  civi-  riculum  est."    Comm.  in  Amos  4,  7.
Ute  habent  plurimas,  imbres  solent  sibi       '  See  above,  pp.  236,  238.

Vol..  I.— 28  L  m,  482

326

JERUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[SecVIL

There  is  also  a  well  of  bad  water  just  out  of  the  Damascus  gate,
not  used  for  drinldng ;  and  another,  somewhat  better,  just  by
the  tombs  of  the  Kings.  The  reason  why  so  few  wells  exist,  is
doubtless  to  be  referred  to  the  small  quantity  and  bad  quality
of  the  water  thus  obtained.

But  although  the  cisterns  of  Jerusalem  thus  afford  appar-
ently an  abundant  supply,  yet  as  a  matter  of  convenience  and
luxury,  water  is  brought  during  the  summer  in  considerable
quantity  from  fountains  at  a  distance  from  the  city.  The  prin-
cipal of  these  is  'Ain  Yalo,  a  small  fountain  in  Wady  el-Werd,
several  miles  southwest  of  Jerusalem.  The  water  is  transported
in  sldns,  on  the  backs  of  asses  and  mules ;  and  is  sold  for  a  trifle
for  drinking,  to  those  who  prefer  it  to  rain  water.  It  was  even
said,  that  one  of  the  baths  is  supphed  with  water  in  this  way
during  a  part  of  the  season.

Reservoirs.  The  same  causes  which  led  the  inhabitants  of
Judca  to  excavate  cisterns,  induced  them  also  to  build,  in  and
around  most  of  their  cities,  large  open  reservoirs  for  more  public
use.  Such  tanks  are  found  at  Hebron,  Bethel,  Gibeon,  Bireb,
and  various  other  places  ;  sometimes  still  in  use,  as  at  Hebron,
but  more  commonly  in  ruins.  They  are  built  up  mostly  of  mas-
sive stones ;  and  are  situated  chiefly  in  valleys  where  the  rains
of  winter  could  be  easily  conducted  into  them.  These  reservoirs
we  learned  to  consider  as  one  of  the  least  doubtful  vestiges  of
antiquity  in  all  Palestine  ;  for  among  the  present  race  of  inhab-
itants such  works  are  utterly  unknown.

With  such  reservoirs  Jerusalem  was  abundantly  supplied  ;
to  say  nothing  of  the  immense  pools  of  Solomon  beyond  Bethle-
hem, which  no  doubt  were  constructed  for  the  benefit  of  the
Holy  City.  In  describing  these  tanks  or  pools,  I  begin  with
those  lying  without  the  walls  on  the  west  side  of  the  city.  Here
are  two  very  large  reservoirs,  one  some  distance  below  the  other
in  the  valley  of  Gihon  or  Hinnom,  and  both  unquestionably  of
high  antiquity.  Now  as  the  prophet  Isaiah  speaks  of  an  upper
and  lower  pool,  the  former  of  which  at  least  lay  apparently  on
this  side  of  the  city,  I  venture  to  apply  these  names  to  the  two
reservoirs  in  question.'

Upper  Pool.  This  is  commonly  called  by  the  monks  Gihon,
and  by  the  natives  Birlcet  el-MamiUa.^  It  lies  in  the  basin
forming  the  head  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom  or  Gihon,  about  700
yards  W.  N.  W.  from  the  Yfifa  gate.    Our  first  visit  to  it  has

Is.  7,  3.    36,  2.    2  Kings  18,  17. —  S70,  mentions  in  this  quarter  a  church  of

Is.  22,  9.  St.  Maniilhi,  in  which  were  prcscr\'cd  the

'  Quaresmius  II.  p.  715.  Hist,  of  Jerus.  bodies  of  many  martyrs  slain  by  the  Sara-

in  Fund^.  des  Or.  II.  p.  131.    The  era-  cons.    Hence  perhaps  the  Ariibic  name  of

giuicrs  called  it  Lni-mi  Pntrinrcho! ;  Will,  the  reservoir.    Bernh.  Mon.  de  Locis  Sauct.

Tyr.  8.  2 — The  monk  Beriihard  in  A.  I).  IC.    See  too  Kutych.  Anna!  IL  p.  213.

i.  482,  483

Sec.  Vn.]

RESERVOIRS.

327

already  been  described,  and  the  small  rude  conduit  mentioned,
which'carries  the  vrater  from  it  down  to  the  vicinity  of  the  Ysifa
gate  and  so  to  the  pool  of  Hezekiah  within  the  city.'  The  sides
are  built  up  with  hewn  stones  laid  in  cement,  with  steps  at  the
comers  by  which  to  descend  into  it.  The  bottom  is  level  The
dimensions  are  as  follows :

Length  from  east  to  west  .  .  .  316  Engl.  feet.

Breadth  at  the  west  end  .  .  .  200

"      at  the  east  end  .  .  .  218

Depth  at  each  end       .  .  .  .  18

"SVe  noticed  no  water-course  or  other  visible  means  by  which
water  is  now  brought  into  the  reservoir ;  *  but  it  would  seem  to
be  filled  in  the  rainy  season  by  the  waters  which  flow  from  the
higher  ground  round  about.  Or  rather,  such  is  its  present  state
of  disrepair,  that  it  probably  never  becomes  fuil ;  and  the  small
quantity  of  water  which  it  at  first  retains,  soon  runs  ofi"  and
leaves  it  dry.

The  upper  pool  of  the  Old  Testament  was  situated  near  the
highway  of  the  Fuller's  field."  and  had  a  trench  or  conduit.'
This  indeed  is  indefinite ;  but  we  are  also  told  that  there  was
"  an  upper  out-flow  of  the  waters  of  Gihon  "  on  the  west  of  the
city.*  Taking  these  two  circumstances  together,  the  upper  pool
and  the  upper  out-flow  or  water-course  of  Gihon,  it  seems  most
probable  that  this  reservoir  is  intended ;  and  that  it  anciently
had  some  connection  with  the  four  tain  of  Gihon  in  the  neigh-
bourhood. This  conclusion  is  strengthened  by  the  fact,  that
nowhere  else  in  or  around  Jerusalem  are  there  traces  of  other
ancient  reservoirs,  to  which  the  names  of  the  upper  and  lower
pool  can  be  appKed  with  any  like  degree  of  probability.'

Loicer  Pool.  This  name  is  mentioned  only  by  Isaiah  ;  and
that  without  any  hint  of  its  locahty.^  I  venture  to  give  it  to
the  large  and  broken  reservoir  lower  down  on  the  west  side  of  the
city,  called  by  the  Arabs  Birl-et  es-SuItdn.  Monkish  tradition
is  here  somewhat  at  fault ;  some  calling  it  the  pool  of  Bersaba ;
others  of  Bathsheba  ;'  while  others  again  give  the  latter  name
to  a  small  tank  just  within  the  Tafa  gate.  The  accounts  of  travel-
lers exhibit  a  like  diversity.    The  probable  identity  of  this  tank

'  See  above,  p.  238.  in  the  subm-bs  of  tbe  city  ;  Onom.  art.

'  Quaresinias  says  there  are  two  chan-  Aatr  FuUouU.
nels,   perbaps  subterranean,    by   which  2  Chr.  32.  30.    I  follow  here  the  He-
water  flows  into  the  reservoir;  one  on  the  brew,  which  the  English  version  does  not
north,  and  the  other  on  the  south  side,  fallv  express.

Elncid.  n.  p.  716.  But  nothing  of  the  ^  Pococke  also  assumes  thesn  as  the  Up-
kind  is  seen  at  present.  per  and  Lower  pool :  Descr.  of  the  Easl^

'  Is.  7,  3.    36,  2.    2  Kings  18,  17.  IL  L  pp.  25,  26.

Of  the  Fuller's  field,  Eusebius  and  Jerome  *  Is.  22,  9.

merely  say,  that  it  was  shown  in  their  day  ■  Qnaresmius  Elucidat  11.  p.  596  sq.

L  48-1.485

328

JERUSALEM.- — ANTIQUITIES.

[SEcvn.

with  the  lower  pool  of  Isaiah,  rests  upon  its  relative  position  in
respect  to  the  upper  pool  just  described  ;  and  upon  the  fact,
that  no  other  reservoir  is  anywhere  to  be  found,  to  which  this
scriptural  name  can  so  well  be  applied.

Tliis  reservoir  is  situated  in  the  vaUey  of  Hinnom  or  Gihon,
southward  from  the  Yfifa  gate.  Its  northern  end  is  nearly  upon
a  line  with  the  present  southern  wall  of  the  city,  which  here  lies
about  100  feet  above  it.  The  pool  was  formed  by  throwing
strong  walls  across  the  bottom  of  the  valley  ;  between  which  the
earth  was  whoUy  removed  ;  so  that  the  rocky  sides  of  the  valley  are
left  shelving  down  irregularly,  and  form  a  narrow  channel  along
the  middle.  The  wall  at  the  south  end  is  thick  and  strong  like
a  dam  or  causeway  ;  those  along  the  sides  are  of  course  compar-
atively low  and  much  broken  away  ;  that  on  the  north  is  also  in
part  thrown  down.  A  road  crosses  on  the  causeway  at  the  southern
end  ;  along  which  are  fountains  erected  by  the  Muslims,  and  once
fed  from  the  aqueduct  which  passes  very  near.  They  were  now
dry.    The  following  are  the  measurements  of  this  reservoir  :

Course  of  the  two  sides  S.  10°  "W.

"     of  the  north  end,  taken  from  the  east    .       W.  10°  N.

"     of  the  south  end,        do.       .       .       .  "W.
Length  along  the  middle           ....       592  Engl.  feet.
Breadth  at  the  north  end  245

"      at  the  south  end  275

Depth  at  north  end,  including  about  9  feet  of  rubbish  35

"  at  south  end,  including  about  3  feet  of  rubbish  42

This  reservoir  was  probably  filled  from  the  rains,  and  from  the
superfluous  waters  of  the  upper  pool.  It  lies  directly  in  the  natu-
ral channel  by  which  the  latter  would  flow  off ;  but  is  now  in
ruins.

Besides  these  two  large  reservoirs,  we  find  further  without
the  walls,  the  comparatively  small  and  unimportant  tank  just
north  of  St.  Stephen's  gate,  called  by  the  natives  Birket  el-Eam-
mdm  Sitty  Meryam.  It  seems  to  have  been  little  regarded  by
the  monks,  and  we  did  not  find  that  it  had  among  the  Franks  a
name  ;  though  some,  as  we  Avere  told,  hold  it  to  be  the  pool  of  Be-
thesda.'  There  is  also  the  small  cistern-like  tank  in  the  trench
near  the  gate  of  Herod  on  the  northeast  part  of  the  city.^  My
impression  is,  that  both  these  receptacles  are  filled  only  by  the
rain  water,  which  flows  in  winter  from  the  liigher  ground  on  the
west  and  northwest  into  and  along  the  trench.^  They  have  no
appearance  of  great  antiquity. — The  pool  of  Siloam,  also  without
the  walls,  will  be  described  in  another  place.

'  See  p.  233,  above.  then  carried  from  the  reservoir  outside  of

'  See  p.  234,  above.  St.  Stephen's  gate  to  a  bath  witliin  the  city

•  Scliolz  in  1821  says,  thiit  water  was    Keise,  p.  271.    The  same  is  true  now.
i.  485,  48G

Sb&  YTL]

SESKBTOIRS.

329

"Within  the  walls  of  the  city  there  are  three  reservoirs  ;  two
of  which  are  of  laige  size.

Poo?  of  Batkdieha.  The  smallest  of  the  reseiroiis,  which
indeed  is  rather  a  mere  pit,  lies  just  within  the  Yi£si  gate,  on
tiie  north  side  of  the  street,  overagainst  the  castle.  It  is  now
(»lled  br  the  Franks  the  pool  or  bath  of  Bathsheba,  on  the  sup-
position that  Darid  dwelt  in  the  castle  opposite  ;  though  it  has
long  had  to  dispute  its  claim  to  this  appellation  with  the  large
lower  pool  outside.'  We  did  not  hear  of  anj  Arabic  name.  It
was  now  dry,  nor  did  we  learn  that  it  ever  becomes  fulL*

Pod  of  Sezetiak.  The  reservoir  now  usually  so  called,  lies
some  distance  northeastward  of  the  Tafa  gate,  just  west  of  the
street  that  leads  north  to  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  A
line  of  houses  omlj  separates  it  hom  this  street ;  and  as  it  is  not
&r  fiom  ibe  said  church,  it  was  formerly  called  by  the  monks
the  pool  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.*  The  natives  now  call  it  Biriet
el-Hammam.  {torn  the  circumstance  tiiat  its  waters  axe  used  to
supply  a  bath  in  the  vicinity.  Its  sdes  ran  towards  the  c^di:-
nal  points.  Its  breadth  at  the  north  end  is  144  feet ;  its  length
on  the  esist  side  about  240  feet,  thou^  the  adjacent  houses  here
prevented  any  very  exact  measurement.  The  depth  is  not  great.
The  bottom  is  rock,  levelled  and  covered  with  cement ;  and  fre-  As:  b  coneeL— Ifr  Wolcott  scjrs :
WUfthe  sne  to  l^saiKasthe  "  Tke  famr  piwo]  is  coracc ;  dam  is
«&cr ;  Aft.  Cdk.  imiiiiii;;  la^      aaeaeat  aboat  is."  ISk-

'  Maro  calhit  »a».«iilg^  jit,  Imm^   fioA.  Sac.  I«43.  31

~    '        ...       -  -      '  niiiiii  IT  fijiafJif  fja  ■■  IT

Ik  717.

L4B6-I88

330

JEEUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[SkcVIL

towards  the  nortli.  This  wall,  he  said,  was  ten  or  twelve  feet
thick,  laid  in  cement,  and  also  plastered  over  on  the  south  side
with  cement,  like  the  wall  of  a  reservoir.  The  bottom  below  was
rock,  which  was  also  covered  towards  the  south  with  a  coating
of  small  stones  and  cement  several  inches  thick,  hke  the  bottom
of  the  present  pool.  In  laying  the  foundations  of  another  part
of  the  convent,  he  had  also  dug  down  along  a  part  of  the  present
northern  wall  of  the  pool,  which  he  found  to  be  built  of  small
stones  ;  so  small  indeed  that  he  had  been  compelled  to  remove
them  and  build  up  the  wall  anew.  All  these  circumstances  led
him  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  pool  of  Hezekiah  once  extended
further  north,  as  far  as  to  the  old  wall  above  described.  To  this
conclusion  we  could  only  assent  ;  for  the  stones  thus  dug  out
were  still  lying  around,  and  bore  every  mark  of  antiquity.  They
were  not  indeed  large,  Hke  those  of  the  temple  walls  ;  but  were
bevelled,  and  obviously  of  ancient  workmanship.

We  are  told  of  king  Hezekiah,  that  he  "  made  a  pool  and  a
conduit,  and  brought  water  into  the  city;"  and  also  that  "he
stopped  the  upper  water-course  of  Gihon,  and  brought  it  straight
down  to  the  west  side  of  the  city  of  David."'  From  this  lan-
guage we  can  only  infer,  that  Hezekiah  constructed  a  pool  within
the  city  on  its  western  part.  To  such  a  pool,  the  present  reser-
voir, which  is  doubtless  an  ancient  work,  entirely  corresponds  ;
and  it  is  also  fed  in  a  similar  manner.  The  pool  must  of  course
have  been  situated  within  the  second  wall  of  Josephus  ;  and  its
present  position  serves  therefore  to  determine  in  part  the  proba-
ble course  of  that  wall.^  It  is,  doubtless,  also  the  pool  Amyg-
dalon  of  Josephus,  about  thirty  cubits  distant  from  the  monu-
ment of  the  highpriest  John.^

Bethesda.  Sheep  Fool.  In  the  Gospel  of  John  we  are
informed,  that  "  there  was  at  Jerusalem,  by  the  Sheep  [gate],
a  pool,  which  was  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Bethesda,  having
five  porches."^  This  pool  the  monks  and  many  travellers  have
chosen  to  find  in  the  deep  reservoir  or  trench  on  the  north  side
of  the  area  of  the  great  mosk.  They  give  to  it  the  different  names
of  Bethesda  and  the  Sheep  pool ;  and  in  the  two  long  vaults  at
its  southwest  .corner,  they  profess  to  find  two  of  the  five  ancient
porches.'  The  natives  call  it  Birlcet  IsraU.  There  is  not  the
slightest  evidence  that  can  identify  it  with  the  Bethesda  of  the
New  Testament.  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  and  also  the /fm.  Hieros.
do  indeed  speak  of  a  Piscina  Prohatica  shown  in  their  day  as

'  2  KiiKi-s  20,  20.  2  Chr.  32, 30.  Comp.  text  is  to  bo  supplied  by  nvK-q  r/atc,  from

also  Sira(;.''48,  17.  Nob.  8,1.  Sco  Bos  Kllips.  Grace;,  nrt.  iruXrj.

"  Sec  above,  p.  312.  Lij^btfoot  0pp.  II.  p.  587.   Comp.  next

'  KoAu^a^^^po  'KniylaKov,  Jos.  B.  J.  5.  page,  Note  1.
11.  4.  '  (Juaii'.siiiias  calls  it  Piscina  Proba-

*  Jobii  5,  2.    The  ellipsis  in  the  Greek  tica;  but  seems  to  doubt  about  the  porches ;

i.  488,  489

Sec.  VII.]

RESERVOIRS.  FOUNTAINS.

331

Bethesda,  a  double  pool,  one  part  of  whicli  was  filled  by  the  winter
rains,  and  the  other  was  reddish  as  if  formerly  tinged  with  bloody
waters.'  But  neither  of  these  writers  gives  any  hint  as  to  the
situation  of  the  pool.  The  name  has  doubtless  been  assigned  to
the  reservoir  in  question  comparatively  in  modern  times,  from  its
proximity  to  St.  Stephen's  gate,  which  was  erroneously  held  to
be  the  ancient  Sheep  gate.^  The  dimensions  of  the  reservoir
have  already  been  given  ;  and  the  reasons  assigned  why  I  hold
it  to  be  the  ancient  fosse,  which  protected  the  fortress  Antonia
and  the  temple  on  the  north.'  That  it  was  formerly  filled  with
water,  is  apparent  from  the  lining  of  small  stones  and  cement
upon  its  sides.  But  from  what  quarter  the  water  was  brought
into  it,  I  am  unable  to  conjecture  ;  unless  perhaps  it  may  have
been  fed  from  the  pool  of  Ilezekiah,  or  more  probably  from  the
superfluous  waters  formerly  collected  from  the  aqueduct  and  else-
where, in  the  cisterns  of  the  adjacent  Haram  es-Sherif.  The
reservoir  has  now  been  dry  for  more  than  two  centuries  ;  during
which  its  deep  bottom  has  been  in  part  a  receptacle  of  filth,  and
in  part  occupied  as  a  garden  of  herbs  and  trees.*

Fountains.  The  only  sources,  or  rather  receptacles,  of  living
water  now  accessible  at  Jerusalem,  are  three  in  number.  They
are  aU  situated  without  the  present  walls,  in  and  along  the  deep
valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  We  begin  with  that  lowest  down  the
valley.

iVell  of  Nehemidh  or  Job.  This  is  the  deep  well  situated
just  below  the  junction  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom  with  that  of  Je-
hoshaphat. The  small  oblong  plain  there  fbnned,  is  covered  with
an  olive  grove,  and  with  the  traces  of  former  gardens  extending
down  the  valley  from  the  present  gardens  of  Siloam.  Indeed  this
•whole  spot  is  the  prettiest  and  most  fertile  around  Jerusalem.
Franks  call  this  the  well  of  Nehemiah,  supposing  it  to  be  the  same
in  which  the  sacred  fire  is  said  to  have  been  hid  during  the  Jewish
captivity,  until  again  recovered  by  that  leader  of  the  exiles.^  But

II.  p.  98  sq.  Comp.  Cotovic.  Itin.  p.  258.
M.iundrell  Apr.  9th.

'  Onomast.  art.  Bethesda. — These  fa-
thers supplied  the  ellipsis  in  the  Greek  text
so  as  to  read:  "There  was  in  Jerusalem
by  the  Sheep  [pool],  a  pool  which  was
called,"  etc.  They  thus  make  here  a
double  pool.

"  See  above,  p.  319.  I  have  not  found
the  name  Piscina  Probatica  distinctly  ap-
plied to  this  reservoir  earlier  than  Brocar-
dus  A.  D.  1283,  (c.  8,)  and  Marinus  Sanu-
tus  A.  D.  1321,  lib.  3.  14.  10.  These  wri-
ters speak  also  (especially  Brocardns  1.  c.)
of  a  large  reservoir  adjacent  to  the  church
of  St.  Anne,  called  Piscina  interior,  now
apparently  destroyed.    This  latter  seems

to  have  been  the  Piscina  Probatica  of  the
earlier  historians  of  the  crusades ;  see  Gesta
Dei,  p.  573.  ^ViU.  Tyr.  8.  4,  fin.  Jac.  de
Vitr.  c.  63.  They  mention  indeed  the
present  reservoir  as  "  lacus  quidam,"  but
give  it  no  name  ;  Gesta  Dei,  p.  573.  Will.
T}T.  1.  c.  Sir  John  Maundeville  in  the
14th  century-  places  the  Piscina  Probatica
within  the  church  of  St.  Anne  ;  Lond.
1839,  p.  88.  Comp.  also  F.  Fabri  and
Rauwolf  in  Reissb.  des  heU.  Landes,  pp.
252,  609.

'  See  above,  pp.  293,  294.

*  Cotovic.  Itin.  p.  258.  Quaresmius  11.
p.  98.    Comp.  p.  233,  above.

'  2  Mace.  1,  19-22.  Formerly  also
Puleus  ignis  ;  see  Quaresmius  II.  p.  270

I  489-491

332

JEETTSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[SecVIL

I  have  not  found  this  name  in  any  writer  earlier  than  the  close
of  the  sixteenth  century.  Those  who  mention  the  well  before
that  time,  speak  of  it  only  as  the  En-Eogel  of  the  old  Testa-
ment.* The  native  inhabitants  call  it  Bir  Eynb,  the  weU  of
Job.^

It  is  a  very  deep  well,  of  an  irregular  quadrilateral  form,  wall-
ed up  with  large  squared  stones,  terminating  above  in  an  arch
on  one  side,  and  apparently  of  great  antiquity.  There  is  a  small
rude  building  over  it,  furnished  with  one  or  two  large  troughs  or
reservoirs  of  stone,  which  are  kept  partially  filled  for  the  conve-
nience of  the  people.  The  well  measures  125  feet  in  depth  ;  50
feet  of  which  was  now  fuU  of  water.  The  water  is  sweet,  but  not
very  cold  ;  and  is  at  the  present  day  drawn  up  by  hand.  An
old  man  from  Kefr  Selwan  was  there  with  his  cord  and  leather
bucket,  and  drew  for  us.  He  said  the  water  was  good  and  would
sit  lightly  on  the  stomach.  In  the  rainy  season  the  weU  becomes
quite  full,  and  sometimes  overflows  at  the  mouth.  More  usually,
however,  the  water  runs  off  under  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and
finds  an  outlet  some  forty  yards  below  the  well.  Here,  the  old
man  said,  it  commonly  flows  for  sixty  or  seventy  days  in  winter,
and  the  stream  is  sometimes  large.  An  Arabian  writer  describes
the  Bir  Eyub  as  built  up  with  very  large  stones ;  and  as  having
in  its  lower  part  a  grotto  or  chamber  walled  up  in  like  manner,
from  which  the  water  strictly  issues.  It  might  be  inferred,  per-
haps, from  the  same  account,  that  in  a  season  of  drought,  the  Mu-
hammedans  had  sunk  this  well  to  a  greater  depth.'

It  is  singular  that  the  earher  historians  of  the  crusades  make
no  mention  of  this  well ;  although  on  account  of  the  abundance
of  its  Kving  water,  it  must  have  been  of  great  importance  to  the
Franks.*  That  it  existed  before  their  day  is  obvious  ;  for  it  is
mentioned  by  Brocardus  in  A.  J).  1283,  as  being  one  of  the  foun-
tains of  the  Old  Testament.  It  may  not  improbably  have  been
filled  up  ; '  and  thus  have  remained  unknown  to  the  first  crusaders.
It  is  apparently  of  high  antiquity  ;  and  there  can  be  little  doubt,

eq.  Cotovic.  p.  292.  Doubdan  Voyage,  p.  Gentiles  call  it  the  -well  of  Job ;  p.  48.  ed.

136.  2.    This  does  not  at  all  help  the  matter.

'  So  Brocardus  c.  8.    Marinns  Sanntus  And  besideii,  this  Itinerary  cannot  be  older

3.  14.  9.    De  Salignac  in  A.  D.  1522,  Itin.  than  the  last  half  of  the  sixteenth  century ;

Tom.  X.  c.  1.    Cotovicus  in  1598'  calls  it  since  it  speaks  of  the  building  of  the  walls

Putews  ignis  ;  and  Quaresmius  seems  to  by  Sultan  Suleiman  ;  p.  34.

be  the  first  to  give  it  the  name  of  Nehemiah.  '  Mejr  ed-Din  Hist,  of  Jerus.  in  Ftmdgr.

'  I  know  not  the  occaeion  of  this  name  ;  des  Or.  U.  p.  l.W.

yet  it  occurs  in  Mejr  ed-Din  in  A.  D.  1495,  *  Jac.  de  Vitriaco  says  expressly  of

as  if  already  of  long  standing;  Fundgr.  Jerusalem,  "  fontes  antem  non  habet,  ex-

des  Or.  IT.  p.  130.    It  is  found  also  in  the  cepto  uno,  qui  SilorEHElCLA.H.  5TLOA5L

333

that  it  was  rightly  r^arded  by  Brocardus  as  identical  with  the
En-R'Dgel  of  Scripture ;  though  probably  it  may  have  been  en-
larged and  deepened  in  the  course  of  ages.

The  fountain  En-Rijgel  is  first  mentioned  in  the  book  of  Jo-
shua, in  describing  the  border  between  the  tribes  of  Judah  and
Benjamin.*  This  border  began  at  the  northwest  comer  of  the
Dead  Sea,  and  passed  up  westward  through  the  mountains  to
En-Shemesh  :  which  may  very  possibly  have  been  the  fountain
near  St.  Saba.  Thence  it  came  to  En-Kogel ;  and  went  up  the
valleT  of  Hinnom  on  the  s-^uth  side  of  the  Jebusites  (Jerusalem) ;
and  so  to  the  top  of  the  lull  overagainst  the  valley  of  Hinnom
westward,  at  the  north  end  of  the  valley  of  Rephaim  or  the  Giants.
Thence  it  was  carried  on  to  the  waters  of  Xephti^ah,  perhaps  one
of  the  several  fountains  in  W«dy  el-"Werd.  It  needs  but  a
glance  at  the  plan,  to  see  that  this  description  applies  most  defi-
nitely and  exactly  to  the  present  weU  of  Nehemiah.  The  border
probably  came  up  along  the  lower  part  of  the  valley  of  Jehosha-
phat  to  this  well ;  and  then  continued  up  the  valley  of  Hinnom
and  across  the  hiU  to  the  valley  of  Rephaim.^  One  other  notice
goes  also  to  fix  the  place  of  the  fountain  Rogel  in  the  same  vi-
cinity. When  Adonijah  caused  himself  to  be  proclaimed.  Icing,
he  assembled,  his  friends  and  made  a  feast  at  En-Rogel ;  or,  as
Josephus  records  it.  "  without  the  city  at  the  fountain  which  is
in  the  king's  garden.'"' '

Siloam.  The  name  Sfloah  or  Siloam.*  which  has  obtained
such  celebrity  in  the  Christian  world,  is  found  only  three  times
in  the  Scriptures  as  applied  to  waters  :  once  in  the  prophet  Isa-
iah, who  speaks  of  it  as  runmng  water  :  again  as  a  pool  in  Ne-
hemiah  ;  and  lastiy  also  as  a  po<)l  in  the  account  of  our  Lord's
miracle  of  healing  the  man  who  had  been  bom  blind'  2s  one  of
these  passages  afford  any  clue  as  to  the  situation  of  Sdoam.
But  this  silence  is  amply  supplied  by  the  historian  Josephus.  who
makes  ftequent  mention  of  SUoam  as  a  fountain  ;  *  and  says  ex-
pressly, that  the  vaUey  of  the  Tyiopoeon  extended  down  to  Si-

earveRdaadele«iedoiitalMNitA.D.  IIM.  *  The  AimbicfoanofdnsnameLsS^wlii.

and  fimndied  ma  abondaiit  sopphr  of  va-  *  Jst.  8,  6  r!%3.    Neh.  3,  15  nbs.

te.    H«5.  Pl^.  OoDtin.  (^Dka'Hktnis  j,^  9^  7.  x\.    The  Heta^r  vtxd  in  "die

GinL  TjT.  m  Maitfan  et  Dmaad  Cdkct.  pa^ges  of  the  Old  Testament  is  in-

n^iLTom.  V.p.  889  9^  Wilken's  Gesch.  ae^d  vrittea  with  difoent  tow«1s:  tnt

.            HL  n.  p.  24&  is  ^  j^^gon  ^          ^  identitv  of

Jo*,  la,  7.  8.    18,  16.  17.  tf,e  name.    It  i^idfies  ami,  «  »e»£ng,

•  The  ate  of  Jerasakm  lay  of  eooRe  etc    The  Gredt  fbim  is             bodi  in
vhoDy  witiiin  the  original  fimils  of  die  the  X.  T.  and  in  Joeephns.  Theie
tribe  of  Benjamin.  proi>ali()r  bodi  a  fiMmtain  and  a  imiiiuii,

*  1  Kings  1,  9.  Joaefih.  Am.  '.Xi.  i.  ais  at  tlie  pRsent  day.  Hence  the  diiewitj
Com{i.  2  Sam.  17,  17.  We  have  seen  in  dilTereut  writen. — tower  of  Sloam
abo««,  that  die  Anhic  TCiaan  in         15.  is  afeo  mentiooed,  Luke  13,  4

7  has  'Ain  Eyob  &r  En-Bogel;  see  the  •  B.  J.  5.  4.  L  2.  ik  5.  9.  4.  p.  350,
pneefng  page^  Xo*e  2L  HaTOTc

i.  49-2-494

334

JERUSALEM. — ANTIQUITIES.

[Sec.  Vn.

loam  ;  or  in  other  words,  Siloam  was  situated  in  the  mouth  of
the  Tyropoeon,  on  the  southeast  part  of  the  ancient  city  ;  as  we
find  it  at  the  present  day.*  Its  waters,  he  says,  were  sweet  and
abundant.  There  can  also  be  no  room  for  question,  that  the  Si-
loam  of  Josephus  is  identical  with  that  of  the  Scriptures.

Of  the  same  tenor  is  the  account  of  the  Itin.  Hieros.  A.  D,
333,  that  to  those  going  out  of  the  city  in  order  to  ascend  Mount
Zion,  the  "  pool "  of  Siloam  lay  below  in  the  vaEey  on  the  left.
More  defiuite  is  the  testimony  of  Jerome  about  the  close  of  the
same  century.  This  father  says  expressly  that  "  SUoam  is  a
fountain  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Zion  ;  whose  waters  do  not  flow  re-
gularly, but  on  certain  days  and  hours  ;  and  issue  with  a  great
noise  from  hollows  and  caverns  in  the  hardest  rock."  Again,  in
speaking  of  Gehenna,  he  remarks  that  "  the  idol  Baal  was  set  up
near  Jerusalem  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Moriah,  where  Siloam
flows."  ^  Moriah  must  here  be  taken  as  including  the  ridge  which
runs  from  it  towards  the  south  ;  and  the  mention  of  the  idol
Baal  limits  the  position  of  SUoam  to  the  gardens  at  the  mouth  of
the  Tyropoeon  and  vaUey  of  Hinnom  ; '  which  also  corresponds  to
the  language  of  Josephus.  In  the  account  of  Jerome,  we  have
the  first  correct  mention  of  the  irregular  flow  of  the  waters  of
Siloam/

Siloam  is  mentioned  both  as  a  fountain  and  pool  by  Anto-
ninus Martyr  early  in  the  seventh  centuiy  ;  and  as  a  pool  by
the  monk  Bernhard  in  the  ninth.  ^  Then  come  the  historians  of
the  crusades  ;  who  also  place  Siloam  as  a  fountain  in  its  ju-esent
site,  near  the  fork  of  two  valleys.  William  of  Tyre  mentions  its
irregular  flow  ;  and  another  speaks  of  it  both  as  a  fountain  and
apool.*  According  to  Benjamin  of  Tudela  about  A.D.  1165,  there

'  B.  J.  5.  4.  1,  fi  8e  Twv  Tvpcnrotwv
Trpomyopevoiievri  s  a.iroKw\fyai  tj
■KOKiopKla,  ws  7)(r(»'  fj  ■irpo">i'  fOTck

Histor.  7.  12.    See  Miinter  1.  c.  p.  55.  'ASpiavhv  avroKpdropa  Kitrficfws  avdtt  'lou-

"  Miinter,  1.  c.  pp.  62,  63.  8oi'«7)t  •ytvofievTjs  rh  \oiit}>v  ttjj  ■k6k«i)s

'  An  inscription  now  at  Rome  records,  fitpos  rinlffv  iroKtopKtj^iv  a5dis  i^eKavyfrcu,

that  even  the  Gsetuli  in  Mauritaijia  fur-  ws  ^{  inflvov  koI  els  Stvpo  irdfxnaf  &0aTou

nished  troops  for  this  expedition  against  ytvia^ai  rhv  t6hov.     So  also  Chiysost.

the  Jews  ;  Munter,  p.  84.  Orat.  III.  in  Judajos,  Tom.  I.  p.  431.  Frkf.

*  Dio  Cass.  69.  13,  14.    Miinter,  p.  66  169«.    Hieron.  Comm.  in  Joel  1,  4  "iElii

sq.  quoque  Hadriani  contra  JudiBos  expedi-

'  Appian.  deReb.  Syriac.  50.  ed.  Tauclin.  tionem  legimus,  qui  ita  Jerusalem  muros-

II.  p.  6!),  'UpovaoLK^ix . .  .'i)v  5i  /cal  UroKf-  que  subvertit,"etc.  Ejusd.  Comm.  in  Ezech.

Haios  6  irpwTos  Alyinrrov  0a-
fialoiv  KpdrfL  Sulpic.  Severi  Hist.  Sac.  2.
45,  '■  Militum  cohortem  custodias  in  per-
petuum  agitare  jussit,  quae  Judasos  omnes
HierosolymiE  adita  areeret."

°  Jerome  is  the  earliest ;  Comm.  in
Ezecb.  5,  1  "  Post  quinquager.ta  armos
sub  £]io  Hadriano  usque  ad  solum  incensa
atque  deleta  est,  ita  ut  pristinum  quoque
nomen  araiserit."  Eusebius,  nearly  a  cen-
tury earlier,  merely  says,  that  "  the  place
became  inaccessible  to  the  Jews ; "  see
Note  6,  on  p  368,  above.  Miinter  p.  69  sq.

*  See  p.  367,  above.

'  The  R.abbins  call  him  Turanus  Rufus ;
Eusebius  simply  Rufus.  Hist.  Ecc.  4.  6.
See  Gemara  Taanich  c.  4,  "  quaudo  aravit
Turanus  Rufiis  impius  porticnm,"  etc.  Mai-

ii.  6-8

370

JERUSALEM. — HISTOET.

[SEcvin.

Komans  ever  applied  this  symbol  of  perpetual  doom  to  the  sites
of  single  edifices.  And  further,  Adrian  himself  is  expressly  said
to  have  erected  a  temple  to  Jupiter  upon  the  same  spot,'  a  cir-
cumstance entirely  inconsistent  with  such  a  desecration  ;  and
Julian,  two  centuries  later,  the  zealous  protector  of  ancient  su-
perstitions, encouraged  the  Jews  themselves  to  undertake  the  re-
building of  their  temple. — Both  these  accounts,  therefore,  would
seem  rather  to  belong  to  the  legendary  inventions  of  a  later  age.

The  work  of  rebuilding  the  city  would  appear  to  have  been
resumed  immediately  after  the  close  of  the  war,  if  not  before.
In  A.  D.  136,  the  emperor  Adrian  celebrated  his  Vicennalia,  on
entering  upon  the  twentieth  year  of  his  reign.  On  such  occa-
sions, which  heretofore  only  Augustus  and  Trajan  had  lived  to
see,  it  seems  to  have  been  customary  to  build  or  consecrate  new
cities,  or  also  to  give  to  former  cities  new  names.'-^  At  this  time
the  new  Roman  colony  established  upon  the  site  of  the  former
Jerusalem,  received  the  names  of  Colonia  ^lia  Capltolina  ;
the  former  after  the  prtenomen  of  the  emperor,  ^lius  Adrianus  ;
and  the  latter  in  honour  of  the  Jupiter  CapitoUnus,  whose  fane
now  occupied  the  place  of  the  Jewish  temple.^  The  place  be-
came to  all  intents  a  Roman  and  pagan  city  ;  Jupiter  was  made
its  patron  god  ;  and  statues  of  Jupiter  and  Venus  were  then  or
later  erected  on  sites,  which  afterwards  were  held  to  be  the
places  of  the  crucifixion  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord.*  The
city  was  probably  strongly  fortified.  Of  its  citadel  and  the  ap-
parent extent  of  its  walls,  we  have  already  spoken.^

The  ancient  capital  of  the  Jews  was  henceforth  long  known
only  as  .^lia  ;  and  coins  bearing  in  their  inscription  the  name
COL.  AEL.  CAP.  are  still  extant  from  the  time  of  Adrian  to
Hostilian  about  A.  D.  250.^  The  name  Jerusalem  went  out  of
use  ;  and  was  indeed  to  such  a  degree  forgotten,  that  when  a
martyr  at  C^sarea  under  Maximin  mentioned  Jerusalem  as  his
birthplace,  (meaning  the  heavenly  city,)  the  Roman  governor
Firmilianus  inquired,  What  city  it  was  and  where  it  lay  ?  '  In

mon-des  in  Bartoloc.  Biblioth.  Rabb.  III.  Hist.  Ecc.  4.  6.  Hieron.  Comm.  in  Esai.

p.  679.    Hieron.  Comm.  in   Zachar.  8,  2,  8  "       quondam  erat  templura  et  re-

19  "  Capta  urbs  Bethel  (Bether>,  ad  qnam  ligio  Dei,  ibi  Hadriani  statua  et  Jovis  ido-

multa  millia  confugerant  Judteorum  ;  ara-  hnn  coUocatum  est."    See  also  above,  p.

tum  templum  in  igiiominiam  gentis  opprcs-  296.

sje,  a  Tito  Annio  Ruffo."  ftliinter  1.  c.  *  Hieron.  Ep.  49,  ad  Pavilin.  ed.  Mart,

p.  71.  Tom.  IV.  ii.  p.  .564.    Sozomen,  H.  E.  U.  1.

»  See  Note  3,  below.  '  See  above,  pp.  307,  316.

'  Pagi  Critica  Antibaroniana  ad  Ann.  °  Miinter  Jiidiscber  Krieg,  etc.  p.  94.

Chr.  132,  13.5.  Tbc  coins  of  .Elia  are  found  in  Rasche'a

'  DioCass.  69.  12,  "Es  St  rk  'UpoT(ytlpavros  ktK.  Euseb.
ii.  8.  9

SKcVm.]       .aELIA.     SECOND  AND  THIRD  CENTURIES.  371

the  days  of  Constantine  the  ancient  name  became  again  more
current ;  though  that  of  Mlia  still  remained  in  use  ;  as  is
shown  by  the  writings  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome.'  Even  so  late
as  A.  D.  536,  the  name  of  Mlia,  appears  in  the  acts  of  a  synod
held  in  Jerusalem  itself ;  ^  and  it  afterwards  passed  over  also  to
the  Muhammedans,  by  whom  it  was  long  retained.'

The  history  of  Jerusalem  from  the  time  of  Adrian  until  Con-
stantine, presents  little  more  than  a  blank.  The  Christians,
who,  as  individuals  or  perhaps  communities,  had  suffered  so
greatly  from  the  atrocities  of  Barcochba  and  his  followers,  had
become  more  distinctly  separated  from  the  Jews  ;  and  while  the
latter  (as  we  have  seen)  were  now  prohibited  on  pain  of  death
even  from  approaching  Jerusalem,  the  latter  would  seem  to  have
resided  in  it  without  special  molestation  from  the  Romans.  At
this  period  probably,  if  ever,  the  former  church  of  Jerusalem,
which  as  a  body  is  said  to  have  withdrawn  before  the  siege  by
Titus  to  Pella  beyond  the  Jordan,*  re-established  itself  in  the
new  city  ;  and  in  order  to  lay  aside  as  far  as  possible  every  ap-
pearance of  a  Jewish  character,  elected  its  bishop  Marcus  and
his  successors  from  among  the  Gentile  converts.^  Between  Mar-
cus and  Macarius  in  the  time  of  Constantine,  twenty-three  bish-
ops are  enumerated  ;  respecting  whom,  however,  little  is  known.*
Narcissus,  in  the  beginning  of  the  third  century,  under  Severus,
is  related  to  have  wrought  miracles  and  Alexander,  his  suc-
cessor, founded  a  library  in  Jerusalem,  which  was  still  extant  in
the  days  of  Eusebius,  nearly  a  century  later.'  Yet  both  these
bishops,  as  well  as  other  Christians,  were  exposed  to  persecutions
on  account  of  their  faith  ;  and  the  Christian  church  existed  in
Jerusalem,  as  elsewhere,  only  by  sufferance.

The  severe  prohibition  against  the  Jews  appears  not  to  have
been  relaxed  during  all  this  interval  of  nearly  two  centuries  ;
and  they  continued  to  be  shut  out  from  the  land  of  their  fathers,
and  deprived  even  of  the  common  rights  of  strangers  upon  its
soil.'    In  the  days  of  Constantine  they  were  first  allowed  again

'  Particularly  in  their  specifications  of
the  distances  of  places  from  this  city  ;  see
the  Onomast.  art.  Bethel,  and  elsewhere.

"  In  Colonia  jElia  metropoli,  sive
HierosoljTnis ; "  Harduin.  Concil.  II.  p.
1412.    Labbe  ConcU.  V.  p.  275.

°  Eutychius  relates  that  the  name  jElia
was  in  use  among  the  Arabs  in  his  day  ;
Annales  I.  p.  354.  It  is  mentioned  also
by  Edrisi,  ed.  Jaub.  p.  841 ;  by  Ibn  el-
Wardi  in  Abulf  Syr.  ed.  Kohler,  p.  179;
and  also  by  Mejr  ed-Din  so  late  as  A.  D.
1495 ;  Fundgr.  des  Orients,  II.  p.  136.—
It  is  found  likewise  in  Adamnanus,  about
A.  D.  697  ;  de  Locis  Sanct.  1.  21.

*  Euseh.  H.  E.  3.  5.  Epiphanius  (ob.
403)  de  Mensurib.  et.  Pond.  15.  p.  171.
ed.  Petav.  Eusebius  is  silent  as  to  their
return  ;  but  it  is  affirmed  by  Epiphanius.

'  The  election  of  Marcus  is  related  by
Eusebius  under  the  18th  year  of  Adrian;
H.  E.  4.  6.  Le  Quien  Oriens  Christ.  III.
p.  145.

"  Le  Quien,  L  c.  p.  146  sq.

'  Euseb.  H.  E.  5.  12.   ib.  6.  9,  10.

"  Euseb.  H.  E.  6.  20.

"  Tertull.  c.  Judajos,  c.  15.  Apol.  c.  21,
"quibus  [Judceis]  nec  advenarum  jure  ter-
ram  patriam  saltem  vestigio  salutare  con-
ceditur."    Euseb.  Demonstr.  Evang.  6.  18,

ii.  9-11

372

JERUSALEM. — HISTORY.

[Sec.  Yin.

to  approach  the  Holy  City  ;  and  at  last,  to  enter  it  once  a  year,
in  order  to  wail  over  the  ruins  of  their  ancient  sanctuary.'

Meantime  the  influence  and  the  limits  of  Christianity  were
continually  increased  and  extended,  as  well  in  Palestine  itself  as
in  other  parts  of  the  Roman  empire.  The  hearts  of  Christians
in  other  lands  yearned  to  behold  the  sacred  city,  and  the  scenes
of  so  many  great  events  and  hallowed  recollections  ;  and  in  that
age  of  pilgrimages,  the  Holy  Land  did  not  of  course  remain  un-
visited.  Even  early  in  the  third  century,  two  pilgrimages  of
this  kind  are  recorded  ;  one  that  of  'Alexander,  then  bishop  in
Cappadocia,  who  became  the  successor  of  Narcissus  in  the  see
of  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  other,  that  of  a  female  mentioned  in  a
letter  to  Cyprian.^  In  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century,
these  journeys  had  become  more  common  ;  for  Eusebius,  writing
about  A.  D.  315,  speaks  of  Christians  who  came  up  to  Jerusalem
from  all  the  regions  of  the  earth  ;  partly  to  behold  the  accom-
pHshment  of  prophecy  in  the  conquest  and  destruction  of  the
city  ;  and  partly  to  pay  their  adorations  on  the  mount  of  Olives
where  Jesus  ascended,  and  at  the  cave  in  Bethlehem  where  he
was  born.^

In  the  conversion  of  Constantino,  Christianity  obtained  a
worldly  triumph,  and  became  henceforth  the  public  religion  of  the
state.  The  difficulties  which  had  formerly  beset  the  way  of  pil-
grims to  the  Holy  City,  were  now  removed.  The  number  of  the
pilgrims  increased  ;  and  an  example  of  high  influence  was  set
by  Helena,  the  mother  of  the  emperor.  At  the  age  of  nearly
fourscore  years,  but  with  a  youthful  spirit,  she  repaired  in  person
to  Palestine  in  the  year  326,  to  visit  the  holy  places,  and  render
thanks  to  God  for  the  prosperity  of  her  son  and  family.  Having
paid  her  adorations  at  the  supposed  places  of  the  nati\ity  and
ascension,  and  being  sustained  by  the  munificence  of  her  son,  she
caused  splendid  churches  to  be  erected  on  those  spots,  viz.  in
Bethlehem  and  on  the  mount  of  Olives  ;  which  were  afterwards
stUl  further  adorned  by  sumptuous  presents  from  Constantino
himself*  She  returned  to  Constantinople  ;  and  died  there  at
the  age  of  eighty,  about  the  year  327  or  328.^

In  the  mean  time,  after  the  transactions  connected  with  the
councU  of  Nicea,  as  Eusebius  informs  us,  the  emperor  Constan-
tino (not  without  a  divine  admonition)  became  desirous  of  per-

as  quoted  above  on  p.  3G8,  Note  6.  The  re-  '  \fpoa6\vt>.a.  eux'JS       toii'  "riituv  iffropias

mark  in  the  text  applies  of  course  only  to  fvcKfv  -nfiroirififvoy.

Judea  ;  the  Jews  continued  to  reside  in  '  Cyprian.  Epist.  75. — Cyprian  died  A.

Galilee  in  great  numbers.  D.  258.

'  See  above  p.  237.    Itin.  Hieros.  p.  *  Kuseb.  Demonstr.  Evang.6. 16.  ib.  7. 4.

691.  ed.  Wessellng.    Hieron.  Comm.  in  '  Euseb.  Vit.  Const.  3.  42,  43.

Sophon.  1,  15.  '  Ibid.  3.  46.    Tillemont  Momoires  pour

'  Euseb.  H.  E.  6.  11,t!»'  iropelav  M  servir  a  I'Hist.  EccL  Tom.  YLl.  p.  16.

ii.  11,  12

Sec.  Tin.]

CENT,  IV. — CONSTANTINE.

373

forming  a  glorious  work  in  Palestine,  by  beautifying  and  render-
ing sacred  the  place  of  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord.  For  hither-
to, according  to  the  same  writer,  impious  men,  or  rather  the
whole  race  of  demons  through  their  instrumentahty,  had  used
every  effort  to  deliver  over  that  illustrious  monument  of  immor-
tality to  darkness  and  oblivion.  They  had  covered  the  cave*
with  earth  brought  from  other  quarters  ;  and  then  erected  over
it  a  sanctuary  of  Venus,  in  which  to  celebrate  the  impure  rites  and
worship  of  that  goddess.  All  these  obstructions  Constantine
caused  to  be  removed,  and  the  Holy  Sepulchre  to  be  puiified.
Not  content  with  this,  he  gave  diiections  to  build  a  magnificent
temple  or  place  of  prayer  over  and  around  the  sepulchre.  His
letter  on  this  subject  to  the  bishop  Macarius  is  preserved  by
Eusebius  ;  and  presupposes  the  recent  and  joj-ful  discovery  of
the  "  sign  (or  monument)  of  the  Saviour's  most  sacred  passion,
which  for  so  long  a  time  had  been  hidden  beneath  the  earth."*
This  discovery  the  emperor  regards  as  a  miracle,  which  it  is  be-
yond the  capacity  of  man  sufficiently  to  celebrate,  or  even  to
comprehend.'  The  church  was  completed  and  dedicated  in  the
thirtieth  year  of  Constantine,  A.  D.  3.35.  On  this  occasion  a
great  council  of  bishops  was  convened  by  order  of  the  emperor
from  all  the  provinces  of  the  empire,  first  at  Tyre,  and  then  at
Jerusalem.  Among  them  was  Eusebius  himself,  who  took  part
in  the  solemnities,  and  held  several  public  discourses  in  the
Holy  City.*

In  hke  manner  Constantine  gave  orders  to  erect  a  church  on
the  site  of  the  terebinth  of  Mamre,  where  Abraham  had  dwelt  ;
and  where,  as  was  supposed,  the  Saviour  had  first  manifested  his
presence  in  Palestine.  The  emperor  wrote  on  the  subject  to
Eusebius,  who  has  preserved  the  letter.  This  church  is  also
mentioned  by  the  Bordeaux  pilgrim  and  by  Jerome.^

Such  is  the  account  which  Eusebius,  the  cotemporary  and
eyewitness,  gives  of  the  chiuches  erected  in  Palestine  by  Helena
and  her  son  Constantine.  Not  a  word,  not  a  hint,  by  which  the
reader  would  be  led  to  suppose,  that  the  mother  of  the  emperor
had  any  thing  to  do  with  the  discovery  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,
or  the  building  of  a  church  upon  the  spot.  But,  as  I  have
already  remarked,  this  was  the  age  of  credulous  faith  as  well  as
of  legendary  tradition  and  invention,  if  not  of  pious  fraud  ;  and

'  Eusebius  everywhere  speaks  of  the  *  Euseb.  Vit.  Const.  4.  43-47.  Sozo-

sepulchre  as  a  cave,  ivrpov.     De  Vit.  men  2.  26.    Tillemont  Momoires,  etc.  VIL

Const.  3.  26,  33.  p.  12. — The  site  of  the  Jewish  temple  ap-

'  Enseb.  Vit.  Const.  3.  30,  rh  yv6pi(r/ia  pears  to  have   been  left  untouched  by

TO?  ay.a-irov  (Ketvov  ira^ows  vrh  ry  75  Constantine ;  see  above,  p.  29G.

viXai  KpinrrSfitvoy.                            '  '  Euseb.   Vit.  Const.  3.  51-53.  Itin.

'  See  in  general  Euseb.  Vit.  Const  3,  Hieros.  p.  599.  ed.  Wess.  Hieron.  Onomast

25-40.  art.  Arboc.

Vol.  L— 32  ii.  12-14

374

JEKUSALEM. — HISTORY.

[SEcvm.

this  silence  of  the  father  of  Church  History  respecting  Helena,
was  more  than  made  good  by  his  successors.  AU  the  "writers  of
the  following  century  relate  as  with  one  voice,  that  the  mother
of  Constantine  was  from  the  first  instigated  by  a  strong  desire
to  search  out  and  discover  the  Holy  Sepulchre  and  the  sacred
cross  on  which  the  Saviour  had  suffered.  A  divine  intimation
had  pointed  out  to  her  the  spot ;  and  on  her  arrival  at  Jerusa-
lem, she  inquii-ed  diligently  of  the  inhabitants.  Tet  the  search
was  uncertain  and  difficult,  in  consequence  of  the  obstructions  by
which  the  heathen  had  sought  to  render  the  spot  unknown.
These  being  all  removed,  the  sacred  sepulchre  was  discovered,
and  by  its  side'  three  crosses,  with  the  tablet  bearing  the  inscrip-
tion written  by  Pilate.  The  tablet  was  separated  from  the
cross  ;  and  now  arose  another  dilemma,  how  to  ascertain  which  of
these  three  was  the  true  cross.  Macarius  the  bishop,  who  was
present,  suggested  an  appropriate  means.  A  noble  lady  of
Jerusalem  lay  sick  of  an  incurable  disease  ;  the  three  crosses
were  presented  to  her  in  succession.  The  first  two  produced  no
effect ;  but  at  the  approach  of  the  third,  she  opened  her  eyes,
recovered  her  strength,  and  sprang  from  her  bed  in  perfect
health. — In  consequence  of  this  discoveiy,  Helena  caused  a
splendid  church  to  be  erected  over  the  spot  where  the  crosses
were  found.  The  same  writers  relate  also  the  erection,  by
Helena,  of  the  two  churches  at  Bethlehem  and  on  the  mount  of
Ohves.^

Leaving  out  of  view  the  obviously  legendaiy  portions  of  this
story,  it  would  seem  not  improbable,  that  Helena  was  the  prime
mover  in  searching  for  and  discovering  the  sacred  sepulchre  ;
and  that  thi'ough  her  representations  her  son  was  induced  to
undertake  the  erection  of  the  church  ;  which  in  this  way  might
stni  be  appropriately  ascribed  to  her.  The  emperoi-'s  letter  to
Macarius,  as  we  have  seen  above,  seems  to  presuppose  some  such
event. ^  Yet  how  are  we  then  to  account  for  the  entire  silence
of  Eusebius  as  to  any  such  discovery  by  Helena  ;  supported  as
it  is  by  the  hke  silence  of  the  pilgrim  of  Bordeaux,  A.  D.  333  *
Possibly  Eusebius,  the  flatterer  of  Constantine,  may  have  chosen

'  Theodoret.  Hist.  Ecc.  1.  17.  Dei  per  Francos,  II.  p.  121.  Adrichomius,

=  Rufinus,  ob.  circa  410,  lib.  1.  (11.)  7,  p.  176.

8.    Theodoret,  fl.  c.  440,  lib.  1.  18.    So-  '  Page  373,  above,

crat.  fl.  c.  440,  lib.  1.  17.    Sozomen,  fl.  c.  *  The  Jtin.  Huron,  merely  speaks  of

450,  lib.  2.  1.    Rufinus  speaks  of  a  divine  the  church  erected  by  Constantiue  over  the

intimation  as  well  as  of  minute  inquiry ;  sepulchre ;  and  says  not  one  word  of  He-

and  so  Sozomen,  and  apparently  Socrates,  lena  or  of  the  cros.«.    Even  the  churches

Sozomen  also  mentions  the  story  of  a  Jew  of  Bethlehem  and  the  mount  of  Olives,

as  one  of  the  chief  actors ;  but  rejects  it.  which  Eusebius  ascribes  to  Helena,  are

The  story  of  torture  and  the  like,  belongs  referred  by  the  pilgrim  to  Constantine ;

apparently  to  a  later  age.    Comp.  Pauliu.  pp.  596,  55)7,  59!',  ed.  Wesseling.
Nolan.  Epist.  XL  Marinus  Sanutus  in  G  esta
ii.  14.  15

SecVTIL]  CEXT.  it. — COSSTANTrS'E.     HELENA,  375

to  ascribe  all  to  the  piety  and  magnanimity  of  his  patron  ;
and  while  the  church  was  building  imder  the  emperor's  auspices
for  six  or  seven  years  after  Helena's  death,  her  participation  in
it  may  have  been  unknown  or  overlooked  by  the  pUgrim.

However  this  may  be,  and  notwithstanding  the  silence  of
Eusebius,  there  would  seem  to  be  hardly  any  fact  of  history
better  accredited,  than  this  alleged  discovery  of  the  true  cross.
All  the  historians  of  the  following  century  relate  the  circum-
stances as  with  one  voice,  and  ascribe  it  to  the  enterprise  of
Helena.  But  this  is  not  all.  Cyril,  who  was  bishop  of  Jeru-
salem from  A.  D.  348  onward,  only  some  twenty  years  after  the
event,  and  who  frequently  speaks  of  preaching  in  the  church
erected  by  the  mimificence  of  Constantine,  mentions  expressly
the  tinding  of  the  cross  under  that  emperor,  and  its  existence  in
his  own  day.*  So  too  Jerome,  describing  in  A.  D.  404  the
journey  of  Paula,  relates  that  in  Jerusalem  she  not  only  per-
formed her  devotions  in  the  Holy  Septilchre,  but  also  prostrated
herself  before  the  cross  in  adoration.-  Yet  neither  of  these
fethers  makes  mention  of  Helena  in  any  connection  with  either
the  cross  or  sepulchre.  It  would  seem,  however,  to  be  as  little
reasonable  to  doubt  the  existence  of  the  alleged  true  cross  at
that  early  period,  as  it  would  be  to  give  credit  to  the  legendary
circumstances  related  of  its  discovery.  It  was  probably  a  work
of  pious  fraud.

In  the  writings  and  traditions  of  succeeding  centuries,  the
name  of  Helena  became  more  prominent.  Her  memory  and  her
deeds  were  embalmed  and  magnified  in  story  as  successive  ages
roUed  on  ;  until,  in  the  fourteenth  century,  not  less  than  thirty
churches  were  ascribed  to  her  within  the  limits  of  Palestine.'
And  to  the  present  day,  almost  every  remaining  church  in  that
country,  of  any  antiquity,  is  in  like  manner  referred  in  monastic
tradition  to  the  munificence  of  Helena.  Yet  if  we  adhere,  as
we  must,  to  the  testimony  of  all  the  writers  near  her  time,  the
only  churches  which  she  can  be  regarded  as  having  buHt,  are
those  at  Bethlehem  and  on  the  moimt  cf  OUves  ;  except  so  far
as  she  may  have  taken  part  in  the  construction  of  those  con-
nected with  the  Holy  Sepulchre.

'  So  in  Ms  Epist.  ad  Constantium  3,
0pp.  ed.  Tonttee,  p.  352,  eVi  nh>  yap  rov
....  Koi'crrojTii'Oo  toP  (Tov  rarpis,  rh  fftt-
•Hipior  TOV  (TTavpov  ^v\oy  ey  'lepot.  Homil.  V.  de  Stutuis  §1.

monaohonim  choros;"  Ep.  xxxviii,  ad  Tom.  II.  p.  .")9,  UoWol  yvyficucpdi'Tiya  koI

Pamraach.  Tom.  IV.  ii.  p.  308.  ed.  Mart.  SLa-rSyriov  aTroSrfpLiav  i,  Golgotha,  the

April.  T.  III.  p.  32  sq.  site  of  which  had  already  been  fixed.

ii.  21,  22

380

JERUSALEM. — HISTORY.

[SEc.Vm.

existed  ;  and  often  stands  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  specifi-
cations of  later  ages.'

During  the  centuries  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the
metropolitan  see  of  Palesrine  was  at  Caesarea  ;  to  which  the  see
of  Jerusalem  was  subject  like  the  rest.*  But  when  in  the  fourth
century  the  holy  places  at  Jerusalem  became  known,  and  were
decorated  with  splendid  edifices,  and  the  Holy  City  began  to
reassume  its  importance  in  the  Christian  world,  its  bishops  were
not  slow  to  bring  forward  its  claims  to  a  higher  rank,  as  the
original  seat  of  the  apostolic  church.  Even  so  early  as  at  the  coun-
cil of  Nicea,  A.  D.  325,  its  traditional  claims  had  been  acknow-
ledged  and  affirmed  ;  saving  however  the  dignity  of  the  then
metropolitan  see.'  Cyril  as  bishop  of  Jerusalem  contended  long
with  Acacius  of  Cfesarea  for  the  supremacy  ;  though  he  was  at
last  compelled  to  yield  to  the  authority  of  the  primate,  by  whom
he  was  deposed.*  His  successor,  John,  claimed  also  to  be  inde-
pendent of  Caesarea,  and  appealed  to  the  patriarch  of  Alexandria  ;
for  which  he  is  censured  by  Jerome.'  The  following  bishop,
Praylus.  was  a  meek  and  holy  man,  and  apparently  avoided  such
controversies.  But  Juvenal,  his  successor,  who  held  the  chair  of
Jerusalem  from  about  A.  D.  420  to  458,  exerted  himself  to  the
utmost  to  establish  the  authority  of  his  see,  not  only  as  superior
to  Cfe.sarea,  but  as  independent  of  the  patriarch  of  Antioch.  It
was  not  however  untU  the  council  of  Chalcedon,  A.  D.  451-453,
that  he  was  able  after  long  efforts  to  effect  his  purpose.  It  was
there  decreed,  that  Jerusalem  should  be  thenceforth  an  indepen-
dent patriarchate,  comprising  the  three  Palestines  ;  while  Antioch
should  retain  the  two  Phenicias  and  northern  Arabian.'

Amid  all  the  rehgious  or  rather  theological  controversies,  which
agitated  the  oriental  churches  during  these  centuries,  it  was  hardly
to  be  expected  that  Palestine,  crowded  as  it  was  with  ecclesias-
rics  and  monks,  should  remain  in  peace.  On  the  contrary,  it
actually  became  one  of  the  chief  seats  of  strife  and  fierce  conten-
rion,  which  were  not  in  all  cases  appeased  without  bloodshed.  In
the  fourth  century,  the  Arian  controversy  had  much  to  do  with
the  repeated  depositions  of  Cyril  from  the  see  of  Jerusalem."  In
A.  D.  415  Pelagius  himself  appeared  before  two  timiultuous

•  See  more  above,  p.  254.  AiA./^  hrlaKoroy  rifiair^cu,  ^x*''"

*  So  .Jerome,  as  if  addressing  himself  to  Kov^iayrfis  rifirjs,  rfj  firrrporiKfi  au^oiiivov
John,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  and  rej^rring  toC  oiKtlov  i^uifiaros.  Labb.  ConciL  Tom.
him  to  the  council  of  Nicea,  exclaims:  L  p.  47.

"  Xi  fallar,  hoc  ibi  decemitur,  nt  Pal«s-  •  Theodoret  K  E.  2.  26.  Sozom.  4.  25.

tinae  metropolis  Caesarsea  sit,  et  totins  ori-  '  Hieron.  L  c.

entis  Antiochia  ;  "  Hieron.  Ep.  xxxvui,  ad  '  ConciL  Chalcedoa  Act.  VTI.  Labb.

Pammach.  Tom.  IV.  P.  IL  p.  330.  ed.  Tom.  IV.  p.  613.    See  also  Le  Quien

Mart.  Oriens  Christ  Tom.  HL  p.  110  sq.

'  Concil.  Xic  Can.Vn,  'ExtiW)  tmrfi^tia  '  Satom.  K  E.  4.  26.
KtKparrtKf  KoJ  napiXoait  ipx^ua  &rtified  on  Mount
Gerizim.  This  was  in  the  third  year  of  Justinian,  A.  D.  529.'
In  the  same  connecrion,  and  as  if  occurring  about  the  same
time,  Procopius  describes  the  erecrion  of  a  large  church  at
Jeru-salem  by  Justinian  in  honour  of  the  Virgin,  on  which  great
expense  and  labour  were  Ijestowed  in  order  to  make  it  one  of  the
most  splendid  ia  the  world.  This  church,  as  we  have  seen,  was
apparently  the  eflifice  now  known  as  the  mosk  el-Aksa,  on  the
southern  part  of  the  site  of  the  temple.*  The  same  writer
ascribes  to  this  emperor  the  building  of  not  less  than  ten  or
eleven  monasteries  in  and  around  Jerusalem  and  Jericho,  a  Xeno-
dochium  or  hospital  for  pilgrims  at  Jericho,  and  also  the
building  up  of  the  walls  of  Bethlehem  and  other  cities.^
Eutychius  in  the  ninth  century  relates  the  same  general  facts
respecting  Justinian  ;  and  adds  that  he  erected  also  a  hospital
for  strangers  in  Jerusalem.'

This  public  provision  for  the  accommodation  of  pilgrims  in
the  Holy  Land,  serves  to  show,  that  their  numbers  at  this  period

"  Ilepi  Tuv  Tov  iftrwirov  'lowmyuwov  159  sq. — Of  the  church  bailt  hy  Jtutinian

KTUTfidrav,  Dt  uE'lificii*  Juttiniani,  etc.  in  .Jernsalem,  Entrchins  merelj  gays,  "he

in  the  Corpoj  .Scriptor.  Hirtorise  Byzont  completed  the  church  of  Helena  which

'  See  above  in  p.  124  sq.  had  been  begun  by  the  patriarch  ElLis;"

*  Procop.  de  -Edific.  5.  7.  Chron.  Pas-  of  course  in  the  same  century ;  ibid.  p.  lOS.
chale  sen  Akxandrin.  pp.  325,  326.  ed.  Entj-chiaa  aUo  relates,  that  Juninian  at
Ducange,  Paris  1688.  the  same  time  catued  the  church  in  Beth-

*  See  above,  p.  296  sq.  Procop.  de  lehem  to  be  rebuilt ;  and  being  di^plea^
£dif.  5.  6.  at  the  manner  in  which  his  legate  had

'  Procop.  de  jEdificiis  Jnstiniani,  5.  9.      constructed  the  edifice,  he  ordered  his  head

*  Eutvchii  Annaled,  Arab,  et  Lat.  ed  to  be  struck  off.  Both  these  accounts
Pococke^  Oxoa.  1658.  Tom.  XL  pp.  158,    have  an  air  of  the  fkbulous.

iL  29,  30

Sec.  Xin.]

CENT.  VI. — PILGRIMS.  COMMERCE.

385

were  not  diminislied.  On  the  contrary,  the  pilgruns  from  the
west  would  appear  to  have  increased  ;  and  it  was  regarded  as  a
pious  duty  of  occidental  princes  and  wealthy  indi^nduals,  to  make
further  provision  for  their  wants.  At  the  close  of  this  century,
Gregory  the  Great  of  Rome  (A.  D.  590-604)  is  said  to  have
sent  the  abhot  Probus  with  a  large  sum  of  money  to  Jerasalem,
where  he  too  erected  a  splendid  hospital  for  the  reception  of
pilgrims.'  To  such  an  extent  was  this  feeUng  of  duty  at  length
carried,  that  in  the  following  centuries  there  was  scarcely  a  city
of  note  in  France  or  Italy,  in  which  the  charity  of  Chi-istians
had  not  provided  a  hospital  for  the  pious  wanderer  to  Eome  and
the  Holy  Land ;  while  in  Constantinople,  at  least  in  the  ninth
centurv,  there  were  several  estabhshments  of  the  same  charac-
ter.*

To  the  close  of  the  sixth  century  belongs  also  the  Itinerary
of  Antoninus  Martyr,  or  Antoninus  Placentinus  ;  for  he  is  called
by  both  names.  His  description  of  the  church  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre  corresponds  with  that  of  Eusebius  as  above  given.
Of  the  author,  nothing  further  is  known.

The  journey  of  the  pilgrims  to  Jerusalem  was  also  facili-
tated, and  the  interest  taken  by  aU  in  the  Holy  Land  was
cherished  and  augmented,  by  the  commercial  intercourse,
which  at  this  period  was  kept  up  with  the  east  by  several  cities
along  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean.  The  merchants  of
Marseilles  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries  sent  their  ships  to
Alexandria  and  the  coasts  of  Syria  ;  and  received  from  thence
paper,  oil,  and  the  silks  and  spices  of  the  remoter  east.^  In  the
sixth  century,  at  the  court  of  king  Guntram  of  Burgundy,  the
wine  of  Gaza  was  regarded  as  the  highest  delicacy.* — In  hke
manner  the  merchants  of  Syria  and  the  east  travelled  •^"ith  their
wares  into  the  Occident,  and  extended  their  wanderings  through-
out the  greater  part  of  France  and  Spain.^

Another  motive  which  served  at  this  period  and  later  to
encourage  and  multiply  pilgrimages  to  the  Holy  Land,  was  the
desire  of  obtaining  the  rehcs  of  saints  and  holy  persons  ;  among
which  not  a  few  were  alleged  to  have  appertained  to  our  Saviour
himself    About  this  time  the  bones  and  other  remains,  especial-

'  Acta  Sanctor.  Mart.  Tom.  II.  p.  157.  Turner's  Tour  in  the  Levant,  II.  p.  268.

Possibly  this  hospital  or  that  of  Justinian  Schubert's  Reise,  II.  p.  585.    The  Arabic

may  have  been  the  edifice  stOl  used  by  name  is  et-Tekiyeh.

the  Muslims  as  a  hospital,  where  food  is  '  Muratori  Antiq.  Ital.  med.  sevi,  Tom,

daily  distributed  to  the  poor.    It  is  called  IE.  p.  575.    Acta  Sanctor.  i.'art.  T.  II.  p.

by  the  Franks  the  Kitchen  of  Helena,  and  298.    Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kreuzz.  I.  p.  10.

is  Tiituated  on  the  street  in  which  we  re-  '  Gregor.  Turonensis,  5.  5.  Wilken

gidcd,  running  down  eastward  below  the  Gesch.  der  Kreuzziige,  I.  p.  17.

church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre-.    Its  por-  *  Gregor.  Tur.  7.  29.

tal,  if  I  remember  right,  exhibits  an  ar-  '  Greg.  Tur.  4.  38.    Wilken  1.  c,  pp.

chitecture  of  the  Byzantine  type.    See  17,  18.

Vol.  I. -33  ii.  30-32

386

JERUSALEM.  HISTORY.

[Sec.  Vm.

ly  of  those  who  had  suffered  martyrdom,  became  an  object  of
idolatrous  veneration.  Churches  and  convents  held  it  to  be
necessary  to  possess  (if  possible)  the  skeletons  or  other  memorials
of  their  patron  saints ;  or  at  least  those  of  other  saints  of  holy
renown  ;  in  order  to  increase  their  own  authority  and  considera-
tion with  the  people.  Among  the  laity  too,  the  most  sacred  oath
was  that  taken  upon  the  relics  of  a  saint ;  and  the  possession  of
a  relic  was  regarded  as  a  protection  against  every  species  of  evil. '
Hence  such  rehcs  were  sought  for  with  avidity,  and  purchased  at
a  high  price.  They  were  indeed  to  be  found  in  great  numbers  in
the  west ;  for  the  saints  of  France  and  Spain,  and  especially
those  of  Italy,  did  not  fail  to  leave  behind  them  memorials
possessing  a  wonder-working  power.  Yet  rehcs  from  the  Holy
Land  enjoyed  nevertheless  the  pre-eminence  ;  and  those  churches
and  convents  were  especially  venerated,  which  could  boast  of
possessing  some  rehc  of  the  Saviour  or  of  his  cotemporary
followers.'^  The  shrewdness  of  the  oriental  clergy  was  not  slow-
to  take  advantage  of  this  superstition  ;  and  the  pilgrims  who
sought  in  Jerusalem  and  elsewhere  for  rehcs,  were  seldom  neces-
sitated to  seek  in  vain.  The  common  people  at  length  manu-
factured them  according  to  the  demand  ;^  although,  in  practising
this  fi-aud,  they  did  not  go  beyond  that  of  the  priests  both  of  the
east  and  the  west,  in  distributing  to  all  the  woi-ld  pieces  of  the
tioie  cross.* — These  relics  from  Palestine  were  sold  in  the  west  to
clergy  and  laity  at  a  high  profit  ;  and  thiis  a  pilgrimage  to
Jerusalem  often  became  a  source,  not  only  of  spiritual  renown,
but  also  of  emolument.  So  profitable,  indeed,  did  this  trade  in
relics  become,  that  Syrian  merchants  repaired  with  them  to
Europe  for  sale.^

Thus  had  now  rolled  on  the  first  six  centuries  after  the

'  Capitular.  Caroli  Magn.  lib.  VI.  c.  commenced  very  early  ;  for  Cyril  of  Jems.

209,  "Omne  sacramentum  in  ecclesia  et  (c.  350,)  mentions  that  they  were  already

super  reliqidas  juretur.  .  .  Sic  ilium  Deus  dispersed  throughont  the  world ;  see  above,

adjuvet  et  illi  Sancti,  quorum  istae  reli-  p.  375,  Note  1.    Tlie  sacred  cross  was  al-

qui»  sunt,  ut  veritatem  dicat."    Charle-  leged  to  have  an  iiilicrent  power  of  repro-

mao-ne  also  took  relics  with  him  in  time  of  duction  ;  so  that  wlien  a  portion  was  taken

war.    So  too  the  Byzantine  Greeks.    See  away,  it  was  again  immediately  replaced :

Wilken,  1.  c.  p.  12.    Du  Fresne  in  Villa-  "In  materia  insensata  vira  vivam  teuens,

hardouin  Hist,  de  I'Empire  de  Constantino-  ita  ex  illo  tempore  innumeris  pane  qnoti-

ple,  Paris  1657.  fol.  p.  311-13.  die  hominum  votis  lignum  suum  commo-

'  Wilken  1.  c.  p.  12.  dat,  ut  detrimeuta  non  sentiat,  et  quasi

^  Thus  in  A.  D.  1027  a  common  man  intacta  permaneat,"  etc.  See  Paulin.  No-

in  P'rance  made  a  regular  trade  of  such  lati.  (fl.  A.  D.  400,)  Epist.  11  sen  31.

fabricated  relics,  prepared  mostly  from  the  Very  many  abbeys  and  convents  had  por-

bones  of  persons  recently  dead.    Several  tions  of  the  cross  to  show ;  see  Wilken,  1.

bishops  patronized  the  cheat,  and  shared  c.  p.  13. — In  like  mamier,  Charles  the

the  fains.    See  Rodolph.  Glabcr,  Franoor.  Bald  founded  a  convent  in  Aquitaine,  "  in

Hist.  4.  3  ;  in  Du  Chesne  Scriptores  Hist,  quo  posuit  pra-putium  Domini  JcsuChristi:"

Franc.  Tom.  IV.  Bouquet's  Recueil,  Tom.  Chron.  Sithiense  ad  Ann.  875,  in  Martene

X.  Tliesaur.  nov.  Anecdot  Tom.  HI.

*  The  trade  in  pieces  of  the  true  cross  '  Grcgor  Tur.  8.  31.  Wilken,  L  c.  p.  15.

ii.  32,  33

Sec  Vm.]

CEXT.  VII. — PEBSIAK  CONQUEST.

387

Christian  era.  For  half  of  this  long  period  Jerusalem  had
remained  in  darkness,  beneath  the  oppressive  sway  of  heathen
domination.  During  the  other  half,  she  had  again  reassumed
her  station  as  the  Holy  City  of  the  Christian  world  ;  and  the
relations  in  which  she  stood  towards  the  west,  if  not  always  of
the  holiest  character,  were  nevertheless  such  as  to  excite  even  in
worldly  minds  a  deep  interest  in  her  fortunes.  Another  period
of  longer  and  deeper  darkness  was  now  about  to  commence  ;
and  Jerusalem,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,"  was  once  more  to
be  trodden  down  by  the  barbarian  hordes  of  a  false  religion,
under  a  thraldom  from  which  even  yet  she  is  not  emancipated.

The  Persians  under  Chosroes  I,  had  already  made  inroads
upon  the  Roman  empire  during  the  reign  of  Justinian,  and  had
extended  their  conquests  into  the  heart  of  Syria,  as  far  as  to
Antioch  and  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  Under  Chosroes
II,  the  war  was  renewed  against  the  emperor  Phocas  and  his
successor  HeracHus.  The  Persians  penetrated  into  Syria  ;  cap-
tured Damascus  in  A.  D.  613  ;  and  then  directed  their  victorious
progress  southwards  towards  Jerusalem.  They  were  joined  on
the  way  by  the  Jews  of  Tiberias,  Nazareth,  and  the  mountains
of  Galilee.  In  the  month  of  June,  A.  D.  614,  the  Holy  City
was  invested  and  taken  by  storm  ;  many  thousands  of  the
clergy,  monks,  consecrated  virgins,  and  other  inhabitants  were
slain  ;  the  splendid  churches  were  thrown  down,  and  that  of  the
Holy  Sepulchre  burned  with  fire  ;  while  the  patriarch  Zacharias
with  the  true  cross,  and  multitudes  of  the  inhabitants  were
carried  away  into  captivity.'

Many  fugitives  from  Palestine  and  Syria  now  retired  to
Alexandria,  where  they  were  cherished  by  the  boimty  of  the
patriarch  John  Eleemon  (the  compassionate).  This  munificent
patron  also  sent  large  supplies  of  provisions  to  the  miserable
inhabitants  who  remained  in  Jerusalem.  And  when,  not  long
after,  Modestus  was  appointed  as  the  vicar  of  Zacharias  during
his  exile,  the  same  patriarch  furnished  him  with  a  large  sum  of
money  and  a  thousand  labourers  from  Egypt,  to  aid  in  rebuilding
the  Holy  City  and  its  churches.^

Although  Palestine  and  Syria  remained  under  the  yoke  of

The  particulars  of  this  siege  and  its  at  ninety  thousand ;  and  Eutychins  ascrihes

consequences  are  related  by  a  cotemporary  the  slaughter  to  the  Jews.    The  Saracens

writer  in  the  Chronicon  Paschale  seu  Al-  or  Arabs  would  appear  also  to  have  acted

exandrinum,  p.  385,  ed.  Paris.    Also  by  with  the  Persians ;  they  plundered  the

Antiochus,  at  that  time  abbot  of  the  con-  monastery  of  St.  Saba,  and  massarred  for-

vent  of  St.  Saba,  in  Biblioth.  vet.  Patmm,  ty-four  of  the  monks.    Antiochus,  1.  c.  Le

Tom.  I.  p.  1023  sq.    Later  writers  are  :  Quien  III.  p.  252.

Theophanes  Chronographia,  p.  252,  ed.  ^  See  the  lile  of  St.  John  Eleemou  by

Paris.    Eutychii  Annal.  IL  p.  213.  Comp.  Leontius,  a  cotemporary  Cyprian  bishop  ;

le  Quien  Oriens  Christ.  III.  p.  250  sq. —  Lat.  in  Acta  Sanctor.  Jan.  Tom.  II.  p.  500.

Theophanes  gives  the  number  of  the  siain  Le  Qtiiea  HI.  p.  250  sq.

ii.  33;  24

388

JERUSALEM. — HISTOET.

[Sec.THL

the  Persians,  yet  Modestus  appears  not  to  have  been  hindered
in  the  work  of  restoration.  He  proceeded  to  huUd  up  again
from  their  foundations  the  churches  of  the  Kesurrection  and  of
Calvary,  as  also  a  church  of  the  Assumption.'  "Whether  in  doing
this  he  changed  the  form  of  the  buildings  around  the  Holy  Sep-
ulchre, vre  are  not  told  ;  but  the  description  of  Arculfus,  as
given  by  Adamnanus  at  the  close  of  the  century,  seems  not  to
tally  with  the  accounts  of  Eusebius.  According  to  him,  the
Holy  Selpulchre  was  covered  by  a  small  tcgorium  (tuguriimi  ?)
cut  from  the  same  rock,  and  standing  in  the  midst  of  a  large
circular  church  constructed  over  it.*  The  Basilica  or  Martyrion
of  Constantine  was  situated  as  before.  Adamnanus  further  de-
scribes a  church  of  Golgotha  between  the  Basilica  and  the  sep-
ulchre ;  but  this  is  not  mentioned  by  Bemhard  two  centuries
later.'  Both  these  writers  however  speak  of  a  church  of  St.
Mary,  adjacent  to  the  buildings  of  the  sepulchre  on  the  south  ;
and  this  is  not  improbably  the  church  of  the  Assumption  re-
stored by  Modestus.

After  years  of  discomfiture  and  disaster,  the  tide  of  victory
turned  at  length  in  favour  of  Heraclius.  He  routed  the  armies
of  the  Persians,  put  their  monarch  to  flight,  and  pursued  them
into  their  own  territory.  Early  in  A.  D.  628,  Chosroes  was  de-
posed and  murdered  by  his  son  Siroes  ;  who  immediately  con-
cluded an  inglorious  peace  with  the  Roman  emperor.  The  pa-
triarch Zacharias  and  other  captives  were  restored  after  fourteen
years  of  exUe,  and  the  true  cross  was  given. up.  The  emperor
returned  first  to  Constantinople,  where  he  made  a  triumphal
entry ;  and  in  the  following  year  repaii-ed  in  person  to  Jerusa-
lem, which  he  entered  on  foot,  bearing  the  true  cross  upon  his
shoulder.*

But  the  restoration  of  the  Holy  City  to  the  dominion  of  the
Christians,  was  not  of  long  duration.  Jerusalem  had  indeed
been  freed  from  the  yoke  of  the  disciples  of  Zoroaster  ;  but  only
in  order  to  be  speedily  subjected  to  the  more  galling  and  perma-
nent bondage  of  the  followei-s  of  Muliammed.  The  arms  of
the  false  prophet  and  his  companions  had  already  subdued  Ara-
bia, Syria,  and  Egypt  ;  and  in  A.  D.  636  the  troops  of  the  Kha-
lif  Omar  appeared  before  Jerusalem.    The  city  was  bravely  de-

'  Antiochi  Epist.  in  Biblioth.  vet.  Patr.  *  Chron.  PaschaL  p.  398  sq.  ed.  Paris.

Grsec.  Tom.  I.  p.  1023  sq.    Le  Quien  1.  c.  Theophan.  Chronogr.  p.  273,  ed  Paris,

p.  259.    Baron.  .Ajinal.  A.  D.  616.  vi. —  Baronii  Annal.  A.  D.  628.  t,  ii.    Le  Qnien

Antiochus  describes  Modestus  a:-  a  second  L  c.  p.  2.)T. — In  A.  D.  634,  Heraclius  re-

Bezaleel,  or  at  least  a  Zenibbabel.  tiring  before  the  Muhammedans,  carried

'  "  Valde  grandis  ecclesia  super  with  him  the  true  cross  to  Constantinople,

Dlud  constructa;  "  Adamn.  1.  2.  where  it  was  seen  and  described  by  .\rcnl-

'  See  the  description  and  plan  of  Adam-  fus  at  the  close  of  the  century.  Theophan.

nanus,  1.  2  sq.    Bemhard  de  Locis  Sanct  Chronogr.  p.  280.     Adamnan.  de  Loc.

10.  Sanct  3.  3.

ii,  35,  36  *

.SEcVm.]  CENT.  VII.  MUHAMMEDAN  CONQUEST.

389

fended  by  the  patriarch  Sophronius.  After  a  long  siege/  the
Khalif  himself  repaired  to  the  camp  ;  and  the  patriarch  at  length
surrendered  to  him  the  Holy  City  in  A.  D.  637,  on  condition  that
the  inhabitants  should  be  secured  as  to  their  lives,  their  families,
their  property,  and  their  churches.  The  latter  were  neither  to  be
destroyed  nor  appropriated  to  the  Muhammedans.  The  gates
were  opened  ;  and  Omar  entered  in  a  garment  of  camel's  hair,  the
common  apparel  of  his  countrymen.  He  was  not  very  cordially
received  by  the  patriarch  ;  who,  on  seeing  him  in  this  garb,  ex-
claimed :  "  This  is  of  a  truth  the  abomination  of  desolation  spo-
ken of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  standing  in  the  holy  place  !
The  Khalif  honourably  fulfilled  his  promises  ;  and  performed
his  devotions  only  on  the  ste'ps  of  the  Basilica  ;  in  order  that  his
followers  might  have  no  pretext  to  claim  possession  of  the  church
after  his  departure,  under  the  pretence  that  he  had  worshipped
in  it.^  The  further  proceedings  of  Omar  and  his  successors  in
erecting  a  mosk  upon  the  site  of  the  Jewish  temple,  have
already  been  narrated.*

From  this  time  onward  untU  the  era  of  the  crusades,  a  period
of  four  and  a  half  centuries,  the  history  of  Jerusalem  again  pre-
sents little  more  than  a  blank.  A  few  scattered  notices  drawn
from  the  itineraries  of  pilgrims  and  the  cotemporary  works  of
European  authors,  with  the  traditions  recorded  by  later  oriental
writers,  furnish  all  the  materials  which  exist  for  such  a  history  ;
and,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  even  these  have  never  yet  been
fuUy  collected  and  arranged.'  The  names  of  the  successive  pa-
triarchs are  indeed  preserved  ;  but  the  chronicle  of  their  lives
illustrates  the  progress  of  theological  controversy,  rather  than
the  history  of  Jerusalem.*  "We  can  here,  of  course,  only  touch
upon  some  of  the  principal  events.

The  remainder  of  the  seventh  century,  as  well  as  the  greater
portion  of  the  eighth,  is  barren  of  incidents  relating  to  Jerusa-
lem.   The  Muslims  extended  their  conquests  :  subdued  the

'  Christian  writers  say  the  siege  contin-  have  in  part  followed)  in  his  introduction  ;

ned  two   years ;   Arabian  writers,  four  Gesch.  der  Kreuzz.  I.  p.  1  sq.    See  also

months.  Michaud  Hist,  des  Croisades,  Tom.  I  The

'  In  allusion  to  Matth.  23,  15.    Theo-  work  of  Gibbon  contains  some  of  these  no-

phanes  Chronograph,  p.  281,  ed.  Par.  tices.    Witsius  in  his  professed  history  of

'  The  earliest  writers  who  describe  these  Jerusalem  utterly  passes  over  this  whole

events  are  Theophanes  1.  c.  and  Eutychius  period  ;  Miscell.  Sac.  Tom.  IT.  Exerc.  XII.

Annal.  II.  p.  28-t  sq.    The  former  lived  40,  -tl. — William  of  Tyro  wrote  a  work

apparently  nearly  or  quite  two  centuries  entit\ei  de  Gestis  oricntalium  Principum,

after  the  event  ;  and  the  latter  about  A.  covering  the  time  from  the  conquest  of

D.  870.    The   Arabian  writers  Elmacin  Jenisalem  to  the  era  of  the  crusades  ;  but

(el-Makin),  Abulfeda   and  Abulfaragius  it  is  unfortunately  lost.    Will.  Tyr.  1.  3,

(Bar  Hebraeus),  who  give  still  more  par-  fin.

'  The  notices  of  Jerusalem  during  this  tor.  Mail  Tom.  III.  LeQuienOriens  Christ,
period  are  best  given  by  Wilken  (whom  I    lU.  pp.  280-500.

ticulars,  are  all  of  the  thirteenth  century.
*  See  above,  pp.  297,  298.

°  See  Pappebroch  Patriarchar.  Hieros.
Hist.  chronoL  prefixed  to  the  Acta  Sanc-

VoL.  I.— 33*

u.  36,  37

390

JERUSALEM.  HISTORY.

[Sec.  Vm.

nortliern  coast  of  Africa  and  the  kingdom  of  Spain  ;  and  threat-
ened to  advance  into  France  and  Italy.  '  Meanwhile  the  Chris-
tian pilgrims  to  Palestine  resumed  their  wonted  course,  appa-
rently in  peace  ;  and  the  Holy  City,  which  the  Arabians  also
called  el-Kuds  (the  Holy),  became  likewise  a  place  of  pilgrim-
age for  the  Muhammedans. '  These  pilgrimages  were  still  con-
nected with  the  spirit  of  trade.  Arculfus,  who  visited  Jemsa-
lem  about  A.  D.  697,  relates  that  a  fair  was  held  there  annually
on  the  fifteenth  day  of  September,  which  was  attended  by  an  in-
numerable multitude  from  every  quarter,  for  the  purposes  of
mutual  traffic  and  intercourse.^

Towards  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century,  the  sceptre  of  the
Khalifs,  after  a  long  and  bloody  struggle,  was  transferred  from
the  race  of  the  Ommiades  to  that  of  the  Abassides.^  About  A.
D.  750,  Almansor  (el-Mansur),  the  second  of  his  race,  foxmded
the  city  of  Bagdad,  and  removed  the  seat  of  the  Khalifate  from
Damascus  to  his  new  capital  on  the  banks  of  the  Tigris.  During
this  century,  earthquakes  were  frequent  in  Syria  and  Palestine.*
The  situation  also  of  the  Christians  in  the  east  appears  to  have
become  more  difficult  and  less  secure.  Patriarchs  and  bishops
were  deposed  and  driven  from  their  homes,  at  the  caprice  of  their
Muhammedan  rulers  ;  and  exactions  and  oppressions  were  the
natural  consequence  of  the  existing  relations  of  society.^  Yet
the  pilgrims  from  the  west  seem  in  general  to  have  been  looked
upon  with  favour  ;  and  they  seldom  suffered  harm  in  their  per-
sons or  hindrance  in  their  pursuits.  Among  them  at  this  period
was  St.  Madelveus,  bishop  of  Verdun  in  France,  who  made  a
strong  impression  upon  the  patriarch  Eusebius  by  his  piety  and
fervent  devotion.*  About  A.  D.  786,  St.  WilHbald,  bishop  of
Eichstfidt,  with  seven  companions,  made  the  pilgrimage  to  the
Holy  Land,  which  they  traversed  in  all  directions  ;  visiting  Jeru-
salem no  less  than  four  times,  and  Emesa  and  Damascus  twice.
They  first  passed  through  Emesa  (Hums)  on  their  way  to  Jeru-
salem ;  and  the  inhabitants,  not  being  accustomed  to  the  sight "
of  pilgrims,  and  ignorant  whence  they  came,  wondered  at  their

'  EutTch.  Aiinal.  II.  p.  364.    D'Herbe-  of  Nicea,  A.  D.  787,  in  Labb.  Concil.  Tom.

lot  Bibli'oth.  Or.  art.  Co(/«.  VII.  p.  170  sq.    Lc  Qnien  Or.  Christ.  HI

'  Adamnan.  de  Locis  Sanct.  1.  1.  p.  207  sq.  304.    Also  Acta  Sanctorum,

'  The  generiil  liistory  of  this  change  Jul.  Tom.  III.  pp.  531,  .537,  .'>.")  1. — In  A.

may  be  seen  in  Gibbon,  Chap.  LIT.  I).  7!i7,  the  Klialif  increased  the  tribute,

■*  Violent  earthquakes,  which  destroyed  stripped  tlie  churclies,  and  compelled  the

churches,  convents,  and  even  whole  cities,  Jews  to  purchase  the  spoils;  Theophaji.

are  mentioned  by  Theophanes  in  A.  I).  Chronojrr.  p.  Sfil,  ed  Paris.

746,  749,  756.    Chronogr.  pp.  354,  357,  "  St.  Madelveus  was  made  bishop  in  A.

361,  ed.  Paris.  D.  75.%  and  died  about  A  D.  776.  See

'  So  the  patriarchs  of  Antioch  and  Je-  the  Chron.  Virdunense  by  Hugo  Flavinia-

rusalera  ;  Elinacin  Hist.  Sarac.  lib.  I.  17.  ccnsis,  in  Labb.  Nov.  Bibliotli.  Manuscr,

p.  82.  Lugi.  Bat.  1625.    See.  too  the  letter  Tom.  I.  p.  110  sq.    Le  Quien  1.  c.  p.  300

of  the  SjTian  monks  to  the  second  council  sq.    Acta  Sanctor.  Oct.  Tom.  11.
ii.  38,  39

SKcVm.]    CZyT.  VIII,  IX. — ^HAKTJK  AKD  CHABLF.VAGyE.  391

strange  appearance,  and  regarded  them  as  spies.  They  were
brought  before  a  wealthy  Sheikh  to  be  examined  ;  who  after  in-
quiry, said  :  I  have  often  seen  men  trorn  their  part  of  the
world  ;  they  seek  no  harm,  and  only  wish  to  fulfil  their  law."
Yet  they  were  kept  for  some  time  in  prison,  though  treated  with
great  courtesy  ;  until,  through  the  influence  of  a  Spaniard,  the
Emir  of  the  city  ordered  them  to  be  set  at  liberty.'

Just  at  the  close  of  the  same  century,  a  furious  civil  war
raged  in  Palestine  among  the  various  tribes  of  Saracens  or  Arabs
inhabiting  the  country.  In  A.  D.  796  the  monastery  of  St.  Saba
"was  again  pillaged  and  many  of  the  monks  slain.  The  fortimes
of  the  war  also  laid  waste  the  cities  of  Gaza,  Askelon,  and  Sari-
phaea,  and  converted  EleutheropoUs  into  a  desert.*

In  the  latter  part  of  the  eighth  and  the  beginning  of  the
ninth  century,  amid  the  general  darkness  of  those  ages,  it  is  in-
teresting to  meet  with  two  cotemporary  monarchs,  lords  of  the
Orient  and  Occident,  who  both  exerted  a  mighty  influence  upon
their  respective  quarters  of  the  globe,  and  are  still  the  heroes  of
many  a  romantic  tale,  and  landmarks  in  the  history  of  the  world.
In  the  east,  Harim  er-Rashid  (Aaron  the  Just),  who  swayed  the
sceptre  from  A.  D.  786  to  809,  is  celebrated  as  the  ideal  of  Ara-
bian justice,  magnanimity,  and  splendour  ;  and  procured  for  the
empire  of  the  Khahfs  a  renown,  both  in  learning  and  in  arms,
unequalled  in  its  previous  or  later  history.  In  the  west.  Charle-
magne was  the  sagacious  founder  of  a  new  and  still  more  power-
fol  empire,  which  he  governed  with  equal  wisdom  and  justice  for
the  long  period  of  some  forty  years ;  having  reigned  from  A.  D.
771  to  A.  D.  814.  The  interjacent  position  of  the  Byzantine
empire,  prevented  these  two  sovereigns  from  becoming  rivals  or
enemies ;  and  there  was  too  much  of  nobleness  in  the  character
of  both,  not  to  awaken  a  mutual  sentiment  of  respect  and  good
wflL

Another  motive  also  prompted  the  monarch  of  the  west  to
set  on  foot  and  cultivate  an  interchange  of  courtesies  and  friend-
ship. His  compassion  for  Christians  in  poverty  and  suffering
was  not  confined  to  the  wide  Kmits  of  his  own  realms ;  but
was  likewise  awakened  for  those  languishing  under  the  oppres-
sion of  the  followers  of  the  false  prophet,  both  in  Africa  and
Asia.^  The  situation  of  the  Holy  Land  could  not,  of  course,
but  excite  his  sympathy.  He  sent  amljassadors  to  distribute
alms  in  the  Holy  City  ;  and  they  were  also  charged  with  presents
and  a  message  to  the  Khalif,  to  intercede  with  him  in  behalf  of

'  StWillibiddiHodcBporicOT,  inMabnion  monk  of  St  Saba,  in  Acta  Sanctor.  Mart.
Ajcta  Saact  Ori  Benedict  Ssbc  IIL  P.  IL  Tom.  IIL  p.  167  sq.  Le  Quien  Lap.
p.  373.  313.

'  See  die  account  of  these  civil  wars  *  Eginhardi  Vita  Car.  Magni  via  rel
and  massacres,  bv  Stephen,  a  cotemporary  zvi.

ii  39,40

392

JERUSALEM.  HISTORY.

[SBcVni.

his  Christian  subjects.  Harun  received  the  messengers  with
courtesy  ;  immediately  granted  all  their  requests  ;  and  even  went
so  far  as  to  make  over  to  Charlemagne  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Holy  Sepulchre  and  its  appurtenances.'  The  ambassadors  on
their  return  were  accompanied  by  those  of  the  Khalif,  bringing
rich  presents  of  vestments  and  spices  and  the  choicest  products
of  the  eastern  world  ;  and  bearing  to  the  emperor  the  keys  of  the
Holy  Sepulchre  and  of  Calvary,  as  the  symbol  of  possession.  A
few  years  before,  the  Khalif,  at  the  emperor's  request,  had  sent
him  the  only  elephant  he  happened  to  possess.''  Indeed,  so  strong
was  the  mutual  admiration  of  the  two  monarchs,  that  according
to  Eginhard,  the  biographer  of  Charlemagne,  this  emperor  pre-
ferred the  friendship  of  Harun  to  that  of  aU  the  kings  and  prin-
ces of  the  world  ;  and  regarded  him  alone  as  worthy  to  be  dis-
tinguished with  honours  and  magnificence.'  To  the  end  of  his
life  Charlemagne  continued  to  send  alms  to  the  Christians  in
Jerusalem,  in  aid  of  the  poor  and  for  the  rebuilding  of  churches;
and  his  example  was  followed  by  his  son  Lewis  the  Pious,  and
by  his  grandson  Lewis  the  Grerman.*

These  of  course  were  palmy  days  of  pilgrimage  ;  but  after  the
death  of  Harun  er-Rashid  the  prospect  was  again  clouded.  The
dissensions  among  his  sons  spread  also  through  the  provinces  ;
the  people  were  divided  into  factions ;  and  each  party  rejoiced  in
the  opportunity  to  wreak  its  fury  on  the  Christians.  The  Holy
City  did  not  escape  the  storm  ;  churches  were  destroyed  and  con-
vents pillaged  ;  and  among  the  latter,  the  monastery  of  St.  Saba,
which  seems  ever  to  have  been  a  special  object  of  vengeance,  was
again  plundered  and  the  monks  massacred  in  A.  D.  812.^

The  remainder  of  the  ninth  century  presents  no  important
incident  in  the  history  of  Jerusalem,  save  the  visit  and  Itinerary
of  the  monk  Bernhard  and  his  two  companions,  about  A.  X).
870.*   His  account  is  very  brief ;  but  the  description  of  the  Holy

'  "  Sed  etiam  sacram  ilium  et  salutarem  omnium  qui  in  toto  orbe  terrarum  erant

locum,  ut  illius  potestati  ascriberetur,  con-  Regum  ac  Principum  amicitiae  prseponeret,"

cessit ; "    Eginb.  1.  c.  v.  etc.    Eginhard  1.  c.

^  Eginliardi  Vita  Car.  Magni  v.    Tbe  '  So  late  as  A.  D.  810,  there  is  a  Capitu-

presents  of  the  Khalif  are  described  in  the  larium  of  Charlemagne  entitled  :  "  De

Annalcs  Mcttenses  ad  Ann.  807,  in  Bou-  eleemosyna   mittenda  ad  Hierosolymas,

quet^s  Recueil  des  Hist.  Fr.  Tom.  V.  p.  354.  propter  ecclesias  Dei  restituandas."  Capit

The  elephant  arrived  in  A.  D.  802  ;  Annal.  I.  Ann.  810.  c.  17.    Monach.  Sangall.  II.

Loiseliani  ad  h.  Ann.  in  Duchesne  Tom.  c.  14.    Wilken  1.  c.  p.  27. — ¥ot  the  later

II.  p.  24  sq.    The  keys  are  sometimes  legend,  whicli  relates  that  Charlemagne

said  to  have  been  sent  by  the  patriarch  of  himself  repaired  to  Palestine,  see  Wilken

Jerusalem ;    but  as  Eginhard   expressly  L  c.  I.  Anh.  p.  3.

says,  that  tbe  Holy  Sepulchre  was  made  '  Theophanes  '  Chronogr.  p.  409.  ed.

over  to  Charlemagne  by  the  Khalif,  the  Paris.    Baronii  Annul.  A.  D.  812.  xi.

keys  were  also  probably  sent  by  his  order.  "  The  \vriter  was  cotcmporary  with  pope

See  generally,  Lo  Quion  Oriens  Ciirist.  III.  Nicholas  I,  who  died  A.  D.  867  ;  and  with

p.  sis  sq.  346.  Theodosius,  who  was  patriarch  of  Jerusa-

"  "  Cum  Aaron  talem  habuit  1cm  from  A.  D.  867  to  A.  D.  879.

in  amicitiai  concordiam,  ut  is  gratiam  ejus
ii.  41.  42

SEcVin.]         CENT.  IS,  X.  WARS.     THE  FATIMITES.

393

Sepulchre  and  its  appurtenances  is  quite  distinct.  He  speaks
indeed  of  four  churches  round  about  it,  though  he  enumerates
only  three,  viz.  that  of  the  Sepulchre  itself  upon  the  west,  that
of  St.  Mary  on  the  south,  and  the  Basilica  on  the  east,  forming
three  sides  of  an  open  court,  and  all  connected  by  walls.  Adja-
cent to  the  church  of  St.  Mary,  there  was  already  a  hospital,  in
which  all  the  Latin  pilgrims  were  received.  This  traveller  is  the
first  to  mention  the  jugglery  of  the  Greek  holy  fire  ;  and  he  also
speaks  of  a^ library  foimded  by  Charlemagne  in  the  church  of  St.
Mary.

The  renown  of  the  house  of  the  Abassides  linsrered  long  in  its
decay.  The  munificence  of  Almamon  (el-Mamun)  the  son  and
second  of  the  successors  of  Harfin,  -^-ho  held  the  sceptre  for  thirty
years  (A.  D.  813-843),  and  the  patronage  which  he  gave  to
learning,  sustained  for  a  time  the  waning  gloif"  of  his  race.  Un-
der him  the  Christians  still  enjoyed  favours,  and  were  found
among  his  ofiicers  of  trust  and  the  attendants  of  his  person.'  But
his  successors  held  the  reins  of  empire  with  a  feeble  hand ;  the
various  provinces  were  distracted  with  feuds  and  bloody  wars  ;
and  the  Christian  subjects  became  every  day  more  and  more  ex-
posed to  violence  and  oppression.  The  empire  was  torn  with  dis-
sensions ;  and  the  Holy  Land  was  again  made  the  scene  of  bat-
tles and  bloodshed,  during  the  long  wars  waged  by  the  KhaHfs,
either  against  the  various  factions  and  revolted  governors  of  cities,
or  against  new  heretical  sects,  which  strove  to  propagate  their
tenets  by  the  sword.*  One  province  after  another  was  thus
wrested  from  the  sway  of  the  Khalils.  At  length  in  A.  D.  969,
Mu'ez,  of  the  race  of  the  Fatimites,  whose  ancestors  for  sixty
years  had  reigned  as  Khalifs  at  Kairwan  (Cyrene)  over  a  great
part  of  Africa,  extended  his  conquests  throughout  Egypt  and
Syria,  and  transferred  the  seat  of  his  empire  to  the  new  city  of
Musr  el-Kahirah,  the  present  Cairo.

The  Holy  City  had  now  fallen  into  the  hands  of  new  mas-
ters, who  were  inclined  to  pay  little  regard  to  the  stipulations  or
usages  which  had  found  place  under  the  former  dynasties.  The
church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  is  said  again  to  have  been  set  on
fire  ;  and  the  patriarch  John  was  committed  to  the  flames.'
The  Christians  were  subjected  to  new  oppressions  and  afflictions ;
against  which  they  would  seem  to  have  complained  bitterly  to
their  brethren  of  the  west.    A  letter  of  the  pope  Sylvester  II,

'  Eutychii  Annal  IL  pp.  431,  432.  sect,  A.  D.  890.    Syria  and  Egypt  were

'  See  a  sketch  of  some  of  these  wars  twice  dismembered  from  the  empire,  first

and  factions  in  Gibbon,  Chap.  LEI.    More  by  the  Tulunides,  A,  D.  868  ;  and  then  by

fully  in  Desguignes  Hist,  des  Huns,  Tom.  the  Ikshides,  A.  D.  934.

EL    De  Pacy,  Expos^  de  la  Religion  des  '  Cedreni  Hi.stor.  Compend.  p.  061.  ed.

Ehiizes,  Tom.  I.  Introd. — The  Karmathi-  Par.   he  Quien  L  c.  p.  466.

ans  were  a  new  and  powerfbl  religious

ii.  12.  43

394

JERUSALEM. — HISTORY.

[SecVIIL

(A.  D.  999-1003,)  is  still  extant,  intended  to  rouse  the  western
church  to  active  sympathy  in  behalf  of  her  oriental  sister.'  The
ships  of  Pisa  actually  made  descents  upon  the  African  coasts  ;
and  not  improbably,  the  necessity  of  a  general  war  against  the
followers  of  the  prophet  and  in  behalf  of  the  Holy  Land,  had
already  begun  to  occupy  the  minds  of  men.'^

Yet  in  the  oppression  of  the  Egyptian  Khalifs  there  was
a  pause ;  and  the  Christians  of  the  Holy  Land,  either  from  a
habit  of  suffering  or  the  policy  of  their  oppressors,  obtained  a
breathing-spell.'  The  pilgrims  from  the  west,  and  especially
the  western  merchants,  were  not  unwelcome  guests  ;  for  the
tolls  and  exactions  to  which  they  were  subjected,  contributed  to
fill  the  coffers  of  the  Muslim  rulers.  The  merchants  of  Amalfi
in  Italy  were  particularly  favoured  ;  and  were  able  to  purchase
many  commercial*  privileges.  As  they  often  visited  the  Holy
City  in  their  peregrinations,  they  obtained  from  the  Khalif  per-
mission to  erect  there  a  domicile,  which  they  might  call  their
own.  They  accordingly  founded  a  monastery  with  a  church  in
honour  of  the  Virgin,  at  the  distance  of  a  stone's  throw  from  the
Holy  Sepulchre,  in  which  all  the  services  were  performed  in  the
Latin  tongue  ;  and  which,  for  this  reason,  took  the  name  of  St.
Mary  de  Latina.  Adjacent  to  this  a  nunnery  was  not  long  af-
terwards erected,  in  honour  of  Mary  Magdalene  ;  in  which  the
nuns  devoted  themselves  to  the  care  of  the  poor  female  pilgrims.
But  as  even  in  those  perilous  times  the  numbers  and  the  need
of  pilgrims  continued  to  increase,  so  that  even  both  these  con-
vents were  insufficient  to  receive  them,  the  monks  procured  a
Xenodochium  or  hospital  to  be  built  within  the  same  precincts,
in  which  the  poor  and  the  sick  found  a  shelter,  and  were  fed
from  the  fragments  of  the  monastic  tables.  This  hospital  was
dedicated  to  St.  John  Eleemon,  the  former  patriarch  of  Alexan-
dria ;  and  in  it,  at  a  later  period,  arose  the  celebrated  order  of
the  Hospitalers,  or  knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.''

The  third  of  the  Fatimite  Khalifs  in  Egypt  was  el-Hakim,

Mabillon  refers  this  letter  to  A.  D.
98C ;  Acta  Sanctor.  Ord.  Bened.  T.  IV.  p.
39.  It  has  often  been  printed ;  e.  g.  in
Bouquet's  Recueil  T.  X.  p.  426.  The  gen-
uineness of  the  letter  is  doubted ;  but  not
the  fact  of  such  an  appeal.  Wiliicn  1.  c.
p.  28.

'  Wilken  1.  c.  p.  29.

'  Will.  Tyr.  1.  4,  "  Sub  quo  principatu
[Egyptorium],  sicut  captivis  solent  ali-
quando  tempora  indulgeiitiora  conecdi,  a
sui.s  an\ietatibus  coepit  aliquantulra  esse
remissius,"  etc.

*  Tlie  founding  of  the  church  and  mon-
astery of  St.  Mary  de  Latina  by  the  mcr-
ii.  44,  45

chants  of  Amalfi,  is  related  two  centuries
after  by  William  of  TjTe,  18.  4,  .5  ;  and  by
Jacob  de  Vitr.  c.  64.  But  a  church  of  St.
Mary  is  mentioned  in  the  same  place  by
Adamnanus,  A.  1).  G97  ;  and  in  Bcrnhard's
time,  A.  I).  870,  the  same  church  was  still
in  existence,  and  also  a  hospital  for  Latin
pilgrims.  Not  improbably  these  may  have
bci^n  destroyed  at  the  capture  of  Jerusalem
under  Mu'cz,  and  again  rebuilt  by  mer-
chants of  Amalfi.  This  may  perhaps  be
the  destruction  of  buildings  around  the
Holy  Sepulchre,  which  is  mentioned  by  Ce-
drcims  as  above  quoted ;  see  N.  3  on  pre-
ceding page.

SKcVm.]  CEKT.  XI. — THE  KHALIF  HAKIM.  395

who  mounted  the  throne  at  the  age  of  eleven  years  in  A.  D.  996.
He  became  a  wild  and  yisionarr  fanatic,  who  gave  himself  out
as  the  prophet  of  a  new  religion  ;  and  his  whole  reign  was  a
series  of  violence  and  inconsistencies. '  By  Arabian  writers  he  is
described  as  a  compound  of  atheism  and  iusanity.-  About  A.
D.  1010,  prompted  by  siispicion  or  some  motive  equally  un-
worthy, he  became  jealous  of  the  Christians  who  had  hitherto
enjoyed  tranquility  and  even  honours  under  his  reign, ^  and  set
on  foot  a  furious  persecution  agauist  them  both  in  Egypt  and
Palestine.  Disregarding  the  claims  of  usage  and  the  conces-
sions of  his  predecessors,  he  imposed  upon  his  Christian  subjects
and  upon  the  pilgrims  enormous  contributions  and  taxes  ;  and
forbade  the  celebration  of  the  Christian  worship  ia  the  churches.
But  this  was  not  alL  The  houses  of  Christians  were  broken
open,  and  the  inmates  hurried  off,  without  accusation  or  trial,
to  death  by  the  cross  and  by  impalement.  Sons  and  daughters
were  torn  from  the  houses  of  their  parents,  and  compelled,  some-
times by  the  bastinado  and  sometimes  by  blandishments,  to
apostatize  from  their  faith,  or  were  delivered  to  the  cross.  Xo
one  was  secure  in  his  property  or  life  ;  the  former  was  confiscated
and  plundered  at  wiLL  To  crown  this  exhibition  of  hatred
towards  the  Christian  name,  the  Khalif  gave  orders  to  demolish
the  chtuch  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  ;  and  this  order  was  folly  car-
ried into  execution  by  the  governor  of  Eamleh,  to  whom  it  was
directed.  The  building  was  razed  to  the  foundations  ;  and
much  labour  was  expended  to  deface  and  destroy  the  sepulchre  it-
self.*

The  news  of  these  atrocities  was  carried  by  the  pilgrims  to
Europe  ;  and  awakened  universal  indignation  and  grief  Yet
instead  of  combining  to  take  vengeance  on  the  direct  authors  of
these  calamities,  a  report  was  spread  abroad  that  the  Jews  had
been  the  cause  of  this  persecution,  by  secretly  informing  the
Khalif  of  a  proposed  warlike  expedition  against  Jerusalem;

'  This  Khslif  el-Hakim,  is  regarded  as
the  prophet  of  the  Druzes.  He  built  a
mosk  in  Cairo,  which  is  still  standing :  and
in  an  inscription  o-ner  one  of  the  doors,
bearing  date  in  A.  H.  393,  (A.  D.  1003.)
he  is  already  treated  as  a  prophet.  See
WHkmson's  Thebes,  etc.  p.  547,  ed.  1.  Gib-
bon, Chaji.  LVn.

*  Elmacin  Hist.  Saracen.  3.  6.  p.  260.

'  Christians  even  enjoyed  the  office  of
Vizier  :  Bar  Hebr.  Chron.  Syr.  p.  211.

'  ■•  Pnedicta  ecclesia  nsqne  ad  solom
dirata,"  are  the  words  of  WDliam  of  Tyre.
The  above  description  is  drawn  chiefly
from  this  writer ;  lib.  I.  c  4,  5.  See  also
Elmacin  lib.  HL  5,  6.  Ademarns  in  Labb.
Nov.  Biblioth.  Mannscr.  T.  IL  p.  174 :  and

in  Bouquet  T.  X  p.  152.  Albericus  as
quoted  in  le  Quien  Or.  Christ  ILL  p.  47^
sq.  Baronii  et  Pagii  Annales.  etc.  A-  IW
1009. — The  mother  of  el-H.ikim  was  a
Christian :  her  brother  Orestes  was  at  this
very  time  patriarch  of  •Jerusalem,  and  was
put  to  death.  The  extravagancies  of  the
Khalif  had  probably  been  referred  to  hia
Christian  orijiin  and  propensities :  and,  ac-
cording to  William  of  Tyre,  it  was  to  clear
himself  from  this  calumny,  that  he  set  on
foot  this  persecution.    WUL  Tyr.  1.  4.

*  '-Eodem  anno  (1010)  Radulphus.  Pe-
tragoricae  episcopus,  Hierosolymis  rediens,
retulit  quse  ibi  viderat  nefanda ;  "  Chron.
Ademari  in  Labb.  Nov.  Biblioth.  EL  p.
174.    Bouquet  Tom.  X.  p.  153.

ii.  45,  46

396

JERUSALEM. — HISTORY.

[SEcVm.

tlius  instigating  him  to  set  on  foot  the  cruel  proceedings  against  the
Christians.  The  J ews  themselves  now  hecame  the  sufferers,  and
throughout  all  France  were  suhjected  to  violent  persecution  ;
which,  if  perhaps  less  bloody  than  that  which  it  was  intended  to
avenge,  was  at  least  equally  unjust.'  Yet  the  Khalif  himself,
with  an  inconstancy  common  to  weak  and  insane  minds,  after-
wards repented  of  his  violence  ;  he  allowed  the  multitudes  who  had
apostatized  from  Christianity  to  return  to  their  former  faith ;  and
gave  permission  to  rebuild  the  churches  which  had  been  de-
stroyed.^ This  concession  would  seem  to  have  been  long  inoper-
ative, or  at  least  slowly  acted  upon  ;  for,  although  el-Hakim
died  in  A.  D.  1021,  it  was  not  until  ten  years  afterwards,  and  on
the  application  of  the  Greek  emperor  Romanus,  that  his  suc-
cessor edh-Dhaher  confirmed  the  permission,  so  that  the  rebuild-
ing of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  could  be  commenced.^
The  successor  of  Romanus  granted  aid  in  the  work.*  Then  there
was  joy  throughout  the  Christian  world  ;  and  pilgrims  flocked  ex-
ulting to  Jerusalem,  bearing  gifts  for  the  restoration  of  the  house
of  God.*  The  church  of  the  Sepulchi-e  was  completed  in  A.  D.
1048  ;  but  instead  of  the  former  magnificent  Basilica  over  the
place  of  Golgotha,  a  small  chapel  only  now  graced  the  spot.'

The  increase  of  pilgrims  had  indeed  become  very  great ;  and
it  is  not  improbable  that  a  dread  of  their  power  and  vengeance,
may  have  had  an  influence  on  the  conduct  of  el-Hakim  and  his
successor.  A  wild  idea  had  prevailed  in  some  minds,  that  the
Saviour's  second  coming  was  to  take  place  in  the  year  1000  ;
and  others  now  saw  in  the  disorders  of  the  times  a  prognostic
of  the  near  approach  of  Antichrist.^  Under  the  influence  of
these  circumstances,  and  perhaps  of  the  concessions  of  the  Kha-
lifs,  multitudes  of  all  ranks  and  classes  flocked  to  the  Holy  City.
It  was  no  longer  single  pilgrims  with  staff  and  scrip,  a  monk  or
an  abbot,  or  even  perhaps  a  bishop  with  a  few  companions,  who
wended  their  way  to  the  Promised  Land,  and  were  sustained
whoUy  or  in  part  by  the  alms  of  the  pious  ;  but  licnceforth  also
the  common  people  and  laity  in  great  numbers,  and  especially
%oblemen  and  princes,  often  with  a  large  retinue  of  armed  fol-
lowers, assumed  the  garb  of  pilgrims,  and  found  their  way  into
the  east.    Even  noble  ladies  did  not  shrink  from  the  hardships

»  Rod.  GlaberHistor.  III.  7;  in  Bouquet       MVill.  Tyr.  ibid.
T.  X.  Duchesne  T.  IV.    Chron.  Ademari,       '  "  Tunc  quoque  de  nniverso  terrarnm

in  Bouquet  T.  X.  p.  152.    Le  Quieu  1.  c.  orbe  incredibilis  hominum  multitudo  ex-

pp.  478,  480.  ultanter  Hierosolymam  pergentes,  domui

'  Elmacin  Hist.  Sarac.  3.  6.  p.  2G0.  Dei  restaurandae  plurima  detulerunt  mu-

Chron.  Ademari  1.  c.  Will.  Tyr.  1.  6.  Bar  nera."    Rod.  Glaber  3.  7.
Hebr.  p.  21G.  '  "  Oratoria  valde  modica;"  Will.  Tyr.

'  Will.  Tyr.  1.  6.  Albericns  in  le  Quien  8.  3.
m.  p.  493.     Cedrenus,  p.  731,  ed.  Par.       '  Rod.  Glaber.  4.  6.
Comp.  Baronii  et  Pagii  AnnaL  A,  D.  1031.
ii.  47,  48

SecVUL]         cent.  XI. — REMARKABLE  PILGRIMAGES.  397

and  dangers  of  the  pilgrimage.  Many  of  the  pilgrims  desired  to
find  their  death  in  the  Holy  Land.'  It  was  perhaps  in  order  to
keep  back  these  throngs,  or  more  probably  in  order  to  derive  the
greater  profit  from  them,  that  the  Muslims  about  this  time  de-
manded of  every  pilgrim  the  tribute  of  a  piece  of  gold,  as  the
price  of  entrance  into  the  Holy  City.''

Among  the  remarkable  pilgrimages  of  this  period,  was  that
of  Robert  duke  of  Normandy,  the  father  of  William  the  Conquer-
or, which  was  undertaken  in  A.  D.  1035,  in  spite  of  the  remon-
strances of  his  barons.^  Having  settled  the  succession  upon  his
illegitimate  son  William,  and  leaving  him  under  the  protection
and  guardianship  of  the  French  king,  he  set  off  with  a  laige  reti-
nue of  knights,  barons,  and  other  followers.  He  himself,  like
every  pilgrim,  went  barefoot  and  in  palmer's  weeds,  with  staff  and
scrip.  In  passing  through  cities,  he  sent  his  train  forwards  ;
himself  following  alone  in  the  rear  in  all  humility,  and  bearing
patiently  the  insults  of  the  rabble.  He  took  the  way  through
Italy  to  Constantinople,  where  his  piety  and  charity  obtained  for
him  the  respect  of  the  emperor  and  the  Greek  nobles.  The  for-
mer tendered  him  presents,  and  forbade  his  subjects  to  receive
payment  for  articles  furnished  to  the  Norman  duke  ;  but  the  pil-
grim refused  the  gifts,  and  ordered  his  people  to  pay  for  every
thing.  The  emperor  commanded  that  no  wood  should  be  fur-
nished to  him,  in  order  that  he  might  be  compelled  to  receive  it
free  from  the  royal  magazines  ;  but  Robert  purchased  a  large
quantity  of  nuts,  the  sheUs  of  which  he  used  as  fuel.  During  his
journey  through  Asia  Minor  he  fell  sick,  and  caused  himself  to  be
transported  in  a  litter  by  Saracens.  Meeting  a  Norman  pilgrim,
who  was  returning  home  and  inquired  if  he  had  any  message  to
send  :  "  Tell  my  people,"  said  he,  "  that  thou  hast  met  me  where
I  was  borne  of  devils  into  Paradise."  Before  the  gates  of  Jeru-
salem Robert  found  a  crowd  of  needy  pilgrims,  too  poor  to  pay
the  entrance  money,  and  awaiting  the  arrival  of  some  wealthy
and  generous  fellow-pilgrim,  who  might  open  for  them  the  Holy
City.  For  each  of  these  he  paid  a  golden  byzant.  The  Mus-
lims admired  his  devotion  and  munificence  ;  and  an  Emir  caused

'  "  Anno  D.  1033,  ex universo  orbe  tam       ^  Aureus,  JBisantium  aurenm,  a  gold

innumerabilis  multitudo  coepit  confluere  ad  Byzant,  equivalent  to  about  five  Spanish

Sepvilchrum  Salvatoris  Hierosolymis,  quan-  dollars.  First  mentioned  in  tlie  Grsta  Con-

tam  nullus  hominum  prius  sperarn  poterat.  sulnm  Aiidfrinsensium,  in  d'Achery  Spici-

Primitus  enim  ordo  inferioris  piebis;  de-  leg.  Tom.  III.  p.  252.  fol.    William  of

inde  vero  mediocres ;  postbsec  permaximi  Tyre  mentions  the  imposition  of  tbe  onrois

quique,  reges,  comites,  ac  pricsules ;  ad  ul-  in  this  century,  but  not  the  exact  time ;

timum  vero,  quod  nunqu.im  contigerat,  Hist.  1.  10.

mulieres  multae  nobiles  cum  pauperioribus       '  Described  in  tlie  cotemporary  Chro-

iUuc  perrexit.    Pluribus  enim  erat  mentis  nique  de  Normandie,  in  Bouquet's  Recueil

desiderium  mori  priusquam  ad  propria  re-  Tom.  II.  p.  326  sq.    Wilkcu  Gesch.  der.

verterentur."  Rod.  Glaber,  4.  6.  Kr.  I.  p.  37.

Vol.  I.— 34  ii.  48-50

398

JEBUSALEM.  HISTOBY,

[SEc.vra.

all  tliat  he  had  paid  for  the  pilgrims  to  be  restored  to  him  ;  hut
Robert  imraediately  distributed  it  among  the  poor  pilgrims,  and
made  to  the  Muslims  also  costly  presents.  He  died  on  his  •way
home,  at  the  city  of  Xicea  ;  and  the  relics  that  he  had  collected,
were  deposited  in  the  abbey  of  Cerisy,  which  he  had  founded.

About  this  time  the  conversion  of  the  Hungarians  to  Chris-
tianity, which  took  place  gradually  at  the  close  of  the  tenth  and
in  the  first  half  of  the  eleventh  centuries,  opened  a  new  route  for
pilgrims  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre  ;  since  they  could  now  traverse
the  whole  distance  to  Constantinople  by  land,  through  a  Chrisrian
country.  One  of  the  first  to  avail  himself  of  this  route,  was  the
bishop  Lietbert  of  Cambray  in  A.  D.  1054.  He  was  attended  by
so  great  a  company  of  pilgrims,  that  the  party  was  called  "exer-
citus  Domini,"  the  Lord's  host.  The  king  of  Hungary  at  first
distrusted  the  intentions  of  this  numerous  body :  having  been
but  little  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  pilgrims  ;  but  he  afterwards
treated  them  with  kindness.  The  pUgrims  travelled  by  land  as
far  as  to  Laodicea  in  Syria  ;  and  then  took  ship  on  account  of  the
insecurity  of  the  country.  But  being  driven  back  by  a  storm,
and  learning  from  other  pdgrims,  that  the  Christians  were  then
excluded  from  the  holy  places  in  J erusalem,  and  treated  ,with
indignity,  the  bishop  and  his  companions  returned  to  France.'
The  same  route  was  followed  by  Coimt  William  of  Angouleme,
about  A.  D.  1062,  attended  by  some  of  his  counsellors,  several
abbots,  and  a  large  company  of  noblemen.  They  too  were  treat-
ed with  great  courtesy  by  the  king  of  Himgary,  in  their  passage
through  his  dominions.'

But  the  most  celebrated  pilgrimage  of  this  period  was  that  of
several  German  bishops  in  A.  D.  1065,  which  is  mentioned  by
all  the  chroniclers  of  that  age.^  The  party  was  composed  of
Siegfried,  archbishop  of  Maintz,  and  the  bishops  Giinther  of
Bamberg.  Otho  of  Eatisbon,  and  Wdliam  of  Utrecht ;  followed
by  no  less  than  sevec  thousand  persons  both  rich  and  poor.
Among  these  was  Ingulphus,  the  English  secretary  of  William
the  Conqueror,  who  with  others  joined  the  party  from  Normandy,
attracted  by  the  fame  of  the  immense  preparations.  The  bishops
travelled  with  great  pomp  ;  carrying  with  them  dishes  and  ves-

'  Mta  Dora.  Lietberti  Episc.  Cameras.  '  Most  fully  in  the  chronicles  of  Lam-
in  d'Achcry's  Spicilegium  Tom.  IL  p.  138  bertns  Schafnabnrjrensi- and  Marianus  Sco-
eq.  c.  29-43.  This  temporary  exclusion  of  tus,  both  printed  in  Pistorii  Scriptores  Rer.
the  Christians  from  the  church  of  the  Holy  Germanic.  Tom.  I.  pp.  172,  452.  Francof.
Sepulchre  is  also  mentioned  in  the  life  of  1613  ;  or  Tom.  I.  pp.  332,  651,  ed.  Struve.
the  cotemporary  St  Wuifrarmus,  A.  D.  Likewise  by  Ingulphus,  who  wag  himself
1056,  in  Acta  ."^anct  Mart.  T.  IIL  p.  157,  amoDg  the  piljniras,  in  his  Histoiy;  see
fin.    Pasrii  Critica,  etc.  A.  D.  1056.  vi.  Scriptores  Rer.  Angl.  ed.  Fell  p.  73.  ed.

'  "  Mato),  which

Km,"  Mar.  Scot.  Lambert  of  AschafiFenburg  Josephus  describes  as  a  village  in  or  near

speaks  ouly  of  a  village  and  a  '•  maceria  "  Judea.    1  Mace.  7,  31.   Joseph  Antiq.  12.

just  ready  to  tumble  down  of  itself.    The  10.  4

ii.  51-53

400

JERUSALEM.  HISTORY.

[SEcvm.

governor  now  caused  the  pilgrims  to  be  escorted  in  safety  to  Je-
rusalem, and  back  again  to  the  sea  ;  receiving  for  his  civUity  and
aid  a  present  of  five  hundred  gold  byzants.  But  of  the  original
host  of  seven  thousand  pilgrims,  only  two  thousand  lived  to  re-
turn to  their  native  land  ;  and  the  bishop  Giinther  also  died  on
the  way  back  in  Hungary.  Ingulphus  and  others  returned  through
Italy  ;  and  he  observes  of  his  own  companions,  "  that  they  sal-
lied from  Normandy,  thirty  stout  and  well  appointed  horsemen  ;
but  that  they  repassed  the  Alps,  twenty  miserable  palmers,  with
the  staff  in  their  hand,  and  the  wallet  at  their  backs."'

But  another  revolution  was  now  impending  over  Syria,  still
more  disastrous  in  its  immediate  consequences  to  the  Christians
of  the  east ;  and  destined  to  kindle  up  at  last  those  holy  wars,
which  for  nearly  two  centuries  deluged  the  soU  of  Palestine  with
the  choicest  blood  of  Europe.

Ever  since  the  conquest  of  Syria  by  the  Fatimite  Klialifs  of
Egypt  in  A.  D.  969,  the  dynasty  of  the  Abassides  had  stiU
continued  nominally  to  reign  at  Bagdad,  in  the  possession  of  a
mere  shadow  of  honour  and  power ;  while  their  chief  commanders,
under  the  title  of  Emir  el-Omara,  ruled  with  unlimited  authority
both  the  Khalif  and  his  realms.  This  high  post  had  now  been
held  for  a  century  by  the  race  of  the  Buides,"  when  the  Turkish  or
Turkman  leader  Togrul  Beg,  of  the  family  of  Seljuk,  came  with
a  large  army  from  Khorasan  to  Bagdad,  and  extended  his  con-
quests to  the  Euphrates.  This  conqueror  drove  the  Buides  from
the  post  of  Emir  el-Omara,  which  he  took  upon  himself ;  de-
prived the  Khalif  of  even  the  remaining  shadow  of  temporal
power  ;  and  reigned  as  Sultan  over  all  the  lands  of  the  Khalifat.
His  nephew.  Alp  Arslan,  penetrated  into  Asia  Slinor  as  far  as  to
Iconium ;  took  prisoner  in  battle  the  G-reek  emperor  Romanus
Diogenes  in  A.  D.  1071  ;  and  carried  consternation  to  the  gates
of  Constantinople.  He  was  succeeded  in  A.  D.  1072  by  his  son
Melek  Shah  ;  who,  following  out  the  rude  feudal  system  of  the
Turkmans,  bestowed  on  his  kinsman  Suleiman,  Asia  Minor  and
the  adjacent  countries  west  of  the  Eu]>hrates,  wliich  he  was  to
conquer  and  hold  as  a  fief  under  the  Sultan  of  Bagdad.  Sulei-
man was  successful  in  his  operations,  and  established  in  A.  D.
1073  the  Seljuk  kingdom  and  dynasty  of  Rum,  extending  from
the  Euphrates  to  the  shores  of  the  Bosphoras,  and  having  its  me-
tropolis first  at  Nicea,  and  aftenvards  at  Iconium.'

While  Suleiman  was  thus  establisliing  his  dominion  in  Asia
Minor,  Melek  Shah  despatched  another  of  his  generals,  Atsiz  the

'  This  is  Gibbon's  pompous  paraphrase  multi  attennati  reversi  snmna"  Ingulph.

of  the  simpler  language  of  Ingulphus :  1  c.

"  Et  taiulem  de  trigiuta  eqnitibu.%  qui  de  Deguignes  Hist,  des  Hnns,  T.  I.  i.  p.

XorthniaiiTiia  pingues  e^ivimus,  vix  viginti  40G.  II.  i.  pp.  168,  170.

pauperes  peregrini  et  oranes  pedites  laucie  '  Deguignes,  1.  c.  lib.  XL

ii.  .03,  54

Sk&VIIL]

CENT.  XI.  THE  TURKMANS.

401

Kharismian,  to  make  war  upon  the  Spian  possessions  of  the
Egyptian  Khalif.  He  took  the  city  of  Damascus  after  a  long
siege  in  A.  D.  1075  ;  the  inhabitants  having  been  compelled  to
surrender  by  famine.  During  the  two  following  years  he  sub-
dued the  greater  part  of  Syria,  marched  against  Egypt,  and  pen-
etrated almost  to  Cairo.  The  Khalif  trembled  and  fied  by  night ;
but  his  people  rallied,  defeated  the  invader,  and  drove  him  back
upon  Syria.  Atsiz  retired  to  Damascus,  taking  the  route  by  Eam-
leh  and  Jerusalem,  which  he  pillaged,  A.  D.  1077.'  In  conse-
quence of  this  defeat,  Melek  Shah  now  bestowed  the  Syrian  pro-
vinces as  a  fief  upon  his  brother  Tutush ;  who  in  A.  D.  1078  laid
siege  to  Aleppo  ;  got  possession  of  Damascus  by  treachery  ;  and
carrying  his  %-ictorious  arms  from  Antioch  to  the  borders  of
Egvpt,  established  the  Seljuk  kingdom  of  Syria  or  Aleppo  ;  which
he  held  under  the  nominal  sovereignty  of  his  brother,  the  Sultan
of  Bagdad.*

Following  out  the  same  system  of  feudal  reward,  these  Turk-
man leaders  bestowed  also  upon  their  officers  the  hereditary  com-
mand, or  rather  the  property,  of  particular  cities  and  districts,  as
a  recompense  for  the  services  of  themselves  and  their  followers.  In
this  way,  in  A.  D.  1083  or  1084,  the  Holy  City  was  made  over
by  Tutush  to  his  general  Ortok,  the  chief  of  a  Turkman  horde
serving  under  his  banner.  This  chieftain  continued  to  hold  the
city  as  Emir  of  Jerusalem  untH  his  death  in  A.  D.  1091  ;  when
it  passed  into  the  hands  of  his  two  sons,  Hghazy  and  Sukman.^

The  permanent  approach  of  the  savage  Turkman  hordes  to
the  shores  of  the  Bosphorus,  spread  dismay  not  only  among  the
Christians  of  the  Byzantine  empire,  but  also  throughout  Europe.
The  Greek  emperor  wrote  letters  to  the  western  Christians,  implor-
ing their  aid  against  the  terrific  progress  of  the  Turks.*  The  im-
petuous Hildebrand,  as  pope  Gregory  VII,  for  a  time  took  up  the
cause  of  his  eastern  brethren ;  and  in  A.  D.  1074  wrote  letters
exhorting  the  western  church  in  general,  and  also  individuals,  to
take  arms  in  behalf  of  the  emperor  and  the  churches  of  the  east.
He  even  held  out  the  hope,  that  he  himself  would  bear  them  com-
pany in  this  holy  expedition.'    But  his  attention  was  soon  divert-

'  Deguignes,  Tom.  11.  p.  216. — William  '  Abulfedse  Annales,  ed.  Adler,  Tom.  III.

of  Tyre  affirms  that  Jenisalem  was  subject  pp.  260,  280 ;  comp.  p.  2.">3.  Deguignes

to  the  Turks  for  thirty-eight  years :  which  Hist,  des  Huns,  Tom.  II.  ii.  p.  134.

would  give  A.  D.  1060  or  1061,  for  the  '  One  of  these  letters  is  preserved  by

time  of  their  first  conquest ;  Hist.  1.  6.  ib.  Guibert  "verbis  tamen  vestita  meis,"  as

7.  19.    This  must  at  any  rate  be  an  error ;  he  frankly  says ;  Guibert  Abbot.  Hist,

for  in  the  year  1065,  when  the  pilgrim  Hieros.  in  Gesta  Dei,  pp.  -175,  476.

bishops  visited  the  Holy  City,  it  was  still  *  The  general  letter  is  found  in  Gregor.

rmder  the  Egyptian  Khali£  ■  Epist.  lib.  IL  37;  and  a  particular  one  to

'  Deguignes,  lib.  XH. — A  summary  and  Count  William  of  Burgundy,  ibid.  L  46.

chronology  of  all  the  four  or  five  Seljuk  See,  generally,  Mansi  Collect  ConciL

dynasties,  is  given  by  Deguignes,  Tom.  I.  Tom.  XX.
L  p.  241  sq.

Vol.  L— 34*  il  54-56

402

JERUSALEM. — HISTORY.

[SEcvm.

ed  from  the  dangers  of  the  east,  and  absorbed  in  his  own  strug-
gles for  supremacy  over  the  monarchs  of  the  west.  His  successor
Victor  III,  Avas  actuated  by  similar  views ;  but  as  the  unbeUevers
of  Africa  at  this  time  often  ravaged  the  Itahan  coasts,  he  first
turned  the  vengeance  of  the  Christians  against  them.  In  A.  D.
1086  he  caused  a  crusade  to  be  preached  in  Italy  against  the  Af-
rican Mushms,  promising  to  all  who  should  take  -part  in  it  the  full
absolution  of  their  sins.  A  Christian  host  was  collected  and  pro-
ceeded to  Africa,  under  the  standard  of  St.  Peter  ;  where  it  de-
solated the  chief  cities  of  the  Arabs,  and  is  said  to  have  de-
stroyed a  hundred  thousand  of  the  inhabitants.  This  was  a  pre-
lude worthy  of  the  approaching  crusades  in  the  Holy  Land. '

The  dominion  of  the  Turkmans  in  Palestine,  these  fierce  sons
of  the  eastern  deserts,  coidd  only  render  the  condition  of  the
Christians  and  pilgrims  still  more  deplorable.  These  wild  hordes
knew  no  law  and  no  right,  save  that  of  the  sword  ;  they  neither
knew  nor  cared  for  ancient  usage  nor  stipulation  ;  and  in  their
rage  for  gain  and  their  rude  fanatic  zeal  for  the  religion  of  the
false  prophet,  they  perpetrated  every  species  of  cruelty  and  outrage
against  the  followers  of  the  cross.  In  Jerusalem  especially,  under
the  dominion  of  Ortok  and  his  sons,  the  native  Christians  and  pil-
grims were  overwhelmed  with  insult  and  driven  to  extremity.
Troops  of  these  savage  oppressors  often  forced  their  way  into  the
churches  during  divine  service  ;  terrified  the  worshippers  by  their
wild  noise  and  fiiry ;  mounted  upon  the  altars  ;  overturned  the
sacred  cups  ;  trod  under  foot  the  consecrated  vessels  ;  broke  in
pieces  the  marble  ornaments  ;  maltreated  the  clergy  with  con-
tumely and  blows  ;  seized  the  patriarch  himself  by  the  hair  and
beard,  and  dragged  him  from  his  seat  headlong  to  the  ground  ;
and  several  times  threw  him  into  prison,  in  order  that  the  Chris-
tians might  redeem  him  with  large  sums  of  money.

It  might  be  supposed  that  this  state  of  things,  when  known  in
Europe,  would  have  served  to  allay  the  rage  for  pilgrimage,  and
have  deterred  the  Christians  of  the  west  from  exposing  them-
selves to  dangers  and  contumehes  hitherto  unparalleled.  Bnt  the
custom  had  become  too  firmly  established,  and  pilgrimages  during
this  century  had  been  too  frequent,  to  be  at  once  broken  off.
Multitudes  of  pilgrims  still  flocked  to  the  Holy  City  ;  and  as  the
Turkmans  were  now  more  rigorous  in  exacting  the  price  of
entrance,  than  the  governors  of  the  Egyptian  Khalifs  formerly
had  been,  thousands  of  pilgrims,  who  had  consumed  or  lost  their
all  upon  the  way,  were  compelled  to  lie  waiting  before  the  gates.
Here  many  of  them  died,  worn  out  with  famine  and  nakedness.

'  Clironicon  Casinum  auct.  Leone  Os-  "  Will.  Tjt.  1.  10.  Comp.  also  the  same

tiensi,  in  Muratori  Scriptores  Rcrum  Itali-  writer,  1.  8.
canim,  Tom.  IV.  p.  480.
ii.  50;  57

Sec.  VIII.]

CENT.  XI. — PETER  THE  HERMIT.

403

Whether  living  or  dead,  the  pilgrims  were  now  an  intolerable
burden  to  the  inhabitants.  If  admitted  into  the  city,  they  were
the  source  of  continual  dread  to  the  Chiistians,  lest  by  their
I  incautious  behaviour  they  should  excite  the  fury  of  their  op-
I  pressors.  So  great  also  were  their  numbers  and  penury,  that  the
convents  and  hospitals  were  unable  to  receive  more  than  a  smaU
part  of  them  ;  and  the  care  of  the  remainder  fell  upon  the
citizens.  Not  one  pilgrim  in  a  thousand  had  the  means  of  self-
subsistence.'  The  Christians  of  the  east  now  repaired  to  Europe,
lamenting  their  misery  and  imploring  help.  The  pilgrims  who
returned,  confirmed  their  accounts,  and  supported  theu-  appeal
for  aid.''

It  was  in  the  midst  of  these  calamities,  that  the  celebrated
Peter  the  hermit  repaired  as  a  pilgrim  to  Jerusalem,  in  A.  D.  1093
and  1094.'  His  soul  was  fiUed  with  indignation  at  the  horrors  he
beheld  ;  and  his  spirit  roused  to  vengeance.  He  reproached  the
patriarch  for  his  pusillanimity,  and  exhorted  him  no  longer  to
submit  to  such  indignities  ;  but  the  patriarch  had  no  power  to
break  the  chains  of  oppression,  and  could  only  commission  Peter
to  go  forth  as  his  ambassador,  to  awaken  the  energies  of  Europe
in  behalf  of  their  sutfering  fellow  Christians.  Peter  hastened  to
Rome  ;  obtained  the  ready  sanction  and  support  of  the  pope
Urban  II  ;  and  traversed  Italy  and  France,  proclaiming  to  high
and  low  the  miseries  of  their  brethren  in  the  east,  and  urging
them  to  arise  for  the  deliverance  of  the  Holy  City  and  to  take
vengeance  on  the  infidels.  His  efibrts  were  crowned  with  won-
derful success  for,  as  we  have  seen,  the  ground  was  already
prepared  and  the  seed  sown.  The  pope  urged  the  cause  with
all  his  eloquence  at  the  crowded  councils  of  Placentia  and  Cler-
mont in  A.  D,  1095  and  1096  ;  and  Christian  Europe  roused
itself  in  frenzy,»for  a  crusade  against  the  oppressors  of  the  Holy
I  Land.

I  The  first  host  of  these  pilgrim  warriors  set  off  at  once  by
way  of  Hungary  under  the  guidance  of  Peter  himself ;  without
preparation,  without  discipline,  and  without  suppHes.  After
many  hardships  and  much  turbulent  dissension,  they  succeeded  in
reaching  Constantinople  ;  but  had  hardly  set  foot  on  the  shores  of
Asia  Minor,  when  the  whole  host  was  annihilated  by  the  Turks.
This  was  in  A.  D.  1097.  A  second  and  better  appointed  army
was  already  on  the  way,  under  leaders  of  more  renown  and

'  Will.  Tyr.  1.  10.  *  In  such  veneration  was  Peter  held  by

"  Baldrici  Archiepisc.  Hist.   Hieros.  in  the  people  at  large,  that  they  even  plucked

Gesta  Dei,  p.  86.    Wilken's  Gesch.  der.  hairs  from  his  mule  and  preserv'ed  them  as

Kr.  I.  p.  45.      ^  relics;  "prtesertim  cxmi  etiam  de  ejusmnlo

'  The  iiuthorities  for  ihe  following  nar-  pili  pro  reUquiis  raperentur!"  Guibert

rative,  are  found  in  all  the  historians  of  the  Abbot.  2.  8,  in  Gesta  Dei.

crusades.

ii.  57  59

404

JERUSALEM.  HISTORT,

[Sec.  Vm.

greater  experience.  They  marched  to  Constantinople ;  and
after  many  hindrances  and  several  battles,  succeeded  in  reaching
Antioch,  and  encamped  before  that  city  on  the  18th  of  October,
A.  D.  1097.  After  a  long  siege  of  nearly  nine  months,  they
became  masters  of  the  city  by  treachery,  July  3,  A.  D.  1098.
Scarcely  were  they  in  possession,  when  an  immense  Mushm  host
appeared  before  the  walls,  to  which  they  gave  battle  on  the
10th  of  Jnly,  and  gained  a  complete  victory.  This  opened  to
them  the  whole  of  Syria  ;  and  there  was  now  nothing  to  hinder
their  advance  upon  Jerusalem.  But  the  dissensions  and  inde-
cision of  the  princes  delayed  the  impatient  warriors  still  four
months ;  until  at  length,  on  the  24th  of  November,  they  broke
up  from  Antioch,  and  proceeded  on  their  march  for  the  deliver-
ance of  the  Holy  City.

During  the  progress  of  these  events,  the  affairs  of  Syria  and
Palestine  had  assumed  a  new  aspect.  On  the  death  of  the
Sultan  Melek  Shah  in  A.  D.  1092,  his  brother  Tutush  of  Syria
aspired  to  the  empire  of  the  Seljucides  ;  made  war  upon  his
nephew  Borkiaruk  the  son  of  Melek  Shah ;  but  was  defeated
and  slain  in  battle,  A.  D.  1095.^  Dissensions  arose  between  his
sons  Rudhwan  and  Dekak  for  the  succession  in  Syria  ;  and  the
Emirs  of  the  several  cities  and  districts  took  occasion  of  the
anarchy,  to  make  themselves  for  the  time  independent.  Such
was  the  case  with  the  sons  of  Ortok  in  Jerusalem  ;  to  which
Rudhwan  unsuccessfully  laid  siege  in  A.  D.  1096. In  like
manner  the  Fatimite  Khalif  of  Egypt,  el-Mustaly,  profiting  at
length  by  the  distracted  state  of  Syria  and  the  dissensions  of
the  Seljiik  princes,  despatched  an  army  into  that  country  under
his  vizier  Afdal,  in  order  to  reduce  it  again  to  his  own  dominion.
Afdal  marched  through  the  land ;  summoned  Rudhwan  to
acknowledge  the  Khalif  of  Egypt ;  took  possession  of  Tyre  ;
and  having  besieged  Jerusalem  for  forty  days,  received  the
surrender  of  the  city  from  the  inhabitants.'  The  two  sons  of
Ortok,  Ilghazy  and  Sukman,  retired  to  the  region  of  Edessa,
established  themselves  afterwards  at  Maredin  and  Haifa,  where
they  founded  the  two  ■  dynasties  of  the  Ortocidcs,  which  became
famous  in  the  wars  of  the  crusades.  The  surrender  of  Jerusa-
lem took  place  after  the  famous  battle  of  Antioch.*    The  city

•  Degnignes  Hist,  des  Huns,  T.  L  L  p.  pressly;  Will.  Tyr.  7.  19.  Guib.  Abb.  7.  3.
247,  11.  ii.  p.  83.  p.  533.    The  fonner  writer  also  says  that

"  Abulfedse  Annales  ad  A.  H.  488.  De-  the  Egyptians  bad  been  only  eleven  months

guignes  L  c.  Tom.  I.  i.  p.  247.  II  ii.  pp.  in  possession  of  the  city;  9.  10.  Yet

84,  85.    Kemaleddin  in  WUken's  Gesch.  Abnlfeda  places  the  Eg^TStinn  conquest  two

der  Kr.  Bd  II.  Beyl.  p.  28  sq.  years  earlier,  in  A.  D.  1096;  in  which  ho

'  AbulfediB  Annal.  ad.  A.  H.  492.  De-  is  followed  by  Deguignes,  Tom.  II.  ii.  p.

guignes  L  c.  T.  XL  iL  p.  134.  I.  L  p.  249  134.    See  Wilkcn  Comment.  deBell.  Cruc.

eq.  Hist.  pp.  30,  31.

*  So  William  of  Tyre  and  Guibert  ex-
ii.  59,  60

Sec.  Yin.  ]

CENT.  XI,  XII. — THE  CRUSADERS.

405

■was  left  in  charge  of  the  Emir  Iftikar  ed-Dauleh  ;  who  had  now
governed  it  for  eleven  months  in  the  name  of  the  Egyptian
Khalif,  when  on  the  7th  of  June,  A.  D.  1099,  the  host  of  the
crusaders  appeared  before  its  walls.'

It  is  not  my  province  here  to  recount  the  events  of  this
siege,  nor  the  history  of  Jerusalem  in  general  during  the
crusades.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  after  an  investment  of  nearly
forty  days,  the  Holy  City  was  taken  by  storm  on  the  15th  day
of  July.  Some  of  the  frightful  scenes  which  then  ensued  I  have
already  had  occasion  to  describe.^

After  order  was  restored  and  the  city  purified,  one  of  the
first  cares  of  the  Christian  warriors  was  to  establish  churches
according  to  the  Latin  rites  and  constitution.  It  was  also  not
long,  before  convents  of  Latin  monks  and  nuns  sprung  up  in
Jerusalem  and  in  various  parts  of  the  country ;  and  thus  the
mass  of  foreign  tradition,  of  which  the  oriental  church  had  long
laid  the  foundation,  was  now  built  up  and  decorated  anew,  by
the  fresher  zeal  and  lore  of  their  western  brethren.

The  Christians  retained  Jerusalem  for  eight  and  eighty
years  ;  until  it  was  again  wrested  from  their  hands  by  Saladin
in  A.  D.  1187.  During  this  long  period  they  appear  to  have
erected  several  churches  and  many  convents.  Of  the  latter,  few  if
any  traces  remain  ;  of  the  former,  save  one  or  two  ruins,  the  church
of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  is  the  only  memorial  that  survives  in  the
Holy  City,  to  attest  the  power  or  even  the  existence  of  the  Chris-
tian kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  The  crusaders  found  the  buildings
connected  with  the  sepulchre  as  they  had  been  completed  in  A.
D.  1048  ;  a  round  church  ■^vith  an  open  dome  over  the  sepulchre
itself,  and  a  small  separate  chajjel  covering  Calvary  and  the
other  sacred  places.  These  edifices  were  regarded  by  the
crusaders  as  too  contracted ;  and  they  accordingly  erected  over
and  in  connection  with  them  a  stately  temple,  inclosing  the
whole  of  the  sacred  precincts  ;  the  walls  and  general  form  of
which  probably  remain  unto  the  present  day.  The  grand
entrance  then,  apparently,  as  now,  was  from  the  south.  ^ — To
the  southward  of  this  church,  the  site  of  the  hospital  or
palace  of  the  knights  of  St.  John  continues  to  this  day  unoc-
cupied, an  open  field  in  the  heart  of  the  city  ;  where  the
foundations  and  a  few  broken  arches  alone  remain  to  testify  of
its  former  soHdity  and  splendour.

Of  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem  by  Saladin,  the  subsequent
demoUtion  of  the  walls,  the  two  successive  surrenders  of  it  by

'  Deguignes,  Tom.  II.  ii.  p.  99.     Will    it  appears  to  have  been  after  A.  D.  1103;

Tyr.  8.  5.  for  Sswulf,  who  visited  Jerusalem  in  that

"  See  above,  pp.  298,  299.  year,  speaks  only  of  the  former  church,

'  Will.  Tyr.  8.  3.    The  time  when  this    which  some  held  to  be  the  work  of  Justi-

edLSce  was  erected  is  not  mentioned  ;  but    niau !  p.  2C0.

i.  G0-G2

•406

»  JERUSALEM.  HISTORY.

[SEcVm.

treaty  to  the  Christians,  and  its  varying  fortiines  until  it  finally
reverted  to  the  Muhammedans  in  A.  D.  1244,  I  have  already
spoken,  in  tracing  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  the
•walls  of  the  city.'  In  that  year  the  forces  of  the  Sultan  Nijm
ed-Din  Eyub  of  Egypt,  the  seventh  of  the  Eyubite  dynasty
established  by  Saladin,  took  possession  of  the  Holy  City,  after
the  defeat  of  the  combined  forces  of  the  Christians  and  Syrian
Muslims  at  Gaza.  From  that  time  onwards  Jerusalem  appears
to  have  sunk  in  political  and  military  importance  ;  and  its  name
scarcely  occurs  in  the  slight  histories  we  have  of  the  two
successive  Memlilk  dynasties,  the  Baharites  and  the  Circassians
or  Borgites,  who  reigned  over  Egypt  and  the  greater  part  of
Syria  during  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries.''  In  all
their  wars  in  Syria,  the  nature  of  the  country  led  the  great  and
frequent  military  expeditions  between  Egypt  and  Damascus  to
take  the  route  along  the  coast  and  the  adjacent  plains  ;  and
rarely  did  a  Sultan  turn  aside  to  visit  the  neglected  sanctuary
in  the  mountains.^  The  pilgrims  and  travellers  who  found  their
way  to  Jerusalem  during  this  long  period,  make  no  mention  of
its  immediate  masters,  nor  of  any  military  changes.

In  A.  D.  1517,  Jerusalem  with  the  rest  of  Syria  and  Egypt
passed  under  the  sway  of  the  Ottoman  Sultan  Selim  I  ;  who
paid  a  hasty  visit  to  the  Holy  City  from  Damascus  after  his  re-
turn from  Egypt.'*  From  that  time  imtil  our  cfwn  days,  Pales-
tine and  Syria  have  continued  to  form  part  and  parcel  of  the
Ottoman  empire.  During  this  period  Jerusalem  has  been  sub-
jected to  few  vicissitudes  ;  and  its  history  is  barren  of  incident.
Suleiman,  the  successor  of  SeHm,  erected  its  new  walls  in  A.  D.
1542  ;  and  so  recently  as  A.  D.  1808,  the  church  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre  was  partially  consumed  by  conflagration.  A  fire  which
commenced  in  the  Armenian  chapel  on  the  12th  of  October,  de-
stroyed the  great  dome,  the  Greek  chapel,  and  various  other  parts,
as  well  as  many  of  the  marble  columns.  The  edifice  was  rebuilt
by  the  Greeks ;  and  after  twelve  months  of  labour  and  an  enor-
mous expense,  was  completed  in  September  A.  D.  1810.  The
funds  were  collected  from  the  contributions  of  Christians  in  va-
rious countries.  The  stranger  who  now  visits  this  imposing  tem-
ple, remarks  no  obvious  traces  of  its  recent  desolation.'

In  A.  D.  1832,  Syria  became  subject  to  the  dominion  of
Muhammed  Aly,  the  powerful  Pasha  of  Egypt ;  and  the  Holy  City

'  See  above,  pp.  317,  318.  ■*  v.  Hammer  Gesch.  des  Osmanische

"  Deguignes  Hist,  des  Huns,  Tom.  IV.  Reiclies,  II.  p.  .'i'iC.

lib.  21,  22.  Turner's  Journal  of  a  Tour  in  the  Lc-

^  Two  visits  of  the  Borgite  Sultan  Sboikli  vant,  Vol.  II.  p.  l('>!>.    See  also  the  general

Mahmud  or  Abu  en-Niisr,  are  recorded  in  aecount  of  the  fire  drawn  up  in  Italian  by

A.  I).  1414  and  1417.    Deguignes,  Hist,  the  Latin  monks,  Turner  ibid.  Appendix,

des  Iluns,  Tom.  IV.  pp.  310,  313.  p.  597.
ii.  62,  03

Sec.  Vm]

THE  HOLT  SEPULCHRE,

407

opened  its  gates  to  tlie  victor  witliout  a  siege.  During  the  in-
Burrection  in  the  districts  of  Jerusalem  and  Nabulus  in  A.  D.
1834,  the  Fellahin  seized  upon  Jerusalem,  and  held  possession
of  it  for  a  time ;  but  under  the  stern  energy  of  the  Egyptian
government,  order  was  soon  restored,  and  the  Holy  City  returned
to  its  allegiance  upon  the  approach  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  with  his
troops.'    In  1840  it  again  reverted  to  the  Sultan.

n.     CHURCH  OF  THE  HOLT  SEPULCHRE.

The  circumstances  connected  ^vith  the  discovery  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre  in  the  fourth  century,  and  the  erection  of  edifices  over
and  around  it  imder  the  auspices  of  Constantine  and  his  mother
Helena,  have  already  been  detailed.^  In  tracing  the  further  his-
tory of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  we  have  also  noted  some  of  the
changes  to  which  this  spot  has  been  exposed.  Twice,  at  least,
the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  appears  to  have  been  totally
destroyed  ;  once  in  the  seventh  and  again  in  the  eleventh  cen-
tury ;  besides  the  various  partial  desolations  to  which  it  has  been
subjected.^  After  aU  the  preceding  details,  topographical  and
historical,  we  are  now  prepared  to  enter  upon  the  discussion  of
another  question  of  some  interest ;  I  mean  the  genuineness  or
probable  identity  of  the  site  thus  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre.

The  place  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion,  as  we  are  expressly  in-
formed, was  without  the  gate  of  the  ancient  city,  and  yet  nigh
to  the  city.*  The  sepulchre,  we  are  likewise  told,  was  nigh  at
hand,  in  a  garden,  in  the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified.^  It
is  not  therefore  without  some  feehng  of  wonder,  that  a  stranger,
unacquainted  with  the  chcumstances,  on  arriving  in  Jerusalem
at  the  present  day,  is  pointed  to  the  place  of  crucifixion  and  the
sepulchre  in  the  midst  of  the  modem  city,  and  both  beneath  one
roof  This  latter  fact,  however  imexpected,  might  occasion  less
surprise ;  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  to  Calvary.  But  beneath
the  same  roof  are  further  shown  the  stone  on  which  the  body  of
our  Lord  was  anointed  for  burial,  the  fissure  in  the  roch,  the
holes  in  which  the  crosses  stood,  the  spot  where  the  true  cross
was  found  by  Helena,  and  various  other  places  said  to  have  been
connected  with  the  history  of  the  crucifixion ;  most  of  which  it
must  have  been  difficult  to  identify  even  after  the  lapse  of  only
three  centuries ;  and  particularly  so  at  the  present  day,  after  the
desolations  and  numerous  changes  which  the  whole  place  has  un-
dergone.

'  See  the  Report  of  the  Rev.  :Mr  Thorn-       ^  See  above,  p.  372  sq.
son,  etc.  Missionary  Herald,  1835.  pp.       '  See  above,  pp.  387,  393,  395.
44-51.    Marmont's  Voyage,  etc.  Tom.  II,       *  Heb.  13,  12.  John  19,  20.  The  same
HI.     Menm  the  western
side  of  the  area  of  the  temple  or  great  mosk  to  the  church  of  the
Holy  Sepulchre.  I  measured  from  the  western  entrance  of
that  area  on  a  direct  course  along  the  street  by  the  hospital  of
Helena,  to  the  street  leading  north  fi^m  the  bazar  ;  and  then
fixDm  this  street  to  a  point  in  fix>nt  of  the  great  entrance  of  the
church.    The  whole  distance  proved  to  be  1223  feet,  or  about

'  See  above,  pp.  314,  315,  318.  cond  iraH  was  also  apparently  the  north-

*  See  above,  p.  314,  n.  3.  era  wall  attacked  by  Antiochus,  adjacent

*  See  above,  p.  312  >q.  to  which  there  was'a  kvel  tract  or  pl^n.

*  See  above,  pp.  329,  330.     This  se-  Jos.  Ant  13.  8.  2.

YoL.  L — 3o  ii.  C6-68

410

JERUSALEM.  THE  SEPTTLCHRE.

[SEC.\Tn.

407  yards  ;  wMch.  is  33  yards  less  tlian  a  quarter  of  an  English
mUe.

On  viewing  the  city  from  the  remains  of  the  ancient  Hippi-
cus,  as  well  us  from  the  site  of  Antonia,  we  were  satisfied  that
if  the  second  wall  might  be  supposed  to  have  run  in  a  straight
line  between  those  points,  it  would  have  left  the  church  of  the
Holy  Sepulchre  without  the  city  ;  and  thus  far  have  settled  the
topographical  part  of  the  question.'  But,  it  was  not  less  easy
to  perceive,  that  in  thus  running  in  a  straight  course,  the  wall
must  also  have  left  the  pool  of  Hezekiah  on  the  outside  ;  or,  if
it  made  a  curve  sufficient  to  include  this  pool,  it  would  naturally
also  have  included  the  site  of  the  sepulchre  ;  unless  it  made  an
angle  expressly  in  order  to  exclude  the  latter  spot.  And  further,
as  we  have  seen,  Josephus  distinctly  testifies  that  the  second
wall  ran  in  a  circle  or  curve,  obviously  towards  the  north.*
Various  otber  circumstances  also,  which  go  to  support  the  same
view,  such  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  and  the  ancient  towers
at  the  Damascus  gate,  have  already  been  enumerated.'  Adja-
cent to  the  wall  on  the  north,  there  was  a  space  of  level  ground
on  which  Antiochus  could  erect  his  hundred  towers.*  All  this
goes  to  show  that  the  second  wall  must  have  extended  further  to
the  north  than  the  site  of  the  present  church.  Or  again,  if  Ave
admit  that  this  wall  ran  in  a  straight  course,  then  the  whole  of
the  lower  city  must  have  been  confined  to  a  small  triangle  ;  and
its  breadth  between  the  temple  and  the  site  of  the  sepulchre,  a
space  of  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  English  mile,  was  not  equal  to
that  of  many  squares  in  London  and  New- York.  Yet  we  know
that  this  lower  city  at  the  time  of  the  crucifixion  was  extensive
and  populous  ;  three  gates  led  from  it  to  the  temple  ;  and  ten
years  later  Agrippa  erected  the  third  waU  far  beyond  the  limits
of  the  present  city,  in  order  to  shelter  the  extensive  suburbs
which  before  were  unprotected.  These  suburbs  could  not  well
have  arisen  within  the  short  interval  of  ten  years  ;  but  must
already  have  existed  before  the  time  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion.

After  examining  all  these  circumstances  repeatedly  upon  the
spot,  and  as  I  hope  without  prejudice,  the  minds  of  both  my
companion  and  myself  were  forced  to  the  conviction,  that  the
hypothesis  which  makes  the  second  wall  so  run  as  to  exclude  the
alleged  site  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  is  on  topographical  grounds
untenable  and  impossible.  If  tliere  was  prejudice  upon  my  own
mind,  it  was  certainly  in  favour  of  an  opposite  result  ;  for  I
went  to  Jerusalem  strongly  prepossessed  with  the  idea,  that  the
alleged  site  might  have  lain  without  the  second  wall.

'  The  reader  will  be  able  easily  to  follow  '  Sec  above,  p.  313.
the  details  upon  the  plan  of  Jerusalem.  *  Jos.  Ant.  13.  8.  2.

"  KvKKovfifvoy.   See  above,  p.  312.
ii.  G8,  G'J

Sec.  Vin.]

ARGUMENT  OF  CHATEAUBRIAND.

411

But  even  if  such  a  view  could  be  admitted,  the  existence  of
populous  suburbs  on  this  part  is  strongly  at  variance  with  the
probability,  that  here  should  have  been  a  place  of  execution
with  a  garden  and  sepulchre.  The  tombs  of  the  ancients  were
not  usually  within  their  cities,  nor  among  their  habitations  ;
and  excepting  those  of  the  kings  on  Zion,  there  is  little  evidence
that  sepulchres  existed  in  Jerusalem.

Let  us  now  inquire  whether  there  were  probably,  in  the  time
of  Constantine,  any  such  strong  historical  or  traditional  grounds
for  fixing  upon  this  site,  as  to  counterbalance  the  topographical
difficulties,  and  lead  us  on  the  whole  to  a  different  conclusion.

Chateaubriand  has  furnished  us  with  the  clearest  and  most
plausible  statement  of  the  historic  testimonies  and  probabilities,
which  may  bo  supposed  to  have  had  an  influence  in  determining
the  spot  ;  and  from  him  later  writers  have  drawn  their  chief  ar-
guments.' I  give  an  epitome  of  his  remarks.  The  first  Chris-
tian church,  he  says,  at  Jerusalem,  was  gathered  immediately
after  the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  our  Lord  ;  and  soon  be-
came very  numerous.  All  its  members  must  have  had  a  know-
ledge of  the  sacred  places.  They  doubtless  also  consecrated
buildings  for  their  worship  ;  and  would  naturally  erect  them  on
sites  rendered  memorable  by  miracles.  Not  improbably  the  Holy
Sepulchre  itself  was  already  honoured  in  this  manner.  At  any
rate  there  was  a  regular  succession  of  Jewish-Christian  bishops,
from  the  Apostle  James  down  to  the  time  of  Adrian,  who  could
not  but  have  preserved  the  Christian  traditions  and  although
during  the  siege  by  Titus  the  church  withdrew  to  Pella,  yet  they
soon  returned  and  established  themselves  among  the  ruins.  In
the  course  of  a  few  months'  absence,  they  could  not  have  for-
gotten the  position  of  their  sanctuaries  ;  which,  moreover,  being
generally  without  the  walls,  had  probably  not  suffered  greatly
from  the  siege.  And  that  the  sacred  places  were  generally
known  in  the  age  of  Adrian,  is  proved  incontestably  Ijy  the  fact,
that  in  rebuilding  J erusalem,  that  emperor  set  up  a  statue  of
Venus  upon  Calvary  and  one  of  Jupiter  over  the  Holy  Sejail-
chre.^    Thus  the  folly  of  idolatry,  by  its  imprudent  profanation,

'  Itineraire,  Second  M  jmoire,  Tom.  I.  '  Yet  in  another  part  of  the  same  work

p.  122  sq.    Par.  1837.  (Vol.  II.  p.  17),  Chateaubriand  refers  with

Even  here  the  usual  looseness    and  approbation  to  the  Epitome  Belhram  Sacro-

inaocuMcy  of  the  French  writer  does  not  rum  for  the  rather  remarkable  circum-

abaudon  liim.    He  hira-clf  assigns  A.  D.  stance,  that  Adrian  at  tin-  request  of  the

35  as  the  first  year  of  James,  and  A.  D.  Christians  encloseri  tlie  Holy  S.-pulchre  and

137  as  tlie  beginning  of  the  new  succession  the  adjacent  sacred  places  with  walls  ;  and

of  bishops  from  the  Gentiles  under  Adrian  ;  this  is  quoted  by  Prokesch  (p.  54)  as  a  per-

and  then  gravely  affinns,  that  the  succes-  mission  granted  by  Adrian  to  erect  a

eiou  of  fifteen  Je\vish  bishops,  between  church  over  the  Sepulchre ! — The  Epitome

these  two  dates,  occupied  a  space  of  123  iii  question  is  a  legendary  tract  of  the  fif-

years,  "cent  vingt-trois  ans !  "  pp.  123,  teenth  century;  and  is  "found  in  Canisii

125.  Thesaur.  Monumentor.  Eccl.  ed.  Basnage,

ii.  69-71

412

JERUSALEM  THE  SEPULCHRE.

[Sec.  Vm.

only  made  more  public  "  the  foolishaess  of  the  cross."  From
that  time  onward  till  the  reign  of  Constantine,  there  was  again  a
regular  succession  of  bishops  of  Gentile  origin  ;  and  the  sacred
places  could  not  of  course  have  been  forgotten.

Such  is  the  general  case,  as  stated  by  Chateaubriand  ;  and  I
am  not  aware  of  having  in  any  particular  weakened  the  strength
of  his  argument.  It  is  indeed  a  strong  one  at  first  view  ;  and  at
one  time  made  a  deep  impression  on  my  own  mind ;  though  this
impression  was  again  weakened  and  in  part  done  away,  when  he
afterwards  goes  on  to  admit  the  alleged  miracles,  which  are  said
to  have  accompanied  the  finding  of  the  cross.  The  long  list  of
subsequent  testimonies  which  he  adduces,  has  no  bearing  on  the
question,  and  is  a  mere  work  of  supererogation;  for  who  has
ever  doubted  the  identity  of  the  present  site  with  that  selected
under  Constantine  Let  us  now  examine  the  argument  more
closely.

That  the  early  Christians  at  Jerusalem  must  have  had  a
knowledge  of  the  places  where  the  Lord  was  crucified  and  buried,
there  can  be  no  doubt ;  that  they  erected  their  churches  on  places
consecrated  by  miracles,  and  especially  on  Calvary  and  over  our
Lord's  sepulchre,  is  a  more  questionable  position.  There  is  at
least  no  trace  of  it  in  the  New  Testament  nor  in  the  history  of
the  primitive  church.  The  four  Gospels,  which  describe  so  mi-
nutely the  circumstances  of  the  crucifixion  and  resurrection,
mention  the  sepulchre  only  in  general  terms  ;  and  although  some
of  them  were  written  thirty  or  forty  years  after  these  events,  yet
they  are  silent  as  to  any  veneration  of  the  sepulchre,  and  also  as
to  its  very  existence  at  that  time.  The  writers  do  not  even
make  in  behalf  of  their  Lord  and  Master  the  natural  appeal,
which  Peter  employs  in  the  case  of  David,  "that  he  is  both  dead
and  buried,  and  his  sepulchre  is  with  us  unto  this  day."*  The
great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  too,  whose  constant  theme  is  the
death  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord  and  the  glory  of  his  cross,  has
not  in  all  his  w^ritings  the  slightest  allusion  to  any  reverence  for  the
place  of  these  great  events  or  the  instrument  of  the  Saviour's
passion.  On  the  contrary,  the  whole  tenor  of  our  Lord's  teach-
ing and  that  of  Paul,  and  indeed  of  every  part  of  the  New  Tes-
tament, was  directed  to  draw  off  the  minds  of  men  from  an  at-
tachment to  particular  times  and  places,  and  to  lead  the  true
worshippers  to  worship  God,  not  merely  at  J erusalem  or  in  Mount
Gerizim,  but  everywhere  *'  in  spirit  and  truth."= — The  position
that  the  Christian  churches  in  the  apostolic  age  were  without

Tom.  rV.  p.  423  sq.    The  passage  refer-  Kubbet  es-Sukhrah,  is  the  chiirch  erected

red  to  is  on  p.  446.  by  Constantine.

'  See  liowever  Ferguson's  ancient  To-       '  Acts  2,  29.    Comp.  Gen.  35,  20.
pogr.  of  Jenis.  Lond.  1847  ;  in  which  ho       '  John  4,  21.  23.
takes  the  ground,  that  the  present  mosk,
ii.  71.  72

Src.  viri.]

ARGUMENT  OF  CHATEAUBRIAND.

413

the  Wcalls  of  the  city,  is  a  mere  fancy  springing  from  the  similar
location  of  the  sepulchre  ;  and  still  more  fimciftil  and  ahsurd  is
the  assertion,  that  those  churches,  if  any  such  there  were,  might
have  escaped  destruction  during  the  long  siege  by  Titus.

The  alleged  regular  succession  of  bishops,  from  the  time  of
St.  James  to  the  reign  of  Adrian,  is  also  a  matter  of  less  certainty
perhaps  than  is  here  represented.  Eusebius,  the  only  authority
on  the  subject,  lived  two  centuries  afterwards  ;  and  says  expressly,
that  he  had  been  able  to  find  no  document  respecting  their  times,
and  wrote  only  from  report.'

More  important  is  the  circumstance  related  in  connection  with
Adrian,  that  this  emperor  erected  heathen  temples  on  Grolgotha
and  over  the  sepulchre  about  A.  D.  135.  Could  this  be  regarded
as  a  well  ascertained  fact,  it  would  certainly  have  great  weight
in  a  decision  of  the  question.  But  what  is  the  evidence  on  which
it  rests  ?  The  earliest  witness  is  again  Eusebius,  writing  after
the  death  of  Constantine  ;  who  merely  relates  that  a  temple  of
Venus  had  been  erected  over  the  sepulchre  by  impious  men,  but
says  not  one  word  of  Adrian.  The  historians  of  the  following
century  relate  the  same  fact  in  the  same  manner.'^  It  is  Jerome
alone,  writing  about  A.  D.  395,  or  some  sixty  years  later  than  Euse-
bius, who  affirms  that  an  idol  had  stood  upon  the  spot  from  the
time  of  Adrian.*  There  is  moreover  a  discrepancy  in  the  accounts.
Eusebius  and  the  other  historians  speak  only  of  a  temple  of  Ve-
nus over  the  sepulchre.  Jerome  on  the  other  hand  places  the
marble  statue  of  Venus  on  the  "  rock  of  the  cross"  or  Golgotha,
and  ar^  image  of  Jupiter  on  the  place  of  the  resurrection.  Here
the  Latin  ftither  is  probably  wrong  ;  for  Eusebius  was  an  ej^ewit-
ness  ;  and  the  former  is  therefore  equally  liable  to  have  been
wrong  in  ascribing  these  idols  to  Adrian.

What  then  after  all  is  the  amount  of  the  testimony  relative
to  an  idol  erected  over  the  place  of  the  resurrection,  and  serving
to  mark  the  spot  ?  It  is  simply,  that  writers  ex  post  facto  have
mentioned  such  an  idol  as  standing,  not  over  the  sepulchre  known
of  old  as  being  that  of  Christ,  but  over  the  spot  fixed  upon  by
Constantine  as  that  sepulchre.  Their  testimony  proves  conclu-
sively that  an  idol  stood  upon  that  spot  ;  but  it  has  no  bearing  to
show  that  this  spot  was  the  true  sepulchre.    Eusebius,  the  co-

'  Euseb.  H.  E.  4.  5,  Tuv  ye  n^v     'Upo-  124,  Par.  1628:  Keyovrat  yovv  oi  vpwToi

ffoKvfiois  ivi,  2(5.  most  prol):ibly  to  tlie  latter     See  above,

*  Ibid.  3.  ;?0.    It  may  here  bo  doubt-  pp.  372-374.
ii.  74,  75

SKcvm.]

HISTORICAL  ARGUMENT,

415

the  part  wliicli  Helena  bore  in  these  transactions  ;  and  have
detailed  the  circumstances  under  wliich,  according  to  later  wri-
ters, she  was  enabled  to  find  and  distinguish  the  true  cross. '  We
have  also  seen  that  this  supposed  cross  was  certainly  in  existence
so  early  as  the  time  of  Cyril,  only  some  twenty  years  after  its  al-
leged discovery  by  Helena.'^  It  would  seem  therefore  to  be  a  ne-
cessary conclusion,  that  this  main  circumstance  in  the  agency
ascribed  to  Helena,  must  have  had  some  foundation  in  fact  ;  and,
however  difficult  it  may  be  to  account  for  the  silence  of  Euse-
bius,  it  would  also  appear  not  improbable,  that  these  later  ac-
counts may  be  in  the  main  correct,  at  least  so  far  as  they  ascribe
to  Helena  the  chief  agency  in  searching  for  and  discovering  the
supposed  Holy  Sepulchre.  Yet  even  in  these  accounts,  she  is
nowhere  said  to  have  acted  in  consequence  of  any  known  tradi-
tion ;  but  only  to  have  received  a  divine  suggestion,"  and  also
to  have  inquired  diligently  of  tjie  ancient  inhabitants,  and  espe-
cially, according  to  some,  of  the  Jews.'  At  any  rate,  therefore,
the  place  of  the  sepulchre  was  not  then  a  matter  of  public  noto-
riety ;  and  the  alleged  miracle,  which  attended  her  discovery  of
the  true  cross,  serves  at  least  to  show  the  degree  of  ready  credu-
lity with  which  the  search  was  conducted.

Thus  far  the  balance  of  e'S'idence  would  seem  to  be  decidedly
against  the  probable  existence  of  any  previous  tradition.  But
we  are  now  prepared  to  advance  a  step  further  ;  and  to  show,
that  even  were  it  possible  to  prove  the  existence  of  such  a  pre-
vaiUng  tradition,  still  this  would  not  have  been  of  sufficient  au-
thority to  counterbalance  the  strength  of  the  topographical  ob-
jections.

The  strongest  assertion  which  can  be  made  in  the  case,  as
we  have  seen,  is  the  general  probability,  that  such  a  tradition
might  have  been  handed  down  for  three  centuries  in  the  church,
through  the  succession  of  bishops  and  other  holy  men.  But  for
the  value  of  such  a  tradition,  supposing  it  to  have  existed,  we
have  a  decisive  test,  in  applving  the  same  reasoning  to  another
tradition  of  precisely  the  same  character  and  import.  The  place
of  our  Lord's  ascension  must  have  been  to  the  first  Christians  in.
Jerusalem  an  object  of  no  less  interest  than  his  sepulchre,  and
coukl  not  but  have  been  equally  known  to  them.  The  knowledge
of  it  too  woidd  naturally  have  bej?n  handed  down  from  century  to
century,  through  the  same  succession  of  bishops  and  holy  men.
In  this  case,  moreover,  we  know  that  such  a  tradition  did  ac-
tually exist  before  the  age  of  Constantine,  which  pointed  out  the
place  of  the  ascension  on  the  summit  of  the  mount  of  Olives.
Eusebius,  writing  about  A.  D.  315,  ten  years  or  more  before  the

'  See  above,  p.  374.  '  See  the  acconnt  and  the  authorities,

'  See  p.  375.  as  given  above,  pp.  37-t,  375.

ii.  75-77

416  JERUSALEM. — THE  SEPULCHRE.  [SEC.Vm.

journey  of  Helena,  speaks  expressly,  (as  we  have  already  seen,)
of  the  many  Christians  who  came  up  to  Jerusalem  from  aU  parts
of  the  earth,  not  as  of  old  to  celebrate  a  festival,  but  to  behold
the  accomplishment  of  prophecy  in  the  desolations  of  the  city,
and  to  pay  their  adorations  on  the  summit  of  the  mount  of  Olives,
where  Jesus  gave  his  last  charge  to  his  disciples,  and  then  as-
cended into  heaven. '  Yet  notwithstanding  this  weight  of  testi-
mony, and  the  apparent  length  of  time  and  imbroken  succession
through  wliich  the  story  had  been  handed  down,  the  tradition
itself  is  unquestionably  false  ;  since  it  is  contradicted  by  the
express  declaration  of  Scripture.  According  to  Luke,  Jesus  led
out  his  disciples  as  far  as  to  Bethany,  and  blessed  them  ;  and
while  he  blessed  them,  he  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up
into  heaven.^ — Yet  Helena  erected  a  church  upon  the  mount  of
Olives  ;  and  assuredly  there  could  have  been  no  tradition  better
accredited  in  respect  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  Indeed,  the  fact
that  no  pilgrimages  were  made  to  the  latter,  goes  strongly  to
show  that  there  was  no  tradition  respecting  it  whatever.

We  arrive  at  a  similar,  though  less  decided  result,  in  follow-
ing up  another  parallel  tradition  of  the  same  kind.  The  cave  of
the  Nativity,  so  called,  at  Bethlehem,  has  been  pointed  out  as
the  place  where  Jesus  was  bom,  by  a  tradition  which  reaches
back  at  least  to  the  middle  of  the  second  century.  At  that  time
Justin  Martyr  speaks  distinctly  of  the  Saviour's  birth,  as  hav-
ing occurred  in  a  grotto  near  Bethlehem.^  In  the  third  century,
Origen  adduces  it  as  a  matter  of  notoriety,  so  that  even  the  hea-
then regarded  it  as  the  birthplace  of  him  whom  the  Christians
adored.*  Eusebius  also  mentions  it  several  years  before  the  jour-
ney of  Helena  and  the  latter  consecrated  the  spot  by  erecting
over  it  a  church.  In  this  instance,  indeed,  the  language  ot  Scrip-
ture is  less  decisive  than  in  respect  to  the  place  of  the  ascension ;
and  the  evangelist  simply  relates  that  the  Virgin  "  brought  forth

'  TSiv  els  Xpia-rhv  vfirurnvKiruv  aviv-  tin.  Mart.  Dial,  cnm  Tryph.  78.  p.  175.

rav  travTaxi^ev  yris  (rvvTp(x^'''''<^''y  o^X  Hag.  Com.  1742.

i>s  iriKat  ktK.  .  .  Kol  [eVeKo]  r^js  in]  rb  *  Origen.  c.  Celsnm  1.  51.  0pp.  Tom.

opos  Twv  iXaiSiv  irpoa'Kvy{i(rev  ovriav  iKf7,  irerSKfi  fi  Vlapla  rhv  Venus  in  Jerusalem.  Hieron.  Ep.  XLIX,  ad

\puir6v,  KoX  iv  firyri  aiirbv  irtbtUtt.  Jus-  Pauliu.  0pp.  Tom.  IV.  ii.  p.  564,  ed  Mart.

u.  77.  78

SEc.vm.]

HISTORICAL  ARGUMENT.

417

her  first  born  son,  and  laid  him  in  a  manger  ;  because  there  was
no  room  for  them  in  the  inn." '  But  the  circumstance  of  the
Saviour's  being  born  in  a  cave  would  certainly  have  not  been  less
remarkable,  than  his  having  been  laid  in  a  manger  ;  and  it  is  na-
tural to  suppose,  that  the  sacred  writer  would  not  have  passed  it
over  in  silence.  The  grotto  moreover  was  and  is  at  some  dis-
tance from  the  town  ;  and  although  there  may  be  still  occasional
instances  in  Judea,  where  a  cavern  is  occupied  as  a  stable,  yet
this  is  not  now,  and  never  was,  the  usual  practice,  especially  in
towns  and  their  environs.  Taking  into  account  all  these  circum-
stances,— and  also  the  early  and  general  tendency  to  iment  and
propagate  legends  of  a  similar  character,  and  the  prevailing  cus-
tom of  representing  the  events  of  the  gospel  history  as  having
taken  place  in  grottos,'^ — it  wDuld  seem  hardly  consistent  with  a
love  of  simjjle  historic  truth,  to  attach  to  this  tradition  any  much
higher  degree  of  credit,  than  we  have  shown  to  belong  to  the
parallel  tradition  respecting  the  place  of  our  Lord's  ascension.

The  two  traditions  which  we  have  now  examined,  both  pre-
sent a  much  stronger  case,  than  any  tiling  which  ever  has  been
or  can  be  urged  in  behalf  of  the  supposed  Holy  Sepulchre.  Yet
one  of  them  at  least,  and  probably  both,  have  no  foundation  in
historic  truth.  On  this  ground  then,  as  well  as  on  aU  others,  the
alleged  site  of  the  sepulchre  is  found  to  be  without  support.^

Thus  in  every  view  which  I  have  been  able  to  take  of  the
question,  both  topographical  and  historical,  whether  on  the  spot
or  in  the  closet,  and  in  spite  of  all  my  previous  prepossessions,  I
am  led  irresistibly  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  Golgotha  and  the
tomb  now  shown  in  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  are  not
upon  the  real  places  of  the  crucifixion  and  resurrection  of  our

'  Luke  2,  7  ;  comp.  vs.  12.  16.  where  the  Apostles  made  the  creed,  or  this

'  On  the  subject  of  grottos,  I  subjoin  the  of  the  Transfiguration ;  all  these  places  are

very  apposite  remarks  of  Maundrell,  Jour-  grottos.    And  in  a  word,  wherever  you  go,

ney,  Apr.  19th.    "  I  ca'inot  forbaar   to  you  find  almost  every  thing  is  rep-esented

mention  in  this  place  an  obsen-ation,  which  as  done  under  ground.    Certainly  grottos

is  very  obvious  to  all  that  visit  the  Holy  were  anciently  held  in  great  esteem,  or

Land,  viz.  that  almost  all  passages  and  his-  else  they  could  never  have  been  assigned,

tories  related  in  the  Gospgl,  are  represented  in  spite  of  all  probability,  for  the  places  in

by  them  that  undertake  to  show  where  which  were  done  so  many  various  actions,

every  thing  was  done,  as  having  been  done  Perhaps  it  was  the  hermit-way  of  living  in

most  of  them  in  grottos ;  and  that,  even  grottos  from  the  fifth  or  sixth  century

in  such  cases  where  the  condition  and  the  downward,  that  has  brought  them  ever

circumstances  of  the  actions  themselves  since  to  be  in  so  great  reputation."  The

seem  to  require  places  of  another  nature,  historical  notices  in  the  text,  show  that

Thus,  if  you  would  see  the  place  where  St.  this  practice  is  of  much  earlier  date  than

Anne  was  delivered  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  is  here  assigned.

you  are  carried  to  a  grotto  ;  if  the  place  of  =1  After  tliis  discussion,  it  would  be  of
the  Annunciation,  it  is  also  a  grotto  ;  if  the  little  avail,  to  dwell  upon  the  arguments
place  where  the  blessed  Virgin  saluted  Eli-  usually  drawn  from  the  form  and  condition
zabeth  ;  if  that  of  the  Baptist's  or  of  our  of  the  present  sepulchre,  against  its  anti-
Saviour's  nativity ;  if  that  of  the  agony,  or  quity.

that  of  St.  Peter's  repentance,  or  that

ii.  78-80

418

JERUSALEM. — STATISTICS.

[Sec.  Yin,

Lord.  The  alleged  discovery  of  them  by  the  aged  and  credulous
Helena,  like  her  discovery  of  the  cross,  may  not  improbably  have
been  the  work  of  pious  fraud.  It  would  perhaps  not  be  doing  in-
justice to  the  bishop  Macarius  and  his  clergy,  if  we  regard  the
whole  as  a  well  laid  and  successful  plan  for  restoring  to  Jerusa-
lem its  former  consideration,  and  elevating  his  see  to  a  higher
degree  of  influence  and  dignity.

If  it  be  asked,  Where  then  are  the  true  sites  of  Golgotha  and
the  sepulchre  to  be  sought  ?  I  must  reply,  that  probably  all
search  can  only  be  in  vain.  We  know  nothing  more  from  the
Scriptures,  than  that  they  were  near  each  other,  without  the
gate  and  nigh  to  the  city,  in  a  frequented  spot.'  This  would
favour  the  conclusion,  that  the  place  was  probably  upon  a  great
road  leading  from  one  of  the  gates  ;  and  such  a  spot  would  only
be  found  upon  the  western  or  northern  sides  of  the  city,  on  the
roads  leading  towards  Joppa  or  Damascus.

III.  STATISTICS,

The  details  in  the  preceding  pages  have  extended  themselves
far  beyond  the  limits  originally  proposed  ;  and  will  at  least  prove
to  the  reader,  that  during  our  sojourn  in  Jerusalem,  our  atten-
tion was  directed  more  to  the  topography  and  antiquities  of  the
Holy  City,  than  to  its  present  social  and  political  relations.  The
facts,  however,  which  we  gleaned  upon  these  latter  points,  may
not  be  devoid  of  interest ;  and  may  help  to  fill  out  or  correct  the
accounts  of  other  writers.

The  glory  of  Jerusalem  has  indeed  departed.  From  her  an-
cient high  estate,  as  the  splendid  metropolis  of  the  J ewish  com-
monwealth and  of  the  whole  Christian  world,  the  beloved  of  na-
tions and  '  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,'  she  has  sunk  into  the
neglected  capital  of  a  petty  Turkish  province  ;  and  where  of  old
many  hundreds  of  thousands  thronged  her  streets  and  temple,
we  now  find  a  population  of  scarcely  as  many  single  thousands
dwelling  sparsely  within  her  walls.  The  cup  of  wrath  and  de-
solation from  the  Almighty  has  been  poured  out  upon  her  to  the
dregs ;  and  she  sits  sad  and  solitary  in  darkness  and  in  the  dust.
The  Saviour  "  beheld  the  city  and  wept  over  it,  saying,  If  thou
hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least  in  tliis  thy  day,  the  things
which  belong  unto  thy  peace  !  but  now  tliey  are  hid  from  thine
eyes  !  '"^  He  wept  at  the  calamities  and  the  doom  which  were
then  coming  upon  the  city,  and  which  now  for  almost  eighteen
centuries  have  bowed  her  heavily  to  the  ground.  That  which
our  Lord  wept  over  in  prosj)oct,  we  now  see  in  the  terrible  reality.

"  John  19,  20.
ii.  80,  81

»  Luke  I'J.  41  sq.

Sec.  VIU.]

DECAY.     EGYPTIAN  RULE.

419

Long  since  have  the  days  come,  when  "  her  enemies  cast  a  trench
about  her,  and  compassed  her  round,  and  kept  her  in  on  every
side,  and  have  laid  her  even  with  the  ground,  and  her  children
Avithin  her  ;  and  have  not  left  in  her  one  stone  upon  another  !  "
How  fearfully,  and  almost  to  the  letter,  this  '  burden '  of  Jerusa-
lem has  been  accomplished  upon  her,  the  preceding  pages  may
serve  to  testify.

Under  the  Egyptian  rule  in  Syria,  the  former  Pashahks  of
'Akka  and  Aleppo  have  been  done  away.  The  whole  country  is
united  under  one  civil  government,  the  seat  of  which  is  at  Da-
mascus ;  while  the  independent  military  command  is  intrusted
to  Ibrahim  Pasha.  The  same  system  is  also  followed  in  the  se-
veral districts  into  which  the  country  is  divided.  Thus  in  the
district  of  Jerusalem,  which  includes  the  hill  country  around  the
city  from  Sinjil  on  the  north  to  about  half  way  to  Hebron  on  the
south,  there  is  a  Mutesellim  or  civil  governor,  residing  in  the  city,
and  likewise  a  military  commander.  The  powers  of  these  two
chiefs,  perhaps  from  poUcy,  are  not  very  distinctly  marked,  nor
separated  by  any  very  definite  Hue.  The  former,  however,  seems
to  be  the  responsible  person  for  the  due  administration  of  justice;
and  he  too  was  the  actor  in  disarming  several  villages  while  we
were  there,  which  would  seem  to  fall  more  naturally  under  the
jurisdiction  of  his  colleague.  The  district  of  Hebron  is  subor-
dinate to  that  of  Jerusalem,  and  is  administered  only  by  a  de-
puty governor.  The  Bedawin  tribes  around  Hebron  and  in  the
deserts  further  south,  were  under  the  superintendence  of  Sheikh
Sa'id,  the  civil  governor  of  Graza ;  who  collected  from  them  the
tribute,  and  controlled  their  predatory  excursions  against  other
tribes. — The  little  intercourse  which  we  had  occasion  to  seek
with  the  two  governors  of  Jerusalem,  has  already  been  men-
tioned.'

A  considerable  body  of  troops  usually  lay  in  garrison  at  Jeru-
salem ;  but  the  number  was  variable,  and  we  did  not  learn  the
average  amount.  They  were  at  this  time  mostly  Syrian  troops,
taken  by  force  as  soldiers  in  the  country  itself;  and  of  course  ex-
ceedingly discontented  with  the  service.  Shortly  before  our  visit,
a  mutiny  had  occurred  among  them ;  a  large  number  had  de-
serted, many  of  whom  had  been  retaken  ;  while  others  were  still
wandering  about  as  outlaws  and  robbers.  It  was  the  usual  po-
licy of  the  Egyptian  government  to  remove  the  Syrian  regiments
from  their  own  soil  to  Egypt  or  other  places,  where  they  would
be  less  reminded  of  their  bondage  ;  and  during  our  stay  in  Jeru-
salem a  large  detachment  of  its  garrison  was  sent  off  to  Yafa,  in-
tended for  a  more  distant  service.  The  troops  we  saw,  were  in
general  composed  of  fine  looking  young  men.    They  are  lodged

'  See  above,  pp.  244,  246.

ii.  81-83

420

JERUSALEM. — STATISTICS.

[Sec.  Vm,

in  Jerusalem  in  the  citadel,  adjacent  to  wliich  new  barracks  had
recently  been  erected  ;  and  also  in  the  former  house  of  the  gover-
nor of  the  city,  on  the  north  of  the  Haram,  now  converted  into
a  barrack.  A  military  guard  was  regularly  kept  at  each  of  the
city  gates.  We  saw  also  several  times  parties  of  soldiers  at  the
fountains  and  weUs  round  about  the  city,  washing  their  garments
and  spreading  them  upon  the  ground  to  dry.

The  population  of  Jerusalem  has  been  variously  estimated
according  to  the  fancy  of  different  travellers  from  15,000  up  to
nearly  30,000.*  No  doubt  the  number  has  varied  much  at  differ-
ent times ;  and  entire  certainty  can  never  be  hoped  for  under  an
oriental  government,  where  a  census  of  the  whole  population  is
a  thing  unknown.  Indeed,  imtil  within  the  last  few  years,  there
would  appear  to  have  been  no  data  whatever  accessible  to  a
traveller,  on  which  to  found  a  calculation.  The  more  common
estimate  of  late  years  among  the  Franks,  has  been  the  round
number  of  15,000  inhabitants  ;  of  which  the  greater  part  have
been  svipposed  to  be  Muhammedans.  "We  found,  however,  reason
to  distrust  the  accuracy  of  both  these  statements.

The  introduction  of  the  Egyptian  system  of  taxation  and
military  conscription  into  Syria,  has  led  to  the  enumeration  and
registry  of  all  the  ?HaZes  who  are  of  an  age  to  be  taxed  or  to  bear
arms.  We  could  not  learn  that  this  age  is  very  exactly  defined ;
but  it  is  usually  reckoned  as  commencing  at  about  eighteen  or
twenty  years.  According  to  the  proportion  generally  assumed,
this  enumeration  may  thus  be  regarded  as  a  loose  census  of  one
fourth  of  the  population.  As  tliis  measure  was  a  great  innovation,
and  led  to  consequences  which  excited  much  alarm  and  oppositon,
the  number  of  persons  thus  registered  in  the  difierent  cities  and
villages  became  everywhere  an  object  of  interest  to  the  inliabi-
tants,  and  was  very  generally  known.  On  our  inquiring  of
different  individuals  respecting  the  number  enrolled  in  a  particu-
lar place,  the  answer  given  was  almost  uniformly  the  same.  We
found  this  therefore  to  be  the  best,  and  indeed  the  only  positive
basis,  on  which  to  found  an  estimate  of  the  population  of  any
city  or  village.  Yet  even  this  enumeration  is  not  always  correct ;
as  the  partiality  or  negligence  of  the  authorities  often  causes  the
list  to  faU  below  the  actual  number.  Among  the  multitudes  be-
longing to  different  sects,  there  are  always  eyes  keen  enough  to
watch  and  detect  the  errors  arising  from  this  source  ;  and  we
not  unfrequently  received  two  reports,  one  according  to  the  offi-
cial registry,  and  the  other  according  to  the  alleged  truth. — I
have  dwelt  the  longer  upon  this  topic  here ;  because  these  re-

'  Turner  26,000,  Vol.  II.  p.  263.   Rich-    Salzbacher  (in  1837)  not  less  than  26,000,
ardson  20,000,  Vol.  II.  p.  2.5G.    Scholz    Vol.  II.  p.  119.
18,000,  p.  271.    Jowett  15,000,  p.  238.
ii.  83  84

SEcvin.]

POPULATION.

421

marks  apply  not  only  to  Jerasalem,  but  to  all  our  subsequent
travels  in  Palestine.'

The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  dwell  in  separate  quarters  ac-
cording to  their  religion,  Christian,  Jewish  and  Muhammedan.
The  Christian  quarter  extends  along  the  upper  or  western  part
of  the  city,  between  the  Latin  convent  at  the  northwest  corner,
and  the  great  Armenian  convent  in  the  southwest,  including  also
the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  The  Jewish  quarter  occu-
pies the  northeastern  part  of  Zion  and  extends  upwards  so  as  to
include  the  greater  portion  of  the  hill  lying  within  the  walls.
The  Muhammedans  are  in  the  middle  and  lower  parts  of  the
city.  After  careful  inquiry,  the  information  which  we  found
most  worthy  to  be  relied  upon,  amounted  to  the  following.

I.  The  Muhammedans  are  reckoned  in  the  government
books  at  750  men ;  but  amount  really  to  1,100. '  This  gives
at  the  utmost  a  round  number  of  4,500.

II.  Of  the  Jews,  only  500  males  are  enrolled ;  but  there  are
actually  many  more.  According  to  the  careful  estimate  of  the
Kev.  Mr.  Nicolayson,  who  has  a  better  opportunity  of  judging
than  any  other  person,  the  whole  number  of  the  Jews  at  this
time  was  about  3,000.  In  former  years  the  number  had  some-
times amounted  to  5,000.

III.  Christians.  The  Greeks  are  reckoned  by  the  govern-
ment at  400,  but  are  actually  460 ;  the  Latins  at  260  ;  the  Ar-
menians at  130.  Total  850  males,  indicatiag  a  population  of
about  3,500  in  all. — Hence

Muhammedans  4,500

Jews  3,000

Christians  8,500

Total  population  11,000

If  to  this  we  add  something  for  possible  omissions,  and  for  the
inmates  of  the  convents  ;  the  standing  population  of  the  city,
exclusive  of  the  garrison,  cannot  weU  be  reckoned  at  over
11,500  souls.  The  Muhammedans,  it  will  be  seen,  are  more  nu-
merous than  either  the  J ews  or  Christians  alone ;  but  fewer  in
number  than  these  two  bodies  united.'

'  In  regarding  this  partial  enumeration       "  I  have  more  recently  learned,  (Oct

as  the  only  existing  basis  for  a  general  es-  1840,)  that  some  of  our  friends  in  Jerusa-

timate,  I  am  happy  to  have  the  concur-  lem,  on  the  strength  of  later  information,

rence  of  my  friend  Dr.  Bowring ;  whose  re-  have  been  led  to  estimate  the  number  of

searches  into  the  resources  and  statistics  of  the  Muhammedans  at  about  1,500  hir^her

Egypt  and  Syria  during  the  same  year,  as  or  6,000  in  all ;  and  the  Jews  at  7,000,  ac-

the  accredited  agent  of  the  British  govern-  cording  to  the  reported  enumeration  ob-

ment,  were  carried  on  under  facilities  and  tained  by  Sir  Moses  Montefiore  in  A.  D.

to  an  extent  to  which  ours  could  make  no  1839.    This  would  give  for  the  whole  po-

pretension.  pulation  of  the  city  about  1 7,000  souls.  Bu  t
Vol.  I.— 36  81-86

422

JERUSALEM. — STATISTICS.

[Sec.  Vm.

Of  all  this  native  population,  as  well  as  throughout  Syria
and  Egypt,  the  Arabic  is  the  vernacular  language  ;  as  much  so
as  the  English  in  London  or  the  French  in  Paris.  The  Jews
are  for  the  most  part  not  natives  of  the  countiy ;  and  speak  a
corrupt  medley  of  tongues  among  themselves.  Among  the
other  foreigners,  the  Greek,  Armenian,  and  Itahan  languages  are
also  found  ;  but  whoever  desires  to  obtain  access  to  the  common
people,  whether  Muhammedans  or  Christians,  can  do  it  only
through  the  medium  of  the  Arabic.

Of  the  Jews  now  resident  in  Palestine,  the  greater  number
are  such  as  have  come  up  to  the  land  of  their  fathers,  in  order
to  spend  the  remainder  of  their  hves  and  die  in  one  of  the  four
holy  places,  Jerusalem,  Hebron,  Tiberias,  or  Safed.  Those  in
Jerusalem  desire  to  lay  their  bones  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.'
They  come  hither  from  all  parts  of  the  Levant,  and  especially
from  Smyrna,  Constantinople,  and  Salonika  ;  in  which  cities  there
are  many  thousands  of  this  people.  Two  years  before  our  visit,
the  Jews  were  said  to  have  flocked  in  great  numbers  to  Syria,
and  particularly  to  Damascus  and  Tyre,  where  formerly  they
were  not  permitted  to  reside.  But  subsequently,  as  the  high
prices  of  provisions  and  of  living  in  general  increased,  this  cir-
cumstance prevented  the  coming  of  more,  and  compelled  the  re-
turn of  many  ;  so  that  the  number  of  Jews  in  Jerusalem  had
been  much  diminished.  They  live  here,  for  the  most  part,  in
poverty  and  filth.  A  considerable  amount  of  money  is  collected
for  them  by  their  emissaries  in  different  countries  ;  but  as  it
comes  into  the  hands  of  the  Rabbins,  and  is  managed  by  them
without  responsibility,  it  is  understood  to  be  administered  with-
out much  regard  to  honesty  ;  and  serves  chiefly  as  a  means  of  in-
creasing their  own  influence  and  control  over  the  conduct  and
consciences  of  their  poorer  brethren.

Most  of  the  Jews  now  in  Palestine  appear  to  be  of  Spanish
or  Polish  origin ;  very  few  are  from  Germany,  or  able  to  speak
the  German  language.  The  very  motive  which  leads  them  thus
to  return  to  the  land  of  Promise,  shows  their  strong  attachment

I  Lave  yet  to  learn,  that  the  new  sour-  iiiforraation  so  late  as  Nov.  1840.  The

ces  of  information  as  to  the  Muhamme-  Scottish  deputation  of  clerfrymen  in  1839,

dans,  were  more  correct  than  ours.    As  to  as  I  learned  from  some  of  its  members,  es-

the  Jews,  the  enumeration  in  question  was  timated  the  Jews  in  Jenisalem  at  5,000

made  out  by  themselves,  in  the  expecta-  souls ;  while  Mr.  Caiman,  who  accompanied

tion  of  receiving  a  certain  amount  of  alms  them,  himself  a  converted  Jew,  still  snp-

for  every  name  returned.    It  is  therefore  posed  them  not  to  exceed  3,000  in  all. —

obvious,  that  they  here  had  as  strong  a  The  estimate  of  the  British  consul  at  Bei-

motive  to  exaggerate  their  number,  as  they  rut,  who  makes  the  whole  population  of

often  have  in  other  circumstances  to  under-  Jerusalem  only  10,000,  is  on  the  other

rate  it.    Besides,  this  number  of  7,000  hand  certainly  too  low.  See  Dr.  Bowring's

rests  merely  on  report;  Sir  Moses  himself  Report  on  Syria,  p.  7.
has  published  nothing  on  the  subject ;  nor       '  See  above,  p.  349.
could  his  agent  in  London  afford  me  any
ii.  86,  87

SEC.VIIL]

JEWS.  LATINS.

423

to  their  ancient  faith  ;  and  would  of  itself  point  a  priori  to  the
conclusion,  which  is  found  to  be  true  in  fact,  viz.  that  the  Jews
thus  resident  in  Palestine  are  of  all  others  the  most  bigoted,  and
the  least  accessible  to  the  labours  of  Christian  missionaries.
The  efforts  of  the  English  mission  have  as  yet  been  attended
with  very  slight  success  ;  and  it  remains  to  be  seen,  whether
the  erection  of  a  Jewish-Christian  church  in  Jerusalem  will
add  to  the  influence  and  prosperity  of  the  mission.  The  site
was  purchased  during  our  stay  in  the  city  ;  and  the  budding  has
been  since  completed.

The  Chrisjians  of  the  Latin  rite  live  around  the  Latin  con-
vent, on  which  they  are  wholly  dependent.  They  are  native
Arabs  ;  know  no  other  language  than  the  Arabic  ;  and  are  said
to  be  descended  from  Catholic  converts  in  the  times  of  the  cru-  .
sades.  They  are  in  number  about  1,100  souls,  accoi'ding  to  the
preceding  estimate  ;  and  live  partly  by  carving  crosses  and  beads
for  rosaries,  and  partly  on  the  alms  of  the  convent. ' — The  Latin
convent  in  Jerusalem,  hke  all  those  in  the  Holy  Land,  is  in  the
hands  of  the  Franciscans,  or  Minorites,  of  the  class  termed
Fratres  Minores  ah  Observantia.  I  have  already  mentioned
their  former  residence  on  Mount  Zion,  and  their  removal  to  the
present  building  in  A.  D.  1561.''  This  convent  contains  at  pres-
ent between  forty  and  fifty  monks,  half  Italians  and  half  Span-
iards ;  and  takes  rank  of  all  the  other  Catholic  monasteries
in  the  east.  In  it  resides  the  intendant  or  principal  of  all  the
convents,  with  the  rank  of  an  abbot,  and  the  title  of  "  Guardian
of  Mount  Zion  and  Custos  of  the  Holy  Land."'  He  is  always
an  Italian  ;  and  is  appointed  or  at  least  confirmed  at  Rome  every
three  years.  The  same  individual  is  sometimes  reappointed.  There
is  also  a  vicar,  called  likewise  president,  who  takes  the  place  of
the  guardian  in  case  of  his  absence  or  death.  He  is  chosen  in
like  manner  for  three  years  ;  and  may  be  an  Italian  or  a  Span-
iard.^ The  procurator,  who  manages  the  temporal  concerns,  is
always  a  Spaniard  ;  and  is  elected  for  life.  The  executive  coun-
cil, called  discretorium,  is  composed  of  these  three  officials,  and
of  three  other  monks,  patres  discreti.

The  cost  of  maintaining  the  twenty  convents  belonging  to
the  estabHshment  of  the  "  Terra  Santa,"  is  rated  at  40,000  Spa-
nish dollars  per  annum.  They  are  said  to  be  very  deeply  in  debt,
contracted  in  former  years,  when  the  wars  in  Europe  cut  off  for
a  time  their  usual  eleemosynary  supplies.    Under  the  Egyptian

'  Salzbacher  gives  the  number  at  1,500.  tos  (Prasul)  Terras  Sanctae ; "  Quaresmius,

Other  native  Catholics  are  found  also  in  Tom.  I.  p.  465.

connection  with  the  Latin  convents  at       *  "  Vicarius  sive  Proeses  ; "  Quaresmius

Bethlehem  and  Nazareth.  1.  p.  468.  Formerly  the  vicar  was  usually

^  See  above,  p.  242.  n.  5.  a  French  monlt ;  but  this  seems  no  longer

'  "  Guardianus  saeri  Montis  Sion  et  C us-  to  be  the  case.    Scholz,  p.  195.

ii.  87-89

424

JEEUSALEM. — STATISTICS.

[Sec.  MIL

government,  they  are  freed  from  tlie  mimerous  exactions  to  whicli
they  were  formerly  subjected  from  the  caprice  and  greediness  of
pashas  and  governors  ;  and  pay  a  regular  tax  for  the  property
which  they  possess.  For  their  buildings  and  lands  in  and  around
J erusalem,  including  the  holy  places,  the  annual  tax  is  said  to
be  7,000  piastres,  or  about  350  Spanish  dollars.'

The  Christians  of  the  Greek  rite  (not  monks)  are  all  na-
tive Arabs  ;  have  their  own  native  priests  ;  and  enjoy  the  privi-
lege of  having  the  ser'V'ice  in  their  churches  performed  in  their
own  mother  tongue,  the  Arabic.  They  amount  in  Jerusalem  to
nearly  2,000  souLs. — The  Greek  convents  are  tenanted  by  foreign-
ers, all  Greeks  by  birth,  mostly  from  the  Archipelago,  speaking
only  the  Greek  language.  There  are  eight  convents  for  men,
.containing  in  all  about  sixty  monks,  viz.  the  great  convent  of
Constantine  near  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre,  in  which  most  of
the  monks  and  the  officials  reside  ;  and  those  of  Demetrius,
Theodoras  (Arabic  Tadrus,)  George,  Michael,  Nicolas,  Johannes,
and  George  in  the  Jewish  quarter.  All  these  minor  establish-
ments are  chiefly  used  for  the  accommodation  of  pilgrims,  and  are
kept  by  only  one  or  two  monks  and  lay  brethren.  There  are  also
five  convents  of  Greek  nuns,  containing  about  thirty-five  in  all,
who  are  foreigners  hke  the  monks  ;  viz.  those  of  the  Holy  Virgin
(Panagia,  Arabic  es-Seideh),  Basil,  Catharine,  Euthymius,  and
another  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  In  the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem  the
Greeks  have  also  the  convents  of  the  Holy  Cross  (Deir  el-Musul-
labeh)  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  W.  S.  W.  of  the  city  ;
that  of  Mar  Elyas  towards  Bethlehem  ;  one  at  the  grotto  of  the
Nativity  at  Bethlehem  ;  and  the  renowned  monastery  of  Mar
Saba,  founded  about  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  and  sit-
uated on  the  continuation  of  the  valley  of  the  Kidron,  as  it  runs
off  to  the  Dead  Sea.

All  these  Greek  convents  in  and  around  the  city  are  under
the  government  of  three  vicars  (Arab.  Wakil )  of  the  patriarch
of  Jerusalem,  who  himself  resides  at  Constantinople.  The
present  vicars  were  the  Greek  bishojjs  of  Lydda,  Nazareth,  and

'  See  Scholz  Rcise,  p.  194  sq.  Salz-
baclier  Erinnerungen,  II.  p.  92  sq.  The
amount  of  the  present  tax  is  given  on  the
authority  of  the  latter  writer  ;  who  as  ca-
non of  St.  Stephen's  cathedral  at  Vienna,
and  a  Catholic  pilgrim  of  rank,  may  he
supposed  to  have  had  access  to  the  best  in-
formation. Yet  I  am  not  sure  that  this  al-
leged sum  of  7,000  piastres  (like  so  many
other  things)  is  not  copied  by  him  from
Soholz,  who  was  there  in  A.  D.  1821  ;  p.
197._The  following  list  of  the  Catholic
convents  now  connected  with  that  of  .leni-
salem,  is  from  the  same  authority :  15cth-
ii.  89,  90

lehem ;  St.  John's  in  the  Desert,  an  hour
and  a  hixlf  southwest  of  Jerusalem ;  Ram-
leh,  Yiifii,  Haifa,  'Akka,  Nnzareth,  Sidon,
Beirut,  Tripolis,  Larissa,  Aleppo,  Damas-
cus, and  one  on  M  unt  Lebanon;  also  ia
Alexandria,  Rosi^tta,  and  Cairo  in  Egypt;
and  in  Larnaka  and  Nicosia  on  the  island
of  C^-prus.  In  Jerusalem,  Bethlehem,  and
Nazareth,  half  the  monks  are  Italians  and
half  Spaniards ;  in  Yafa,  Ramkh,  and  St.
John,  they  are  all  Spaniards ;  and  in  the
other  convents  all  Italians.  The  whole
number  of  monks  is  about  two  hundred.

Sec.  Vm.]

CHRISTIAN  SECTS.

425

Kerak  (Pctra).  They  were  assisted  by  the  bishops  of  Gaza,  Nd-
bulus,  es-Salt  (Philadelphia),  and  Sebaste  ;  who  with  the  ar-
chimandrites form  a  council.  The  vicars,  with  the  concurrence
of  the  council,  appoint  the  superiors  of  the  several  convents  ;  and
all  the  priests  within  these  dioceses  are  ordained  at  Jerusa-
lem. Indeed,  all  the  bishops  above  named  Uve  there  perma-
nently, in  the  great  convent  near  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre.
The  Greek  bishop  of  'Akka  alone  was  said  to  reside  in  his  own
diocese.'

The  Armenians  have  their  large  monastery  on  Mount  Zion,
said  to  be  the  wealthiest  in  the  city,  with  the  splendid  church
of  St.  James.  Not  far  off  is  a  convent  of  Armenian  nuns,  called
ez-Zeituny.  Outside  of  the  city,  on  Mount  Zion,  the  pretended
house  of  Caiaphas  serves  as  a  smaller  convent  and  is  occupied  by
monks.'^  The  Armenians  are  for  the  most  part  not  natives  ;  and
those  not  attached  to  the  convents,  are  usually  merchants.

The  Coptic  Christians  consist  only  of  monks  in  their  convent
of  es-Sultan,  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the  pool  of  Hezekiah.
At  the  time  of  our  visit,  it  had  just  been  rebuilt.^  There  is  also
a  convent  of  the  Abyssinians  ;  and  we  were  hkewise  told  of  one
belonging  to  the  J acobite  Syrians.*

Of  these  Christian  sects,  the  Greeks,  Latins,  Armenians,  and
Copts,  have  their  own  chapels  in  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepul-
chre ;  and  the  three  former  have  also  convents  or  dwelKngs
within  the  walls  of  the  church,  for  the  monks  who  are  shut  up
here  to  perform  the  regular  offices  day  and  night.^  Along  the
walls  of  the  circular  church  around  the  sepulchre  itself,  are  niches
with  altars  for  several  of.  the  minor  sects ;  as  the  Abyssinians,
Jacobites,  Nestorians,  Maronites,  and  others  ;  but  their  service
is  performed  in  these  chapels  only  occasionally.  It  is  well  known
that  a  deep  hatred  exists  among  all  these  possessors  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre  towards  each  other.  Especially  is  this  the  case  be-
tween the  Greeks  and  Latins  ;  in  whom  it  seems  to  be  irrecon-
cilable, and  gives  occasion  for  constant  intrigues  and  bitter  com-
plaints on  either  side.  The  Greeks  have  indeed  the  advantage
in  their  greater  cunning  ;  in  the  far  greater  number  of  their  pil-
grims ;  and  in  their  proximity  to  the  regions  whence  their  re-
sources are  derived.  They  are  consequently  enabled  to  prosecute
their  purposes  more  systematically  and  with  greater  effect.  During

'  Scholz,  p.  205.    The  preceding  infor-  '  These   monks  are   confined  to  the

mation  respecting  the  Greek  Christians  church,  provisions  being  brought  to  them

and  convents  was  obtained  from  intelligent  daily  from  their  respective  convents.  The

natives  of  that  persuasion.  Latin   monks   are   relieved  every  three

*  See  above,  p.  243.  months.  In  1837,  there  was  only  one  Copt
'  See  above,  pp.  329,  330.    See  more  in  thus  residing  in  the  church.  Salzbacher,

Vol.  III.  Sec.  IV.  Vol.  II.  pp.  77,  82.

*  Scholz,  p.  275.

Vol.  I.— 36*  ii.  90-92

426

•JERUSALEM.  STATISTICS.

[Sec.  Vm.

the  wars  in  Europe  tlie  Latins  were  comparatively  forgotten  ;
their  pilgrims  dwindled  away  to  nothing ;  and  their  resources
were  in  a  measure  cut  olf.

Tlie  Greeks  took  occasion  of  these  circumstances  to  get  pos-
session by  degrees  of  many  of  the  holy  places,  in  and  around  the
churches  of  the  Sepulchre  and  at  Bethlehem,  which  had  formerly
been  in  the  hands  of  the  Latins  ;  and  notwithstanding  all  the
efforts  of  the  latter,  these  have  not  yet  been  recovered.  Near  the
close  of  the  year  1836,  the  prince  de  Joinville,  son  of  the  king
of  France,  visited  the  Holy  City  ;  and  one  of  the  first  requests  of
the  Latin  fathers  was,  that  the  influence  of  the  French  monarch
might  be  employed  to  recover  for  them  all  the  sacred  places,  which
the  Greeks  had  so  unjustly  wrested  from  them  ever  since  the
crusades.  The  prince  promised  his  support  ;  and  a  representa-
tion is  said  actually  to  have  been  made  by  the  French  cabinet  to
the  Turkish  court,  through  their  ambassador  at  Constantinople.
A  firman  was  granted,  commanding  the  Greek  patriarch  to  deli-
ver up  to  the  Latins  the  possession  of  the  sacred  places  in  ques-
tion ;  but  still  the  Greek  spirit  of  intrigue  was  able  to  evade  the
execution.  A  timely  present  of  some  500  purses  '  to  the  gover-
nor of  Syria,  is  said  to  have  stayed  all  proceedings.  Further
negotiations  were  set  on  foot  at  Constantinople  ;  but  they  appear
to  have  led  to  no  result.*

The  kings  of  France  have  ever  been  the  protectors  of  the  Ca-
tholics in  the  east ;  and  the  French  ambassador  at  Constanti-
nople has  always  acted,  and  still  acts,  as  their  patron  and  advo-
cate with  the  Porte.  When  we  were  in  Jerusalem  a  splendid
salver  of  gold  for  the  presentation  of  the  host,  had  just  arrived,  a
present  from  the  queen  of  the  French  to  the  convent.  They  pos-
sess also  the  portrait  of  king  Louis  Philip,  a  gift  from  himself.

Formerly  all  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem  paid  their  taxes  to
the  government  through  their  respective  convents  ;  that  is  to
say,  the  monasteries  became  the  collectors  of  the  taxes  ;  a  sys-
tem which  gave  opportunity  for  great  extortion  on  the  part  of
the  convents.  The  Egyptian  government  has  done  away  this
system  ;  and  apportions  and  collects  its  own  taxes  from  all  the
Christian  sects,  except  the  Latins.  For  these  the  Latin  convent
pays  tlie  Kharaj  or  extra  tax  for  Christians  ;  they  being  very
poor.  No  Firdeh  or  ordinary  capitation  tax  is  paid  by  any  of
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  whether  Muslims,  Christians,  or
Jews  ;  because  it  is  regarded  as  a  sacred  place,  and  because  of
the  poverty  of  the  people.    The  inhabitants  of  the  villages  pay

'  A  piirae  is  equivalent  to  500  pia.strcs,  to  iiitcrrcre  ;  and  gravely  refers  the  parties

or  about      Spanish  dollars.  to  the  Sultan  at  Constantinople,  as  the

'  Salzliacher  II.  p.  98  sq. — In  all  svich  highest  tribunal,
qnastions  the  Ki^ptian  government  declines

li.  92.  93

Skc.  vm.]

TAXES.  TRADE.

427

the  Firdeh,  as  well  as  the  Kharaj  and  other  taxes.' — At  the  same
time,  the  Pasha  of  Egypt  has  abolished  the  tolls  and  tribute,
which  under  the  name  of  d-Glmfr  were  formerly  so  oppressive
to  the  pilgrims  and  travellers.  Even  the  entrance  money,  which
for  so  many  centuries  was  paid  for  admission  to  the  church  of  the
Sepulchre,  is  in  like  manner  done  away.

From  these  facts,  however,  it  must  not  he  inferred,  that  the
exactions  of  the  Pasha  are  in  themselves  less  oppressive  than  those
of  the  Sultan.  The  preference  lies  rather  in  the  more  equal
manner  in  which  the  extortions  are  now  conducted.  The  bur-
dens to  be  endured  are  more  definitely  known  ;  and  no  distinc-
tion is  made,  as  formerly,  between  the  Christian  and  the  Mussul-
man. Yet  the  whole  mode  of  proceeding,  as  well  as  the  enormous
amount  of  taxation,  is  sufficiently  oppressive  ;  as  we  had  abun-
dant occasion  to  see  in  the  course  of  our  subsequent  journies.
While  we  were  at  Jenisalem,  the  value  of  the  Turkish  gold  coins
of  twenty  piastres,  which  had  always  been  the  common  curren-
cy of  the  country,  was  by  a  decree  of  the  Egyptian  government
at  once  cut  down  to  17^  piastres,  a  loss  of  nearly  fourteen  per
cent.  It  would  be  natural  to  suppose,  that  a  measure  of  this  sort
would  have  been  fixed  to  go  into  operation  on  a  particular  day  ;
and  that  this  day  would  have  been  publicly  made  known.  Yet
nothing  of  the  kind  took  place.  The  measure  was  proclaimed  on
different  days  in  different  places,  and  in  each  went  immediately
into  operation.  In  Beirut  and  in  Yafa,  it  was  known  and  acted
upon  for  nearly  a  fortnight  before  it  was  proclaimed  in  Jerusa-
lem, It  was  said  that  the  authorities  of  the  latter  city  had  a
large  quantity  of  this  coin  on  hand,  of  which  they  wished  first  to
rid  themselves  by  paying  it  away  at  its  full  value.  Tbe  conse-
quence was  the  greatest  confusion  among  the  tradesmen,  and  the
impossibility  of  guarding  against  loss.

The  bazars  have  been  already  alluded  to,  as  situated  in  the
laiddle  of  the  city,  on  and  near  the  principal  street  running
north  to  the  Damascus  gate.  They  consist  of  two  or  three  nar-
row lanes  roofed  over,  with  open  shops  on  each  side,  occupied  by
merchants  and  sedentary  artisans.  They  appeared  not  to  be
well  furnished,  even  for  an  oriental  city.  The  markets  are  sup-
plied by  the  peasants  from  the  neighbouring  villages.  There
seemed  to  be  no  gardens  of  any  importance  round  about  tlie  city  ;
except  those  below  Siloam.  Wheat  would  appear  not  to  grow
well  around  Jerusalem,  but  is  brought  from  other  quarters.  In
one  of  our  journies  northward,  we  met  a  small  caravan  of  camels
belonging  to  Bethlehem,  loaded  with  wheat  from  ISFabulus.  The

'  The  Fxrdfh  is  a  tax  laid  upon  every  The  Kharaj  is  a  similar  extra  tax  on  Chris-
male^  inhabitant  from  1.5  years  upwards ;  tians  and  Jews,  a  species  of  toleration-tax.
varying  from  1.5  to  .500  piastres  according  Compare  Bowring's  Report  on  Syria,  p.
to  t^e  supposad  ability  of  the  individual.  112.

ii.  93-96

428

JERUSALEM. — CLIMATE.

[SecVIII.

exhausted  situation  of  the  country  arising  from  the  maintenance
of  an  immense  army,  the  forced  export  of  wheat  to  Egypt,
and  the  general  discouragement  to  lahour  and  enterprise,  have
naturally  caused  an  enormous  increase  in  the  cost  of  the  neces-
saries of  life.  In  1838  the  cost  of  living  in  Jerusalem  had  become
threefold.  To  this  succeeded  the  plague,  which  prevailed  more
or  less  for  some  years  ;  and  then  the  suspense  and  miseries  of
actual  war  ;  so  that  the  prices  of  provisions,  as  I  am  informed,
had  in  1839  advanced  to  the  quadruple  of  what  they  were  only
four  or  five  years  since.

Jerusalem  has  few  manufactures ;  and  no  exports,  except
what  is  carried  away  by  the  pilgrims.  The  manufacture  of  soap
is  one  of  the  principal.  For  this  there  are  nine  establishments,
which  appear  to  have  been  long  in  existence.  The  mounds  of
ashes  which  they  have  thrown  out  at  some  distance  from  the  city
on  the  north,  have  almost  the  appearance  of  natural  hills.*  At
Easter  large  quantities  of  perfumed  soap  are  said  to  be  sold  to
the  pilgrims.'  Oil  of  sesame  is  made  to  a  considerable  extent ;
for  this  there  are  nine  presses.  There  is  also  a  large  tannery  for
leather,  just  by  the  eastern  entrance  to  the  court  before  the
church  of  the  Sepulchre.  All  these  estabhshments  are  private
property,  not  controlled  by  the  government ;  and  are  in  the
hands  of  the  Muslims.

The  chief  articles  manufactured  by  the  Christians,  both  here
and  at  Bethlehem,  are  rosaries,  crucifixes,  models  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre,  and  the  like,  carved  in  oHve  wood,  the  fruit  of  the
Dom  palm  said  to  be  brought  from  Mecca,  mother  of  pearl,  or
sometimes  in  the  species  of  black  shining  stone  found  near  the
Dead  Sea.  Some  of  these  are  neatly  executed.  The  concourse
of  pilgrims  at  Easter  converts  the  city  into  a  sort  of  toy  shop  or
fair ;  and  immense  quantities  of  these  tokens  are  carried  away,
after  having  been  didy  consecrated  by  the  priests.  Merchants
also  resort  hither  at  that  season  from  Damascus  and  other  places,
bringing  their  wares  of  various  kinds  ;  so  that  the  whole  city  then
wears  an  air  of  bustle  and  business,  strikingly  in  contrast  with
its  stillness  and  listlessness  during  the  remainder  of  the  year.
The  wares  find  a  ready  sale  among  the  pilgrims  ;  and  the  annual
Easter  fair  of  Jerusalem  is  relatively  not  much  less  important,
than  those  of  Leipzig  and  Frankfort.

IV,  CLIMATE.

The  climate  of  the  mountainous  tract  on  which  Jerusalem  is
situated,  differs  from  that  of  the  temperate  parts  of  Europe  and

'  For  these  monnds,  see  VoL  HI.  Sec.       '  Comp.  Turner,  Vol.  11.  p.  265.
IV,  fin.

ii.  95.  96

SsaVin.]

THE  RAINY  SEASON.

429

America,  more  in  the  alternations  of  wet  and  dry  seasons,  than
in  the  degrees  of  temperature.  The  variations  of  rain  and  sun-
shine, which  in  the  west  exist  throughout  the  whole  year,  are  in
Palestine  confined  chiefly  to  the  latter  part  of  autumn  and  the
winter ;  while  the  remaining  months  enjoy  almost  uninterrupt-
edly a  cloudless  sky.

The  autumnal  rains,  the  early  rains  of  Scripture,  usually
commence  in  the  latter  half  of  October  or  beginning  of  Novem-
ber ;  not  suddenly,  but  by  degrees  ;  which  gives  opportunity  for
the  husbandman  to  sow  his  fields  of  wheat  and  barley.  The
rains  come  mostly  from  the  west  or  southwest,'  continuing  for
two  or  three  days  at  a  time,  and  falling  especially  during  the
nights.  Then  the  wind  chops  round  to  the  north  or  east,  and
several  days  of  fine  weather  succeed.  During  the  months  of
November  and  December  the  rains  continue  to  fall  heavily ;  af-
terwards they  return  only  at  longer  intervals  and  are  less  heavy;
but  at  no  period  during  the  winter  do  they  entirely  cease  to  oc-
cur. Snow  often  falls  in  Jerusalem  in  J anuary  and  February  to
the  depth  of  a  foot  or  more  ;  but  does  not  usually  He  long.*  The
ground  never  freezes ;  but  Mr  Whiting  had  seen  the  pool  back
of  his  house  (Hezekiah's)  covered  with  thin  ice  for  one  or  two
days.

Rain  continues  to  fall  more  or  less  through  the  month  of
March,  but  is  rare  after  that  period.  During  the  present  sea-
son, there  had  been  Httle  or  none  in  March,  and  indeed  the  whole
quantity  of  rain  had  been  less  than  usual.  Nor  is  there  at  the
present  day  any  particular  periods  of  rain,  or  succession  of  show-
ers, which  might  be  regarded  as  distinct  rainy  seasons.  The
"whole  period  from  October  to  March  now  constitutes  only  one
continued  season  of  rain,  without  any  regularly  intervening  term
of  prolonged  fair  weather.  Unless  therefore  there  has  been  some
change  in  the  climate  since  the  times  of  the  New  Testament,
the  early  and  the  latter  rains,  for  which  the  husbandman  waited
with  longing,  seem  rather  to  have  implied  the  first  showers  of
autumn,  which  revived  the  parched  and  tliirsty  earth  and  pre-
pared it  for  the  seed  ;  and  the  later  showers  of  spring,  which  con-
tinued to  refresh  and  forward  both  the  ripening  crops  and  the
vernal  products  of  the  fields.'

During  the  whole  winter  the  roads,  or  rather  tracks,  in  Pa-
lestine, are  muddy,  deep,  and  slippery ;  so  that  the  traveller  at
this  season  is  subjected  to  the  utmost  discomfort  and  inconve-

'  Luke  12,  54,  "When  ye  see  a  cloud  close  of  the  century  found  here  very  deep

rise  out  of  the  west,  straightway  ye  say,  snow  for  several  days.    Comp.  Scholz,  p.

There  cometh  a  shower;  and  so  it  is."  1.38.    The  information  in  the  text  is  de-

'I'hese  words  were  spoken  hy  our  Lord  at  rived  from  our  resideut  friends.

Jerusalem.  ^  j^mes  5,  7.    Prov.  IG,  15.

"  So  Shaw  in  1722.    Brown  near  the

ii.  9G-98

430

JERUSALEM. — CLIMATE.

[Sec.  Vin.

nience.  When  the  rains  cease,  the  mnd  soon  disappears,  and
the  roads  become  hard,  though  never  smooth.  "Whoever  there-
fore wishes  to  profit  most  by  a  journey  in  Palestine,  will  take
care  not  to  arrive  at  Jerusalem  earlier  than  the  latter  part  of
March.  During  the  months  of  April  and  May,  the  sky  is  usually
serene,  the  air  mild  and  balmy,  and  the  face  of  nature,  after  sea-
sons of  ordinary  rain,  still  green  and  pleasant  to  the  eye.  Show-
ers occur  occasionally ;  but  they  are  mild  and  refreshing.  On
the  1st  of  May  we  had  showers  in  the  city  ;  and  at  evening  there
was  thunder  and  lightning,  (which  are  frequent  in  winter,)  vidth
pleasant  and  reviving  rain.  The  6  th  of  May  was  also  remark-
able for  thunder  and  for  several  showers,  some  of  which  were
quite  heavy.  The  rains  of  both  these  days  extended  far  to  the
north  ;  and  overtook  our  missionary  friends  who  were  returning
from  J erusalem  to  Beirut.  But  the  occurrence  of  rain  so  late  in
the  season,  was  regarded  as  a  very  unusual  circumstance.  Morn-
ing mists  however  are  occasionally  seen  at  a  stUl  later  period.

In  ordinary  seasons,  from  the  cessation  of  the  showers  in
spring  until  their  commencement  in  October  or  November,  rain
never  falls,  and  the  sky  is  usually  serene.  If  during  the  winter
there  has  been  a  sufficiency  of  rain,  the  husbandman  is  certain
of  his  crop  ;  and  is  also  perfectly  sure  of  fine  weather  for  the  in-
gathering of  the  harvest.'  The  high  elevation  of  Jerusalem  se-
cures it  the  privilege  of  a  pure  atmosphere  ;  nor  does  the  heat  of
summer  ever  become  oppressive,  except  during  the  occasional
prevalence  of  the  south  wind,  or  Sirocco.*  During  our  sojourn
from  April  14th  to  May  6th,  the  thermometer  ranged  at  sunrise
from  44°  to  64°  F.,  and  at  2  P.  M.  from  60°  to  79°  F.  Tlais  last
degree  of  heat  was  felt  during  a  Sirocco,  April  30th.  From  the
10th  to  the  13th  of  June  at  Jerusalem,  we  had  at  sunrise  a  range
from  56°  to  74°  ;  and  at  2  P.  M.  once  86°,  with  a  strong  north-
west wind.  Yet  the  air  was  fine,  and  the  heat  not  burdensome.
The  nights  are  uniformly  cool,  often  with  a  heavy  dew  ;  and  our
friends  had  never  had  occasion  to  dispense  with  a  coverlet  upon
their  beds  during  summer.  Yet  the  total  absence  of  rain  soon
destroys  the  verdure  of  the  fields  ;  and  gives  to  the  whole  land-
scape the  aspect  of  drought  and  barrenness.  The  only  green
thing  which  remains,  is  the  foliage  of  the  scattered  fruit  trees,
and  occasional  vineyards  and  fields  of  millet.  The  deep  green
of  the  broad  fig  leaves  and  of  the  millet,  is  delightful  to  the  eye
in  the  midst  of  the  general  aridness  ;  while  the  foliage  of  the

'  "  Snow  in  summer  and  rnin  in  lv\r-  Jerome's  Commentary  upon   the  Esme

vest"  were  things  incomprchonsihle  to  a  passa;{e.

Hehrew;  Prov.  2fi,    1.     V:\'m  in  wlieat  Luke  12,  .')5,  "And  when  ye  see  the

harvest  occurred  only  by  a  miracle ;  1  south  wind  Mow,  ye  say,  There  will  bo

Sam.  12,  17.  Compare  Amos  4,  7,  and  heat;  and  it  cometh  to  pass."
ii.  9».  99

SKaVm.]

BETHANY.

431

olive,  with  its  dull  grayish  hue,  scarcely  deserves  the  name  of
verdure.

The  harvest  upon  the  mountains  ripens  of  course  later  than
in  the  plains  of  the  J ordan  and  the  sea  coast.  The  barley  har-
vest precedes  the  wheat  harvest  by  a  week  or  fortnight.  On  the
4th  and  5th  of  June  the  people  of  Hebron  were  just  beginning  to
gather  tneir  wheat  ;  on  the  11th  and  12th  the  threshing-floors
on  the  mount  of  Olives  were  in  full  operation.  We  had  already
seen  the  harvest  in  the  same  stage  of  progress  on  the  plains  of
Gaz  aon  the  19th  of  May  ;  while  at  Jericho,  on  the  12th  of  May,
the  threshing-floors  had  nearly  completed  their  work.  The  first
grapes  ripen  in  July  ;  and  from  that  time  until  November,  Jeru-
salem is  abundantly  supphed  -with  this  delicious  fruit.  The
general  vintage  takes  place  in  September.  We  found  ripe  apri-
cots at  Gaza  in  May  ;  and  they  are  probably  brought  to  J erusa-
lem,  though  I  do  not  recollect  to  have  seen  any  there.  The  fine
oranges  of  Yafa  were  found  in  abundance  both  at  Jerusalem  and
Hebron.

In  autumn  the  whole  land  has  become  dry  and  parched  ;  the
cisterns  are  nearly  empty  ;  the  few  streams  and  fountains  fad  ;
and  all  nature,  physical  and  animal,  looks  forward  with  longing
to  the  return  of  the  rainy  season.  Mists  and  clouds  begin  to
make  their  appearance,  and  showers  occasionally  to  fall  ;  the
husbandman  sows  his  seed;  and  the  thirsty  earth  is  soon  drenched
with  an  abundance  of  rain.

V.    BETH  Ayr

It  was  on  one  of  the  last  days  of  our  stay  at  Jerusalem,  (June
11th,)  that  mounting  the  spirited  mules  we  had  engaged  for  our
journey  northwards,  and  accompanied  by  our  friend  Mr  Lanneau,
we  rode  out  to  Bethany.  Passing  along  the  wall  from  the  Da-
mascus gate  to  that  of  St.  Stephen's,  we  then  descended  and
crossed  the  bridge  iu  the  valley,  and  followed  the  camel  road
which  ascends  obliquely  the  side  of  the  mount  of  Olives  back  of
the  village  of  Siloam,  and  crosses  the  ridge  at  a  lower  spot  some
distance  south  of  the  summit.  It  then  winds  north  around  the
head  of  a  Wady  running  off  southeast,  and  after  crossing  another
lower  ridge,  passes  on  towards  Jericho.  Here,  on  the  eastern
slope,  (strictly  of  the  mount  of  Olives,)  in  a  shallow  Wady,  lies
the  \illage  of  Bethany ;  in  a  direction  about  E.  S.  E.  from  Jeru-
salem. We  reached  it  in  three  quarters  of  an  hour  from  the
Damascus  gate.  This  gives  a  distance  of  a  little  less  than  two
Roman  miles  from  the  eastern  part  of  the  city  ;  corresponding
weU  to  the  fifteen  furlongs  of  the  Evangelist.*   On  the  W.  N.  W.

'  John  11,  18.

il  99-101

432

BETHANY.

[Sec.  Vm.

is  a  hill  partially  separated  from  the  higher  ridge  of  the  mount
of  Olives  by  a  deep  valley  ;  the  head  of  which  we  went  round  in
returning  over  the  summit  of  the  mount.  Just  south  of  the  vil-
lage is  a  very  deep  and  narrow  Wady  or  ravine  running  down
towards  the  east;  and  on  its  further  side  on  higher  ground,  south-
east from  Bethany,  about  one  third  of  a  mUe  distant,  is  seen  the
deserted  village  of  Abu  Dis.

Bethany  is  a  poor  village  of  some  twenty  families ;  its
inhabitants  apparently  are  without  thrift  or  industry.  In  the
walls  of  a  few  of  the  houses  there  are  marks  of  antiquity,  large
hewn  stones,  some  of  them  bevelled ;  but  they  have  all  obviously
belonged  to  more  ancient  edifices,  and  been  employed  again  and
again  in  the  construction  of  successive  dwellings  or  other  buildings.
The  monks,  as  a  matter  of  course,  show  the  house  of  Mary  and
Martha,  that  of  Simon  the  leper,  and  the  sepulchre  of  Lazarus.
The  latter  is  a  deep  vault,  Hke  a  cellar,  excavated  in  the  lime-
stone rock  in  the  middle  of  the  village  ;  to  which  there  is  a
descent  by  twenty-six  steps.'  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark,
that  there  is  not  the  slightest  probability  of  its  ever  having  been
the  tomb  of  Lazarus.  The  form  is  not  that  of  the  ancient
sepulchres  ;  nor  does  its  position  accord  with  the  narrative  of
the  New  Testament,  which  implies  that  the  tomb  was  not  in
the  town.'

The  Arab  name  of  the  village  is  el-'Aziriyeh,  from  el-
'Azir,  the  Arabic  form  of  Lazarus.  The  name  Bethany  is
unknown  among  the  native  inhabitants.  Yet  there  is  no
reason  to  question  the  identity  of  the  place.  The  distance  from
Jerusalem  and  the  situation  on  the  road  to  Jericho  are  suffi-
ciently decisive.  The  Itin.  Hieros.  in  A.  D.  333,  alreadj''
mentions  here  the  crypt  of  Lazarus  ;  and  Jerome  some  seventy
years  later  speaks  of  a  church  as  having  been  built  over  it.'  In
the  seventh  century  it  is  further  mentioned  by  both  Antoninus
Martyr  and  Arculfus  ;  at  that  time  the  church  (Basihca)  was
standing  over  the  supposed  sepulchre,  and  a  large  monastery
had  been  established.*

About  A.  D.  1132,  Melisinda,  the  queen  of  king  Fulco  of
Jerusalem,  wishing  to  found  a  nunnery  over  which  her  younger
Bister  Iveta  might  preside  as  abbess,  selected  Bethany  as  the
site,  and  obtained  it  from  the  canons  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  in
exchange  for  Tekoa.  She  then  established  here  a  convent  of
Black  nuns  professing  the  rule  and  institutes  of  St.  Benedict ;
the  same  order  of  which  her  sister  was  already  a  member  in  the

'  In  the  days  of  Cotovicus  there  were
twenty-two  steps ;  Itin.  p.  276.
'  John  11,  31.  38.

•  Itin.  Hieros.  ed.  Wessoling,  p.  596.
ii.  101,  102

Hieron.  Onomasticon,  art.  Bethania.  Euse-
bius  does  not  mention  it.
*  Adamnanus  1.  24.

Sec.  Vm.]

BETHANY.

433

nunnery  of  St.  Anne  in  Jerusalem.*  The  new  convent  was
more  richly  endowed  than  any  other  in  Syria  ;  and  for  its  pro-
tection, the  queen  caused  a  strong  tower  of  hewn  stones  to  be
erected  at  a  great  expense.  The  buildings  were  not  completed
until  near  the  death  of  king  Fulco  in  A.  D.  1143.  An  aged
matron  of  approved  piety  was  made  the  first  abbess  ;  who  was
soon  succeeded  by  the  high  bom  Iveta.''  Two  centuries  later,
this  convent  was  no  longer  in  existence.'  Brocardus  in  the
thirteenth  century  does  not  allude  to  it ;  and  Ludolph  de
Suchem  in  the  fourteenth  speaks  only  of  three  churches,  one»of
which  was  used  by  the  Arabs  as  a  stall  for  cattle.  In  A.  D.
1484  Felix  Fabri  found  only  the  church  over  the  sepulchre  of
Lazarus  ;  and  this  in  the  days  of  Cotovicus  had  been  converted
into  a  mosk.  Since  then  the  place  is  often  mentioned  by
travellers  ;  and  has  been  gradually  falling  more  and  more  into
decay.

Of  the  village  of  Bethphage  no  trace  exists.  In  coming
from  Jericho  our  Lord  appears  to  have  entered  it  before  reaching
Bethany  ;*  and  it  probably  therefore  lay  near  to  the  latter,  a
little  below  it  towards  the  east.  Of  course,  it  could  not  well
have  been  where  Abu  Dis  now  stands  and  still  less  on  the
spot  which  the  monks  assign  to  it,  half-way  between  Bethany
and  the  sunmiit  of  the  mount  of  Olives,  where  there  is  nothing
to  show  that  a  village  ever  stood.

We  returned  to  Jerusalem  by  the  somewhat  shorter  route
over  the  summit  of  Mount  Olivet.

'  See  above,  p.  233.  '  S-ihubert  suggests  that  Abu  Dis  may

*  Will.  Tyr.  15.  26.  Jac.  de  Vitriaco  have  been  the  site  of  the  ancient  Bahurim ;
68.  Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kreuzz.  II.  pp.  Reise  III.  p.  70.  This  of  course  is  a  mere
616,  617.    •  conjecture ;  tlicugh  Bahurim  was  not  far

^  Vertot  relates,  ■without  citing  his  an-  from   Jerusalem,  beyond   the  mount  of

thority,  that  in  A-  D.  1254,  the  pope  Olives;  2  Sam.  16,  5.    Joseph.  Ant.  7.  9.

granted  the  castle  (fortified  convent)  of  7.    Yet  as  David  came  to  Bahurim  on  his

Bethany,  to  the  knights  Hospitalers ;  the  way  to  the  Jordan,  after  passing  over  the

nuns  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  summit  of  the  mount  of  Olives,  it  would

having  retired  to  Europe.    Histoire  des  seem  that  this  place  must  have  stood  further

Chev.  Hospit.  de  St.  Jean,  etc.  I.  p.  400.  north  than  Abu  Dis.    2  Sam.  16,  1.  6.

*  Matt.  21,  1.    Luke  19,  29.

Vol.  I. -37  ii.  102, 103

SECTION  IX.

EXCURSION  FROM  JERUSALEM  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

Having  thus  been  for  several  weeks  diligently  occupied  in
investigating  the  antiquities  and  interesting  features  of  the  Holy
City,  the  time  had  now  arrived,  when,  according  to  our  plan,  it
became  necessary  to  extend  our  researches  to  other  parts  of  the
country.  We  still  regarded  Jerusalem  as  our  head-quarters  ;
as  the  central  point  from  which  to  make  excursions  ;  and  by
varying  our  routes  in  going  and  returning  to  and  from  diflferent
points,  we  were  enabled  to  see  much  more  of  the  country,  than
would  have  been  possible  by  merely  travelling  once  or  twice
along  the  same  road.  Our  routes  often  crossed  each  other  ;  but
I  do  not  recollect  that  we  ever  passed  for  any  distance  over  the
same  ground  twice,  excepting  the  short  interval  between  Jeru-
salem and  Bethlehem,  and  one  or  two  like  instances.  Three
times,  for  example,  we  were  in  Hebron  ;  but  in  no  instance  did
we  enter  or  leave  the  town  by  the  same  route  a  second  time.

Before  entering  upon  the  account  of  our  further  travels,  I
must  beg  the  reader  to  recall  to  mind  the  remarks  already  made
upon  the  mass  of  foreign  ecclesiastical  tradition,  which  has  been
fastened  not  only  upon  Jerusalem  and  its  environs,  but  also
upon  the  whole  country  west  of  the  Jordan.'  Besides  this,
many  travellers  have  exercised  their  own  discretion,  (not  always
the  most  enlightened,)  in  assigning  the  ancient  Scriptural  names
of  places  to  such  sites  as  they  might  happen  to  fall  in  with  or
hear  of ;  without  stopping  to  inquire,  whether  some  other  place
might  not  have  an  equal  or  better  claim  to  the  proposed  appella-
tion.*   Others,  and  especially  the  older  travellers,  professedly  give

'  See  the  beginning  of  Sect.  VII.  p.  251,
above.

'  An  instance  of  this  is  furnished  by  Dr.
Clarke ;  who  is  very  much  disposed  to
convert  the  fortress  Sanur,  (which  he  writes
Santorri,)  between  Nubulns  and  Jenin,  in-
to the  ancient  city  of  Samaria ;  because  he

ii.  104. 105

saw  no  other  appropriate  site  for  the  latter
town  upon  that  route.  Yet,  as  he  admits,
Maundrell  and  others  had  a  century  before
found  the  name  of  Sebaste  (Samaria),  and
described  its  site  upon  another  route.  The
same  is  mentioned  by  Maundeville  and
WUliam  of  Baldensel  in  the  14th  centaiy;

Sue.  IX.]

UNCERTAIN  TOPOGRAPHY.

435

a  description  of  the  various  parts  of  the  Holy  Land  ;  but  in
Buch  a  way,  that  it  is  usually  difficult  and  often  impossible  to
distinguish  what  they  have  actually  visited  and  seen,  from  that
which  they  have  only  heard  or  read  of,  or  relate  perhaps  merely
from  conjecture.  Very  rarely  do  they  mention  the  modern
names  of  the  places,  which  they  thus  caU  only  by  Scriptural
appellations  ;  so  that  when  the  same  ancient  name  has  a
diversity  of  appHcation,  as  is  often  the  case,  it  is  only  by  close
attention  to  minor  circumstances,  that  we  can  determine  what
modern  place  is  meant.  Thus,  for  instance,  under  the  name  of
Shiloh,  it  is  difficult  to  tell  whether  a  writer  is  spealdng  of  Neby
Samwil,  or  of  one  of  the  various  other  points  which  have  been
assumed  as  its  site.  The  true  site  appears  to  have  been  visited
by  no  traveller.*

I  have  made  these  observations  in  order  to  draw  the  reader's
attention  to  the  confusion  and  discrepancies  which  prevail  among
the  books  of  travels  in  Palestine  ;  and  also  in  order  to  found
upon  them  this  further  remark,  viz.  that  if  a  traveller  at  the
present  day  is  unable  to  find  many  of  the  ancient  places
mentioned  and  described  by  earlier  writers,  the  reason  often  Hes
not  in  his  own  ill  success  ;  but  in  the  fact,  that  those  writers
have  described  places  which  they  never  visited,  and  which  in
aU  probability  no  longer  existed  in  their  day.

As  a  preparation  for  our  further  journies  in  Palestine,  my
companion  had  taken  great  pains  to  collect  from  various  quarters
the  native  names  of  aU  the  places  in  those  parts  which  we
hoped  to  visit.  This  practice  he  had  commenced  so  early  as  the
year  1834,  during  a  journey  through  Hauran  and  the  northern
parts  of  Syria  ;  and  had  afterwards  continued  it  with  express
reference  to  our  proposed  investigations  in  Palestine.  In  Jeru-
salem itself,  there  was  frequent  opportunity  of  making  the
acquaintance  of  intelligent  Sheikhs  and  other  persons  from  the
towns  and  villages  in  that  and  other  districts  ;  and  they  were  in
general  ready  to  communicate  all  they  knew  respecting  the
places  in  their  own  neighbourhood.  This  mode  of  obtaining
information  we  preferred  to  a  direct  application  to  the  govern-
ment ;  not  wishing  in  any  way  to  awaken  distrust  or  risk  a
denial.  The  lists  of  names  thus  made  out,  were  in  some  respects
more  complete  than  any  which  the  government  could  have
furnished  ;  inasmuch  as  the  latter  has  to  do  only  with  inhabited
towns  and  villages,  while  our  attention  was  directed,  in  at  least
as  great  a  degree,  to  the  deserted  sites  and  ruined  places  of

and  also  by  several  other  travellers,  denbacli,  and  other  like  works.  Even
Clarke's  Travels,  etc.  4to.  Part  II.  Vol.  I.  Cotovicus  is  not  whoUj'  free  from  the  same
P-  •''01  fault ;  and  Pocooke's  AVTitin;;;s  must  be  used

'  These  remarks  apply  particularly  to  with  great  caution,  as  he  thus  often  gives
the  tract  of  Brocardus,  the  travels  of  Brev-    an  opinion  instead  of  facts.

ii.  105,  106

436

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  IX,

wjiich  the  country  is  so  full.  The  lists  thus  obtained  were
afterwards  enlarged  and  corrected  by  our  own  observations  and
further  inquiries  ;  and  subsequently  revised  and  copied  out  by
my  companion.  In  this  form,  although  far  from  complete,  they
were  nevertheless  more  so  than  anything  of  the  kind  which  had
hitherto  been  attempted  in  Palestine  and  Syria  ;  and  by  the
advice  of  eminent  scholars  they  were  subjoined  in  an  appendix
to  the  first  edition  of  this  work.  They  could  be  regarded  only  as
the  first  step  towards  a  collection,  which  may  hereafter  become
of  great  importance  to  biblical  geographers.*

Our  first  excursion  from  J erusalem  was  towards  the  northeast,
into  a  region  which,  so  far  as  I  know,  had  never  been  visited  by
any  Frank  traveller.  We  returned  on  the  second  day  by  a  more
western  and  better  known  route.  Our  friends  had  heard,  that
villages  existed  in  the  former  quarter,  bearing  names  which
might  be  regarded  as  the  Arabic  forms  of  Anathoth,  Geba,  and
Bethel ;  but  none  of  them  had  ever  yet  visited  these  places.
They  had  however  become  acquainted  in  Jerusalem  with  some
of  the  native  Christian  priests  from  Taiyibeh,  a  large  village
three  hours  or  more  northeast  of  el-Bireh,  and  from  Ram-Allah,
another  village  just  west  of  the  latter  place.  It  was  therefore
proposed,  that  some  of  our  friends  should  join  us  in  the  excursion,
in  order  that  while  they  thus  afforded  us  countenance  and  aid,  they
might  also  return  the  visits  of  the  priests,  and  awaken  in  them
an  interest  for  the  distribution  of  books  and  the  diffusion  of  in-
struction. The  party,  as  at  length  made  up,  consisted  of  Messrs
Lanneau,  Nicolayson,  Paxton,-  and  ourselves  ;  in  all  six  persons,
besides  one  of  our  servants.  We  were  all  on  horseback,  with  an
extra  mule  for  the  tent  and  baggage,  and  two  attendants  (Mu-
karin,  muleteers)  on  foot,  who  hr.d  charge  of  the  animals.'

Friday,  May  4th.  We  intended  to  have  set  off  this  morn-
ing with  the  rising  sun  ;  but  the  arrangements  for  a  large  party
delayed  us  ;  so  that  it  was  seven  o'clock  before  all  was  ready.
Then  occurred  various  other  delays  ;  some  of  the  party  went  out
at  St.  Stephen's  gate,  and  others  by  that  of  Damascus  ;  and  it
was  not  until  7^  o'clock  that  we  mustered  at  the  northeast  corner
of  the  city  wall  and  took  our  departure.  The  road  descends  ob-
liquely into  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  then  crosses  the  ridge

'  These  Arabic  lists,  corrected  and  en-  no  allusion  to  his  excursion  with  us;  but

larged,  it  is  proposed  soon  to  publish  in  a  introdiices  the  mimes  of  the  places  which

separate  volume.    1856.  he  now  saw  for  the  first  time,  into  a  letter

'  The  Rev.  J.  D.  Paxton,  also  an  Anieri-  dated  Oct.  18;iG;  thus  leaving  upon  the

can,  resided  for  nearly  two  years  at  Bciriit,  mind  of  the  reader  the  impression,  that  he

and  aftorwurds  published  a  work  entitled  :  became  acquainted  with  tliem  nearly  two

LcXter.i  on  Pn/esltne  and  Egypt,  vritlen  diirinff  years  earlier.    Lett.  XV.  p.  169.  Loud.

arei-td(».re//iereinthe;/ews\S3C,-7-8.  Lex-  "  The  MukSry  is  indiscriminately  the

iugton,  Ky.  1839,  8vo.  Reprinted  Loud,  owner  or  p.avider  and  driver  of  cajnols,

1839. — In"  Ids  Letters,  Mr  Paxton  makes  horses,  asses,  mules,  etc.

ii.  lOG-108

Mat  4.]

AXATA,  AXATHOTH.

437

extending  between  the  mount  of  Olives  and  Scopus,  at  a  point
just  at  the  left  of  the  northern  summit  of  the  former.  We
reached  the  top  of  the  ridge  in  twentv-five  minutes.  This  point,
and  more  especially  the  adjacent  summit,  presents,  I  think,  the
finest  view  of  Jerusalem  anywhere  to  be  foimd.  The  city  is  seen
diagonally  ;  and  the  view  thus  includes  the  great  mosk  and  the
deep  valley,  which  are  not  seen  so  well  from  the  Damascus  road  ;
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  domes  and  minarets  are  here  exhib-
ited to  the  eye  with  far  better  effect  than  from  the  other  sum-
mit of  Olivet.  The  Dead  Sea  was  also  visible,  and  the  little
village  el-'Isawiyeh  in  a  valley  below  us  about  a  quarter  of  an
hour  distant,  bearing  X.  70"  E.  Far  in  the  north  was  the  high
village  er-Ram,  the  ancient  Eamah,  on  the  east  of  the  Nabulus
road.  Before  us  was  a  wide  prospect  of  broken  hiUs  and  val-
leys, extending  to  the  plain  of  the  Jordan.

Our  course  thus  far  had  been  X.  25^  E.  The  way  now  be-
came more  winding,  but  in  the  general  direction  northeast.  We
lost  sight  of  Jerusalem,  and  descending  rather  steeply  came  in
twenty  minutes  to  the  bottom  of  Wady  es-Suleim,  here  running
east  by  south  to  join  Wady  Sidr  further  down,  and  afterwards
the  Farah.  In  the  same  direction  we  were  told  of  the  ruins  of
a  convent,  called  Deir  es-Sidd.  We  thus  left  el-'Isawiyeh  on
the  right  behind  a  ridge  ;  and  crossing  the  vaUey  obliquely,  as-
cended another  ridge  skirting  it  on  the  north  ;  beyond  which
runs  also  a  deep  parallel  valley,  called  Wady  es-Selam.  We
kept  along  upon  this  ridge,  which  becomes  gradually  wider  ;  and
at  8f  o'clock  reached  'Anata,  situated  on  the  same  broad  ridge
at  the  distance  of  one  hovn  and  a  quarter  from  Jerusalem.
There  can  be  no  question  that  this  is  the  ancient  Ana-
thoth,  the  birthplace  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah ;  which  Jo!?ephus
describes  as  twenty  stadia  distant  from  Jerusalem,  and  which
Eusebius  and  Jerome  also  place  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  about
three  miles  from  the  same  city  towards  the  nortL '  Ecclesiasti-
cal tradition,  as  is  well  known,  has  selected  for  Anathoth  another
site,  at  the  village  of  Kuryet  el-'Enab  on  the  road  to  Eamleh,  a
distance  of  three  hours  from  Jerusalem.*

'Anata  seems  to  have  been  once  a  walled  town  and  a  place
of  strength  ;  but  I  do  not  find  it  directly  mentioned  by  any
•writer  since  the  days  of  Jerome.^    Portions  of  the  wall  remain,

*  Jer.  1,  1,  et  Hieron.  Comm.  in  loc.  '  Brocardn;  indeed  mentions  Anathoth,
"  qni  habitabant  contra  septentrionalem  but  places  it  close  by  Ramah  of  Benjamin ;
Jeruialem  in  tertio  miliaro  et  vicnlo  Ana-  c.  7.  p.  179.  He  had  probably  heard  of
thoth."  Onomast  art.  Anathotk.  Joseph,  the  name  'Anata.  ■without  knowing  its  ex-
Ant.  10.  7.  3.  See  the  other  authorities  act  position.  Breydenbach  copies  Bro-
eollected  by  Reland,  Palaest,  p.  561.  cardus.  In  like  manner  Xau  has  merely
'  Adrichomin.s,  p.  14.     Cotovicns,  p.  the  passing  remark,  that  Anathoth  lit*  a

146.    Qnaresming  IL  p.  15.

Vol.  I.— 37*

league  east  of  Jemsalem  ;  Vi'vage,  p.  49.

u.  108.  109

438

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  IX.

built  of  large  hewn  stones,  and  apparently  ancient  ;  as  are  also
the  foundations  of  some  of  the  houses.  One  of  our  party  found
the  fragments  of  a  column  or  two  among  the  ruins.  The  houses
are  few,  and  the  people  seemed  poor  and  miserable,  amounting
only  to  a  few  scores.  The  village  lies  where  the  broad  ridge
slopes  off  gradually  towards  the  southeast.  On  this  side  are  tilled
fields,  and  we  had  passed  several  others  on  our  way.  The  grain
was  still  standing  ;  the  time  of  harvest  not  having  yet  come.
Fig  trees  and  olive  trees  are  also  scattered  around.  From  the
vicinity  of  'Anata  a  favourite  species  of  building-stone  is  carried
to  Jerusalem  ;  and  we  met  several  troops  of  donkeys  loaded  in
this  manner  with  the  materials  of  future  dwellings  ;  a  hewn
stone  being  slung  upon  each  side  of  the  poor  animal.  Larger
stones  are  transported  on  camels.

From  this  point  there  is  an  extensive  view  over  the  whole
eastern  slope  of  the  mountainous  tract  of  Benjamin  ;  including
also  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  the  northern  part  of  the  Dead
Sea.  The  region  before  us  was  that  alluded  to  by  the  prophet
Isaiah,  near  the  end  of  the  tenth  chapter,  where  the  approach  of
Sennecharib  towards  Jerusalem  is  described  ;  and  from  the  spot
where  we  now  stood,  several  of  the  places  there  mentioned  were
visible.  Thus  er-Ram  (Ramah)  bore  N.  N.  W.  on  its  conical
hill ;  and  Jeba'  (Geba)  was  before  us,  bearing  N.  10°  E.  The
nearest  village  was  Hizmeh  N.  20°  E.  and  far  in  the  distance
we  could  distinguish  Taiyibeh  lying  N.  N.  E.^N.  on  a  lofty  hUI,
which  was  to  be  the  limit  of  our  excursion.

The  whole  tract  over  which  we  were  now  about  to  pass,  is
made  up  of  a  succession  of  deep  rugged  valleys  running  towards
the  east ;  with  broad  ridges  of  uneven  table  land  between,  often
broken  and  sometimes  rising  into  high  points.  These  terminate
towards  the  east  in  high  cliffs  overhanging  the  plain  of  the  J or-
dan.  I  have  already  remarked,  that  the  great  northern  road
from  Jerusalem  to  Nabulus  passes  along  the  water-shed  of  the
mountainous  country  ;  where  the  heads  of  the  valleys  running
off  in  opposite  directions  often  interlap.'  Our  present  road  lay
at  some  distance  forther  east ;  so  that  the  valleys,  where  we
crossed  them,  had  now  become  very  deep.  The  sides  of  these
Wadys  indeed  are  here  so  steep  and  high,  that  in  descending
into  them,  we  were  usually  obliged  to  dismount  from  our  horses.
The  whole  district  is  a  mass  of  limestone  rock  ;  which  every-
where juts  out  above  the  surfece,  and  imparts  to  the  whole  land
an  aspect  of  sterility  and  barrenness.  Yet  wherever  soil  is  found
among  the  rocks,  it  is  strong  and  fertile  ;  fields  of  grain  are  seen
occasionally  ;  and  fig  trees  and  olive  trees  are  planted  everywhere

ii.  109-111

'  See  above,  p.  258.

Mat  4,]

HIZMEH.

439

among  the  hills.  Lower  down  the  slope,  towards  the  Jordan
valley,  all  is  a  frightful  desert.

With  some  difficulty  we  obtained  a  guide  at  'AnS,ta  to  con-
duct us  to  Taiyibeh.  Our  object  in  this  was  not  so  much  to
learn  the  way  ;  for  that  was  tolerably  plain  ;  but  rather  to  have
a  person  always  at  hand,  of  whom  we  could  inquire  respecting
the  various  villages  and  features  of  the  country,  as  they  came  in-
to view.  We  continued  this  practice  during  our  future  journies,
so  far  as  possible  ;  and  found  it  generally  necessary  to  obtain  a
new  guide  at  the  end  of  every  few  miles  ;  inasmuch  as  the  peas-
ants, though  well  acquainted  with  the  immediate  neighbourhood
of  their  own  villages,  seldom  know  much  of  the  country  at  a
distance  from  their  homes.

Our  route  now  led  us  to  Hizmeh.  Leaving  'Anata  at  9.10,
we  descended  very  steeply  in  ten  minutes  to  the  bottom  of  Wady
es-Selam,  which,  with  the  Suleim,  runs  into  Wady  el-Farah
farther  down.  Crossing  a  low  ridge  and  a  small  shallow  Wady,
we  ascended  again  more  gradually,  and  came  at  9.50  to  Hizmeh,
■situated  on  the  top  of  the  next  high  ridge,  with  a  deep  valley  on
the  north.  Its  position  is  similar  to  that  of  'Anata  ;  though  the
ridge  is  not  so  high.  The  village  is  about  as  large  as  'Anata
and  was  now  deserted  ;  the  inhabitants  having  about  two  months
before  aU  fled  across  the  Jordan  to  escape  the  conscription,  leav-
ing their  fields  of  wheat  and  their  olive  and  fig  trees  with  none
to  attend  them.  The  houses  are  solidly  built  of  stone  ;  but  we
saw  here  no  appearance  of  antiquity  ;  nor  do  I  know  of  any  an-
cient name  to  which  the  form  Hizmeh  corresponds.

Here,  as  on  all  the  high  points  we  crossed,  there  was  a  wide
■view  over  the  whole  slope  quite  to  the  Jordan  and  its  valley,  in-
cluding the  Dead  Sea  and  the  eastern  mountains.  We  could
trace  the  course  of  the  Jordan  by  the  green  trees  along  its  banks.
The  transparency  of  the  atmosphere  rendered  distant  objects
very  distinct ;  so  that  the  plain  of  the  Jordan  seemed  not  more
than  two  hours  distant,  though  its  real  distance  was  not  less
than  four  or  five  hours.  In  that  direction  we  could  see  Wady
el-Farah  as  it  ran  oflP  towards  the  plain,  bearing  S.  85°  E,^
From  this  point  er-KSm  bore  N.  55°  W.  ;  and  J eba*,  the  next
village  on  our  route,  due  north.  A  high  conical  hill  near  the
Nabulus  road,  called  Tuleil  el-Ful,  with  a  large  heap  of  stones
upon  the  top,  was  everywhere  a  sightly  object,  and  bore  from
Hizmeh  S.  70°  W.

Leaving  Hizmeh  at  10  o'clock,  it  took  us  again  ten  minutes
to  descend  into  the  deep  valley  on  the  north,  wliich  I  suppose  to

'  The  name  of  this  Wady  might  suggest  '  a  heifer,'  while  the  Arabic  signifies  '  a
a  coincidence  with  the  Parah  of  Benjamin ;  mouse.'  We  could  hear  of  no  village
Josh.  18,  23.  But  these  names  come  from  called  Farah,  as  related  by  Buckingham,
different  roots  ;  the  Hebrew  word  meaning    Travels,  4to,  p.  312,

ii.  Ill,  112

440

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  IX.

be  the  Farah.  Here  are  enclosures  of  fig  trees  ;  and  on  the  pro-
jecting point  of  a  low  hill  at  the  right  of  the  road,  are  a  few  an-
cient walls,  some  broad  as  if  for  terraces,  and  others  apparently,
foundations  ;  but  there  are  not  enough  of  them  to  be  regarded
as  the  ruins  of  a  town  or  vUlage.  Our  guide  called  them  Ma'dad.*
Ascending,  again,  we  now  came  out  upon  the  table  land  of  the
next  ridge,  and  reached  Jeba'  at  10.40.  It  lies  upon  a  low  coni-
cal, or  rather  a  round,  eminence  on  the  broad  ridge,  which  shelves
down  like  all  the  rest  toward  the  Jordan  valley,  and  spreads  out
below  the  village  into  a  fine  sloping  plain  with  fields  of  grain
now  in  the  milk.  The  views  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  Jordan  and
of  the  eastern  mountains  were  here  still  more  extensive  ;  while
across  the  deep  ravine  on  the  north  we  could  see  the  next  village
on  our  route,  Mukhmas,  the  ancient  Michmash,  lying  directly
overagainst  Jeba'  in  a  direction  about  northeast.

The  village  of  Jeba'  is  small,  about  the  size  of  those  already
described  ;  and  is  half  in  ruins.  Among  these  are  occasionally
seen  large  hewn  stones  indicating  antiquity.  There  is  here  the
ruin  of  a  square  tower,  almost  solid  ;  and  a  small  building  hav-
ing the  appearance  of  an  ancient  church.  Two  nights  before
our  visit,  robbers  had  entered  the  village  ;  and  breaking  into  the
houses  of  the  principal  inhabitants,  wounded  them  with  swords.
To-day  the  men  were  aU  out  on  the  search  ;  and  we  found  only
women.

Besides  Mukhmas,  we  could  here  see  several  other  villages,
viz.  Deir  Duwan  N.  by  E.  Taiyibeh  N.  20°  E.  Burka  ly-
ing this  side  of  Deir  Duwan  N.  9°  W.  el-Kudeirah  N.  3°  E.
Ilummon  N.  N.  E.^  E.  This  latter  village  forms  a  remarkable
object  in  the  landscape  ;  being  situated  on  and  around  the  sum-
mit of  a  conical  chalky  hill,  and  visible  in  all  directions.  There
can  be  little  doubt  of  its  being  the  identical  rock  Eimmon,  to
which  the  remnant  of  the  Benjamites  fled  after  the  slaughter  of
the  tribe  at  Gibeah.  A  place  of  this  name  is  also  mentioned  by
Eusebius  and  Jerome,  as  existing  in  their  day  fifteen  miles  north
of  Jerusalem.*

The  name  Jeba'  corresponds  exactly  to  the  Hebrew  Geha  in
the  Old  Testament,  a  city  of  Benjamin  assigned  to  the  priests.'
It  lay  on  the  northern  border  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  over-
against Michmash,  from  which  it  was  separated  by  a  "  passage,"
meaning  the  deep  valley  between.'  Here  Saul  and  Jonathan
encamped  against  the  PhiUstines  in  Michmash ;  and  here  between
the  two  places  was  the  scene  of  Jonathan's  remarkable  adven-

>  See  more  on  this  tract  in  VoL  m,  un-       »  Josh.  18,  24.  21,  17.

'  Judg.  20,  45.  47.  21,  13.   Onomast.       '  Heb.  ,  1  Sam.  13,  23.  Is.  10,

der  May  10,  1852.

*  1  K.  23,  8.    Zech.  14,  10.

29.

May  4.]

MICHMASH.  GEBA.

441

ture.  •  All  these  circumstances  accord  perfectly  witli  the  situa-
tion of  Jeba'.  At  a  later  period  king  Asa  built  up  Geba  and
Mizpali  with  stones  brought  from  Ramah.'^  The  exiles  returned
again  to  Geba  after  the  captivity  ;  and  the  name  is  simply  men-
tioned by  Eusebius  and  Jerome.^  But  from  that  time  till  the
present  day,  there  is  no  further  trace  of  Geba  in  history.*

We  left  Jeba'  at  11.10  for  Mukhmas.  The  descent  into  the
valley  was  steeper  and  longer  than  any  of  the  preceding.  The
path  led  down  obliquely,  and  we  reached  the  bottom  in  half  an
hour.  It  is  called  Wady  es-Suweinit.  It  begins  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Beitin  and  el-Bireh  ;  and  as  it  breaks  through  the
ridge  below  these  places,  its  sides  form  precipitous  walls.  On
the  right,  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  below  where  wo  crossed,  it
again  contracts  and  passes  off  between  high  perpendicular  preci-
pices, which  (our  guide  said)  continue  a  great  way  down  and  in-
crease in  grandeur.  In  one  of  them  is  a  large  cavern  called
Jaihah.  This  Wady  was  said  to  run  into  another  called  the
Fftwar  coming  more  from  the  north,  which  receives  also  the  Fa-
rah  and  then  empties  into  Wady  el-Kelt.  This  latter  issues  out
upon  the  plain  not  far  from  J ericho.  We  doubted  at  the  time
the  correctness  of  this  information  ;  but  our  own  subsequent  ob-
servations tended  to  confirm  it.

This  steep  precipitous  valley  is  probably  "the  passage  of
Michmash,"  mentioned  in  Scripture.^  In  the  valley,  just  at  the
left  of  where  we  crossed,  are  two  hills  of  a  conical  or  rather  a
spherical  form,  having  steep  rocky  sides,  with  small  Wadys  run-
ning up  behind  each  so  as  almost  to  isolate  them.  One  is  on  the
side  towards  Jeba',  and  the  other  towards  Mukhmas.  These
would  seem  to  be  the  two  rocks  mentioned  in  connection  with
Jonathan's  adventure  ;^  they  are  not  indeed  so  '  sharp'  as  the
language  of  Scripture  would  seem  to  imply  ;  but  they  are  the
only  rocks  of  the  kind  in  this  vicinity.  The  northern  one  is  con-
nected towards  the  west  with  an  eminence  still  more  distinctly
isolated.  This  valley  appears  to  have  been  at  a  later  time,  the
dividing  line  between  the  tribes  of  Benjamin  and  Ephraim.''

Crossing  the  valley  obliquely,  and  ascending  with  difficulty

'  1  Sam.  13,  15.  16.  14,  5.  16.    In  all  M  K.  15,  22.  2  Chr.  16,  6.  Jos.  Antt.

these  passages  the  English  version  wrongly  8.  12.  4.

has  Giberih.    In  the  first  three,  the  Heb.  "  Neh.  7,  30.    Onomast.  art.  Gahe.

reads  Geba;  and  the  same  should  evident-  *  In  the  former  edition  of  this  work,

ly  be  read  in  c.  14,  16.    Elsewhere  also  Jeba,  was  wrongly  held  to  be  Gibeah.

there  is  som6  confusion  in  the  writing  of  '  1  Sam.  13,  23.    Compare  Isa.  10,  29.

these  two  names;  e.  g.  in  Judg.  20,  10.  "  1  Sam.  14,  4.  5.

33,  Geba  is  obviously  put  for  Gibeah  ;  '  Geba  on  the  south  side  of  this  valley

comp.  vv.  4,  5,  9,  36.  This  arose  probably  was  the  northern  limit  of  .ludah  and  Ben-

from  copyists,  who  might  easily  thus  inter-  jamin,  2  Kings  23,  8;  while  Hethel  on  its

change  the  masculine  and  feminine  forms  of  north  side  further  west  was  on  the  southern

the  same  word.    The  error  of  the  English  border  of  Ephraim;  Josh.  16,  1.  2.  18,  13.

translators  is  less  easily  to  be  accounted  for.  Judf.  1,  22-26.

ii.  114-116

442

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  DC.

for  fifteen  minutes,  we  came  upon  the  slope  on  whicli  Mukhmas
stands,  a  low  ridge  between  two  small  Wadys  running  south  into
the  Suweinit ;  the  ground  rising  towards  the  north  beyond,  to
the  still  higher  land  which  extends  to  Deir  Duwan.  The  rocks
here  by  the  side  of  the  path  were  cut  away  in  several  places.
We  reached  the  village  at  12  o'clock.  It  was  even  more  deso-
late than  Anathoth  ;  but  bears  marks  of  having  been  a  much
larger  and  stronger  place  than  any  of  the  others  we  had  passed.
There  are  many  foundations  of  large  hewn  stones  ;  and  some
columns  were  lying  among  them.  Here  the  prospect  towards
the  east  and  north  is  cut  off  by  higher  ground.  We  could  look
back  upon  Jeba'  ;  and  er-Ram  bore  S.  70°  W.

There  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  any  doubt  as  to  the  identity
of  Mukhmas  with  the  Michmash  of  Scripture.  Eusebius  and
Jerome  describe  the  latter  as  a  large  village  nine  miles  distant
from  Jerusalem,  and  not  far  from  Ramah.'  We  were  nearly
three  and  a  half  hours  in  reaching  it,  over  a  very  rough  and  dif-
ficult road.

Passing  on  without  stopping,  and  taking  a  more  northerly
course,  we  ascended  gradually  and  soon  crossed  the  high  broad
swell  of  land  before  us.  We  now  struck  upon  the  eastern  side  of
a  narrow  but  deep  side  valley  running  south  into  the  Suweinit
nearly  at  right  angles.  This  we  followed  up  to  its  head  at  Deir
Duwan.  Opposite  the  point  where  we  came  upon  it,  at  the  bot-
tom of  the  valley,  in  the  steep  western  wall,  are  several  sepul-
chres excavated  in  the  rock.  The  path  keeps  along  the  verge  of
the  high  ground,  gradually  approaching  the  bottom  of  the  valley
as  the  latter  ascends.  At  12.35  we  were  opposite  the  village  of
Burka,  bearing  W.  N.  W.  across  the  valley,  high  up  on  the  hill-
side, a  quarter  of  an  hour  distant.  The  high  point  of  Neby
Samwil  had  also  been  for  some  time  in  sight,  and  now  bore  W.
S.  W.  The  viUage  of  Kudeirah  lay  N.  18°  W.  and  Deir  Du-
wan N.  10°  E.  At  12.50  the  valley  had  become  more  shallow  ;
and  tombs  and  quarries  appeared  again  in  its  bottom  on  the  left,
near  the  low  point  of  a  hill  between  tlie  valley,  and  a  more
western  branch.  On  this  low  hill,  as  we  were  afterwards  told,
there  are  traces  of  an  ancient  site,  which  we  explored  more  fully
at  a  later  period.'  We  reached  Deir  Duwiin  at  1.05,  in  an  hour
and  five  minutes  from  Mukhmas.

This  is  a  large  and  tolerably  wealthy  place,  compared  with  all
the  others  we  had  seen  to-day.  It  lies  in  an  uneven  rocky  basin,
at  the  head  of  the  valley  we  had  followed  u})  ;  and  its  position  is
high,  although  shut  in  by  hills.    This  is  shown  by  the  rapid

'  Onomast.  art.  .^fachmas. — Tlic  monks    rosmius  II.  p.  "SC.    Tlint  wns  for  them  S
have  usually  triiiisforrcd  the  site  of  Mieli-    more  eonveiiicnt  location,
inash  to  el-liiieh;  Brooiirdus,  c.  7.    (Juii-       '  See  under  Miiy  14tli,  1838.

ii.  117.  llrf

Mat  4.]

DEIR  DUWAN.

443

ascent  of  the  small  Wady  from  the  south  ;  while  on  the  north
the  place  is  skirted  by  another  very  deep  and  rugged  valley  run-
ning towards  the  east.  The  declivities  around  were  now  covered
with  grain,  oHve,  and  fig  trees,  all  growing  among  the  rocks  as
before  ;  and  everything  appeared  thrifty.  The  place  is  said  to
produce  large  quantities  of  figs  ;  and  we  had  hoped  to  have  ob-
tained here  some  of  the  dried  fruit ;  but  their  stock  of  it  was
exhausted.  As  we  rode  into  the  town,  we  were  welcomed  by  a
company  of  twenty  or  thirty  men,  who  conducted  us  to  the  flat
roof  of  a  house  and  treated  us  with  great  civUity.  They  had
never  before  seen  a  Frank  among  them.  Their  village,  they  said,
was  anciently  situated  on  the  low  hill  towards  the  south,  where
there  are  ruins  ;  and  on  the  present  site  was  then  a  convent.  But
I  apprehend  that  this  is  nothing  more  than  a  mode  of  accounting
for  the  name  Deir  (convent).  There  are  no  marks  of  antiquity
about  the  present  village.

About  an  hour  from  Deir  Duwan  towards  the  northwest,
lies  Beitin,  the  ancient  Bethel,  not  in  sight ;  and  it  follows  from
the  scriptural  account  and  from  the  nature  of  the  country,  that
the  city  of  Ai,  destroyed  by  Joshua,  must  have  been  somewhere
in  the  vicinity  of  the  spot  on  which  we  now  were.'  The  name
however  has  utterly  perished  ;  we  inquired  diligently  after  it
throxighout  the  whole  region,  but  without  finding  the  shghtest
trace.  The  city  might  have  been  situated  perhaps  upon  the  site
with  ruins  south  of  Deir  Duwan  ;  or  upon  a  rocky  Tell  (hill)
bearing  from  the  village  N.  46°  W.  and  overlooking  the  deep
northern  valley.  Another  place  of  niins,  el-'Alya,  was  also
pointed  out,  bearing  N.  50°  E.  at  some  distance  across  the  same
valley.  But  our  researches  to-day  respecting  Ai  were  so  unsat-
isfactory, that  we  renewed  them  at  a  later  period  ;  though  with
not  much  better  success.^

From  this  place  Taiyibeh,  our  next  stage,  bore  N,  23°  E.
situated  on  very  high  ground.  The  village  of  Kudeirah  bore  S.
50°  W.  er-Ram  S.  40°  W.  Jeba'  S.  12°  W.  and  Rummon  on  its
lofty  rock  E.  N.  E.^N.

Having  remained  for  half  an  hour  at  Deir  Duwan,  we  set
off  again  at  1.35  for  Taiyibeh  ;  although  our  guide  was  very  de-
sirous of  proceeding  directly  to  Beitin.  His  reason  probably  was
the  much  shorter  distance  of  the  latter  place.  After  five  minutes
we  began  to  descend  the  very  rugged  wall  of  the  valley  on  the
north,  the  steepest  and  longest  descent  we  had  yet  made.  The
valley  here  cannot  well  be  less  than  two  hundred  and  fifty  or
three  hundred  feet  in  depth.  We  dismounted  as  usual,  the
path  being  very  difficult  for  the  horses,  even  without  a  load.
Before  us,  towards  the  right,  was  Kummon,  on  a  naked  conical

"  Josh,  c  7  and  8.  »  See  under  May  14th.

ii.  118-120

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  IX,

point  of  the  ridge,  rising  steeply  on  the  north  side  of  the  valley  ;
the  houses  being  apparently  built  in  terraces  around  the  hill
from  the  top  downwards.  It  took  us  thirty  minutes  to  reach
the  bottom  of  the  valley.  This  seemed  to  have  here  more  than
one  name.  Some  called  it  el-Mutyah  ;  while  another  spoke  of
it  as  Wady  el-'Asas.  It  is  the  great  drain  of  the  adjacent  tract ;
and  passes  down  to  the  plain  of  the  Jordan,  issuing  from  the
mountains  at  some  distance  north  of  Jericho  under  the  name  of
Wady  Nawa'imeh,  where  we  afterwards  encountered  it  again.

We  now  entered  a  narrow  branch  valley  which  comes  into
Wady  el-Mutyah  from  the  north  nearly  at  right  angles.  It  is
caUed  Wady  el-'Ain,  from  a  spring  of  water  which  descends
into  it  further  up,  from  the  western  hiU.  The  region  is  very
rocky  ;  and  we  advanced  by  a  rugged  and  often  dangerous  path.
During  the  whole  day  we  saw  very  little  grass ;  the  chief
herbage  everywhere  was  the  furzy  plant  BeUan ;  and  in  this
valley  I  was  struck  with  the  frequent  appearance  of  the  common
sage  of  our  gardens,  interspersed  with  the  fragrant  Za'ter.  At
2.25,  we  came  upon  the  fountain  which  gives  name  to  the
Wady  ;  a  pretty  spring  issuing  from  the  rocky  wall  upon  our
left.  The  valley  extends  quite  up  to  Taiyibeh,  having  its  head
in  a  basin  on  the  northwest  of  the  hiU,  on  which  that  place  is
situated.

Instead  of  following  the  direct  road  up  the  valley,  which
would  have  brought  us  to  the  village  in  one  hour  from  the
fountain,  or  at  3.25,  the  guide  at  about  half  way  mistook  the
path,  and  led  us  up  a  side  Wady  on  the  right,  to  the  high  open
country  lying  between  Kummon  and  Taiyibeh.  Discovering  the
mistake,  we  now  struck  across  the  fields  towards  the  north
without  a  path,  passing  over  a  high  hill  which  afforded  a  wide
prospect,  and  at  length  reached  Taiyibeh  ;  losing  about  twenty
minutes  by  this  detour.

The  village  of  Taiyibeh  crowns  a  conical  hill,  on  the  highest
ridge  or  tract  of  land  which  we  had  yet  crossed.  On  the  very
summit  of  the  hUl  are  the  ruins  of  a  tower,  once  similar  appa-
rently to  those  we  had  seen  in  almost  all  the  villages.  From
these  ruins  the  houses  extend  down  the  sides  of  the  hill,  chiefly
towards  the  southeast.  On  the  west  and  north  are  fertile  basins
of  some  breadth,  forming  the  beginning  of  Wadys  ;  and  these
are  full  of  gardens  of  oUve  and  fig  trees.  Many  olive  trees  are
also  scattered  upon  the  liills  around.  From  the  site  of  the  old
tower  there  is  a  splendid  view  over  the  whole  eastern  slope,  the
vale  of  the  Jordan  or  el-Ghor,  the  Dead  Sea,  and  the  eastern
mountains  comprising  the  districts  of  the  Belka  and  of  Jebel
'Ajltin.  In  the  latter,  towards  the  E.  N.  E.  a  break  was  seen,
where  the  valley  of  the  Zerka  comes  down ;  and  just  north  of

ii.  120,  121

Mat  4.]

TAITIBEH.

445

it,  the  ravine  of  'Ajlun  with  the  Saracenic  castle,  Kul'at  er-
Kubud,  perched  on  a  lofty  rock  high  up  in  the  mountains,  and
bearing  N.  55^  E.'  Further  south  the  site  of  Nimrin  was
pointed  out.*  On  the  east  of  the  sea  the  mountains  seemed  to
come  down  in  precipices  close  to  the  water  ;  so  that  apparently
no  road  could  pass.  Occasional  ravines  were  visible  in  the
naked  rocks.  Towards  the  south  the  view  took  in  the  Frank
Mountain  (el-Fureidis)  beyond  Bethlehem.  Neither  Jerusalem
nor  the  mount  of  Ohves  was  visible.  Near  at  hand  was  Kum-
mon,  now  below  us.  The  landscape  exhibited  little  of  ver-
dure or  beauty  ;  yet  its  stem  and  desert  features  were  strongly
impressive.^

Close  by  Taij-ibeh,  S.  E.^E.  on  the  top  of  a  lower  hill,  sixty
or  eighty  rods  distant,  are  the  ruins  of  a  smaU  church  of  St
George  ;  of  which  the  walls  are  still  partially  standing.

The  inhabitants  of  Taiyibeh  are  all  native  Christians  of  the
Greek  rite.  Their  priests  had  visited  the  missionaries  in  Jeru-
salem, and  we  now  found  here  friends,  who  seemed  exceedingly
glad  to  welcome  us  to  their  village.  As  we  wished,  if  possible,
to  proceed  further  to-day,  Mr  Smith  and  myself  repaired  imme-
diately to  the  ruined  tower,  taking  with  us  one  or  two  of  the
inhabitants  to  point  out  and  name  to  us  the  various  objects  in
view.  On  returning,  we  found  our  companions  sitting  with  the
priests  and  others  before  the  Meddfeli,*  sipping  coffee  out  of
small  cups  in  the  oriental  style.  The  Mukarys  had  concluded
to  stop  here  for  the  night,  and  without  asking  leave  had  unload-
ed the  horses  ;  so  that  we  were  iu  a  measure  compelled  to
remain.

A  place  was  now  selected  and  the  tent  pitched  ;  and  we
obtained  a  supply  of  mats,  lights,  and  eatables  from  the  village.
We  took  this  course  both  because  we  preferred  our  tent  to  the
small  and  uncomfortable  dwellings  of  the  inhabitants,  infested
as  they  are  with  vermin  ;  and  because  too  we  hoped  thus  to
have  more  the  command  of  our  own  time.    But  in  this  latter

*  Bnrckhardt  visited  and  describes  this
castle;  Travels  in  Syria,  pp.  266,  267.
Compare  Irby  and  Mangles'  Travels,  p.
806.  [93.]  From  the  inscriptions,  it  ap-
pears to  have  been  built  under  Saladin ;
and  so  Abulfeda,  Tab.  Syr.  ed.  Kohler,  pp.
13,  92.  The  same  district  was  \-isited  by
my  companion  Mr  Smith,  in  1834.

'  See  further  under  May  13th.

'  Here  we  took,  among  others,  the  fol-
lowing bearings :  Riimmim  S.  5°  W.  Frank
Mountain  S.  17°  W.  er-Rlm  S.  36°  W.
Keby  Samwil  S.  50°  W.  el-'Alya  S.  60°
W.  Khan  HCidhriir,  a  mined  Khdn  on  the
■way  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  S.  15°  E.
Dead  Sea,  northwest  bay,  S.  35°  E.  North
Vol.  L— 38

end  of  the  sea  S.  44°  E.  Wady  Zerka,
mouth,  N.  60°  E.  Kul'at  er-Rubud  N.  55°
E.  Deir  Jernr,  a  sm;iU  Muslim  village
near  Taivibeh,  N.  5°  E.

*  The  Medafeh  is  a  sort  of  public  house,
set  apart  for  the  reception  of  travellers.
Each  village  has  one  or  more.  In  those
parts  of  the  country  not  yet  corrupted  by
the  frequency  of  foreign  travellers,  the
stranger  is  hospitably  entertained  by  the
inhabitants,  without  the  expectation  of  s
reward.  Of  this  we  found  several  instances ;
see  (it  Beit  Nettif  under  May  \7th.  See
alsi  Burckhardt's  Travels  in  S^Tia,  pp.
295,  351,  384.

ii.  121-123

446

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  IX.

particular  we  reckoned  without  our  host.  The  inhabitants
crowded  about  us  with  their  Sheikh  and  three  priests,  untU  the
tent  was  completely  full,  besides  a  multitude  standing  around
the  door.  Mr  Lanneau  distributed  among  them  several  books
and  tracts  in  the  Arabic  language  ;  and  they  became  quite  clam-
orous for  more.  They  were  especially  delighted  with  the  psal-
ters ;  and  each  of  the  priests  obtained  the  promise  of  a  bible,
for  which  they  were  to  come  or  send  to  J erusalem.  The  Sheikh
we  did  not  like  ;  he  was  shy,  though  cringing  in  his  manner  ;
and  almost  from  the  first,  as  he  accompanied  us  to  the  ruined
church,  began  to  inquire  about  his  hakhsMsh.  Afterwards  in  the
tent,  he  declared  himself  an  American  ;  and  to  convince  us  of  it,
drank  milk  in  a  cup  of  tea  before  the  priests,  although  it  was  on
Friday  and  therefore  unlawful.  It  was  only  by  ordering  the
people  away  that  we  could  get  room  to  eat  ;  and  it  was  quite
late  before  we  could  even  think  of  sleep.

At  length,  however,  we  made  shift  to  arrange  our  couches
within  our  somewhat  narrow  limits,  and  laid  ourselves  down.
The  captain  or  responsible  guard  of  the  %-iUage  himself  kept
watch  by  our  tent,  accompanied  by  two  or  three  others  ;  and  to
beguile  the  night  and  keep  themselves  awake,  they  one  after
another  repeated  tales  in  a  monotonous  tone  of  voice.  This
served  theix  own  purpose  ;  and  had  too  the  fiirther  effect  of
aiding  to  keep  us  awake  ;  so  that,  what  with  the  voices  of  the
Arabs,  the  barking  of  dogs,  the  crawling  of  fleas,  and  the  hum  of
mosquitos,  we  were  none  of  us  able  to  get  much  sleep  all  night.
— Two  or  three  nights  before,  robbers  had  entered  the  village
and  stolen  several  sheep.  The  desert  towards  the  Dead  Sea  was
said  to  be  full  of  them.

Taiyibeh  contains  seventy-five  taxable  inhabitants,  sho^'ing  a
population  of  from  three  to  four  hundred  souls.  The  only  other
villages  north  of  Jerusalem  within  the  province,  containing  Chris-
tians, were  said  to  be  Ram-Allah  and  Jifneh,  which  we  after-
wards Adsited ;  and  the  smaller  ones  of  Bir  Zeit  and  'Ain  'Arik,
each  with  twenty-five  Christian  men  and  the  rest  Muslims.  The
land  at  Taiyibeh  is  held  by  the  peasants  in  freehold  ;  except  that
in  a  certain  sense  the  whole  Anllage  belongs  to  the  Haram  esh-
Sherif,  to  the  Mutawelly  of  whicli  it  pays  annually  seventy-five
Mids  (measures)  of  barley  and  wheat.  The  Mid  is  equal  to  six-
teen/Sd'a,  or  twelve  7?2«Ja' of  Eg^-pt.'  Besides  this  there  are
paid  in  taxes  to  the  government  for  each  olive  and  fig  tree  one
piastre  ;  for  each  she  goat  and  ewe  one  piastre  ;  and  for  each  ox
seventy-five  piastres,  which  is  intended  rather  as  a  tax  upon  the
land  ploughed,  than  upon  the  oxen.  Each  man  also  pays  one
hundred  piastres  as  Firdeh  or  capitation-tax  ;  and  being  all

'  The  Egyptian  Ruba'  is  the  twenty-fourth  part  of  an  Ardth.
iL  123.  124

Mat  5.]

TAITIBEH,  EPHBAIM.

447

Christians  and  free  from  the  military  conscription,  each  pays  an
additional  tax  of  twenty-five  piastres,  which  is  reckoned  to  the
Kkaraj  or  toleration  tax.'  The  village  was  said  to  pay  in  all,
not  far  from  seven tv-five  purses  annually,  equivalent  to  1875
Spanish  dollars.— The  Sheikh  el-Bekd.  laterally  the  "  elder  of
the  village."  Ls  here  as  elsewhere  the  chief  man,  and  the  medium
of  communication  with  the  government.

The'remarkahle  position  of  Taiyibeh  would  not  probably  have
been  left  unoccupied  in  ancient  times  ;  but  I  was  formerly  unable
to  identify  it  with  any  earlier  site,  unless  with  the  Ophrah  of
Benjamin.  This  city,  according  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  lay
five  Roman  miles  east  of  Bethel ;  which  accords  with  the  situa-
tion of  et-Taiyibeh-*

There  arises,  however,  the  further  question,  whether  this
Ophrah  is  not  the  same  with  the  Ephron  or  Ephraim  of  the  Old
Testament  ;  a  place  which  Abijah  king  of  Judah  took  from  Jero-
boam along  with  Bethel  and  Jeshanah.^  Josephus  speaks  also  of
a  small  city  Ephraim,  which  Vespasian  took  along  with  BetheL*
All  these  appear  to  be  names  of  one  and  the  same  city,  identical
with  Ophrak^  With  the  same,  too,  we  may  well  identify  the
city  Ephraim  of  the  New  Testament,  which  was  "  near  to  the  wil-
derness," and  to  which  our  Lord  withdrew  with  his  disciples  after
the  raising  of  Lazarus.*  Thence  he  returned  to  Jeni.salem  by
crossing  the  Jordan,  and  passing  down  through  Perea  to  Jericho.^
With  all  these  circumstances  the  position  of  et-Taiyibeh  well
corresponds.

Saturday,  May  5th.  Taking  with  us  a  guide  from  Taiyibeh,
we  set  off  at  4..50  for  Beitin.  intending  to  visit  on  our  way  the
ruins  at  el-'Alya.  We  followed  down  the  narrow  valley  by  the
road  of  yesterday  for  forty  minutes.  Here  we  turned  W.  N.  W.
np  another  branch,  and  then  passed  up  an  ascent,  reaching  the
top  at  6  o'clock.  From  this  point  el-'Alya  lay  ten  minutes
towards  the  south.  We  found  there  only  a  few  ruins  of  small
houses  on  a  high  plateau,  with  a  deep  valley  on  the  west  and  south-
west, but  no  traces  of  antiquity.  Not  far  off  towards  the  east  is
a  spring  of  water,  called  'Ain  el-'Alya,  '  upper  spring,'  to  dis-
tinguish it  from  that  in  the  valley  below,  which  we  passed  yes-

'  See  abore,  p.  427.  n.  1.  """E?  Ephron  differ  strictly  only  in  ter.

'  Heb.  n"E5  ,  Joeh.  18,  23.  1  Sam.  13,  mination  ;  and  the  same  difference  is  also

17.     Eoaeb.  et   Hieron.  Onomast.   art.  found  in  the  proper  name  SalmoTL,  e.  g.

Apkra.  -  and  V Ruth  ^,  20.  21.

•  2  Chr.  13,  19.  Heb.  7-BS  Keth.  '  John  11,  34.'

Keri-  Sept  'I/pfujv  '  See  the  anthot's  HarmouT  of  the  Gos-

i  j;«ph.  B.  J.  4. 9. 9.  ■  "ScSr^^S:

*  The  Heb.  names  JT^E'  Ophrah  and   p.  398  sq.

iL  124, 125

448

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  IX.

terday.  Tlie  village  probably  derived  its  name  from  the  foun-
tain. '

Returning  to  the  point  where  we  had  left  our  road,  we  now
proceeded  again  at  6.40,  on  the  same  general  course  towards
Beitin.  We  soon  crossed  a  broad  shallow  Wady,  running  nearly
south,  apparently  one  of  the  heads  of  that  passing  down  on  the
north  side  of  Deir  Duwan  ;  and  at  7.10,  reached  the  eastern
branch  of  the  great  Nabulus  road  on  the  higher  land*  beyond.
Hence  Taiyibeh  bore  N.  76°  E.  and  el-Bireh  S.  40°  W.  De-
scending gradually  by  this  road  southwest,  we  came  to  the  site  of
Beitin  at  7^  o'clock,  just  at  the  left  of  the  path  ;  making  a  dis-
tance of  two  hours  from  Taiyibeh.  The  ruins  lie  upon  the  point
of  a  low  hiU,  between  the  heads  of  two  shallow  Wadys,  which
unite  below  and  run  off  S.  S.  E.^S.  into  the  deep  and  rugged  val-
ley es-Suweinit,  which  passes  down  between  Jeba,  and  Mukh-
mas.  The  spot  is  shut  in  by  higher  land  on  every  side  ;  so  that
the  only  places  we  could  see  distinctly  from  the  ruins  were  el-
Bireh  S.  48°  W.  and  Sha'fat  S.  10°  W.

Percei\'ing  however  some  ruins  across  the  valley  S.  E.^E.  on
the  higher  ground,  we  immediately  proceeded  thither,  and  came
in  eight  minutes  to  what  the  Arabs  called  Burj  Beitin  and
also  Burj  Makhrun,  '  Castle  of  Beitin  or  Makhrfin.'  It  is  the
ruin  of  a  small  square  fortress  of  hewn  stones,  including  a  Greek
church.  Several  columns  were  lying  among  the  ruins,  on  one  of
which  a  cross  was  carved  in  relief. — Proceeding  still  in  the
direction  S.  by  E.^E.  we  came  in  ten  minutes  more  to  the  riiins
of  another  larger  Greek  church,  situated  on  the  highest  spot  of
ground  in  the  vicinity.  The  lower  walls  are  still  very  distinct,
and  many  columns  are  lying  about  ;  though  it  seems  to  have
been  long  ago  destroyed.  To  this  ruin  one  of  the  Greek  priests
at  Taiyibeh,  who  had  been  delving  a  little  into  biblical  history,
had  chosen  to  give  the  name  of  Ai ;  and  we  found  the  same
name  among  some  of  the  people  of  that  village.  But  there  is  not
the  slightest  ground  for  any  such  hypothesis.  There  never  was  any
thing  here  but  a  church  ;  and  Ai  must  have  been  further  off
from  Bethel,  and  certainly  not  directly  in  sight  of  it.*

We  now  returned  to  the  site  of  Beitin,  and  took  a  nearer
survey  of  its  ruins.  They  occupy  the  whole  surface  of  the  hiU-
point,  sloping  towards  the  southeast,  and  cover  a  space  of  three
or  four  acres.  They  consist  of  very  many  foundations  and  half-
standing  walls  of  houses  and  other  buildings.    On  the  highest

'  From  'Alya,  Deir  Duwan  bore  S.  5°  cinity,  see  under  June  13th,  on  our  jour-

W.    Bir  Zeit  near  Jifna  N.  5r>°  W.  'Atara  ney  northwards.

beyond  .Jifna  N.  30°  W.    'Ain  Yebrdd  on       "  From  this  church  Beitin  bore  N.  N.

the  N;ibulus  road  N.  20°  W.    Tell  'Asiir  W.  A  W.  Taiyibeh  N.  E.  by  E.    'Alya  N.

with  a  ^\'ely  N.  15°  E.    For  several  of  54°  E.    Deir  Duwan  S.  65°  E.  er-Rum

these  places  aa  seen  from  Jifna  and  the  vi-  S.  20°  W.

ii.  12.'),  126

ilATQ.]

449

art,  towards  the  N.  N .  W.  are  the  remains  of  a  square  tower  ;
and  near  the  eoathem  point,  the  waDs  of  a  Greek  chnrch,  stand-
ing within  the  foxmdations  of  a  much  lai^r  and  earlier  edifice
built  of  large  stones,  part  of  which  have  been  used  for  erecting
the  later  structure.  The  broken  walls  of  several  other  churches
are  also  to  be  distinguished.  In  the  western  Taller  are  the
remain?  of  one  of  the  largest  reserroirs  we  saw  in  the  country ;
measuring  314  feet  in  length  {rom  northwest  to  s-r  utheast  and
217  feet  in  breadth  6om  northeast  to  5.;  uthwest.  The  waDs  were
built  of  massive  stones  :  the  southern  one  is  still  entire  ;  those
upon  the  sides  are  partlv  gone,  while  the  northern  one  has  almost
wholly  disappeared.  The  bottom  was  now  a  green  grass-plat,
havinsr  in  it  two  Kring  springs  of  good  water.  Here  we  spread
-5  on  the  grass  for  breakfast,  by  the  side  of  these  deso-
:  ages.  A  few  Arabs,  probably  fri?m  S'ame  neighbouring
village,  had  pitched  their  tents  here  for  the  summer,  to  watch
th  •  -  'is  and  fields  of  grain ;  and  they  were  the  only  inhabitants,
r  m  we  obtained  milk  and  als"?  butter  of  excdlent  quality.

:  u  aoght  have  done  honour  to  the  days,  when  the  flocks  of
Abraham  and  Jacijb  were  pastured  on  these  bfllg  It  was  indeed
the  finest  we  found  anywhere  in  Palestine.

There  is  little  room  for  question,  that  both  the  name  and
site  of  Beitin  are  identical  with  those  of  the  ancient  Bethel.
The  latter  was  a  hjrder  city  between  Benjamin  and  Ephraim  ;
at  first  assigned  to  Benjamin,  but  conqueiwi  and  afterwards  re-
-T.ined  by  Ephraim.^  According  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  it  lay
twelve  Eouian  miles  fr^m  Jerusalem,  on  the  right  or  east  of  the
road  leading  to  Sichem  or  XeapoUs  (yabulus).*  From  Beitin  to
el-Bireh  we  f Tund  the  distance  to  be  forty-five  minutes,  and  from
Bireh  to  Jerusalem  three  hours,  with  horses.  The  correspond
dence  therefore  in  the  situation  is  very  exact :  and  the  name
aflfords  decisive  confirmatirin.  The  Arabic  termination  in  for  the
Hebrew  e?,  is  not  an  unusual  change  ;  we  found  indeed  several
ther  instances  of  it  entirely  parallel.'  Yet  the  name  has  been
reserved  solely  among  the  common  people.  The  monks  appear
r  centuries  not  to  have  been  aware  of  its  existence  :  and  have
-assigned  to  Bethel  a  location  much  fcirther  towards  the  north,*

'  JoA.  16,  L  2.  18,  13.  23.    Jodg.  1,  SDotfa  of  SammnA  on  the  -mvy  to  Skhen

32— 2S.  1  Ki^gs  12,  29.  (^Klmlas)  ^ob  m  high  munUiu :  e.  7.  p.

*  ObdmsL  hC  B«<^  Bttkd,  'A-iymi  177.   Ea^jempfaa  sets  it  a  infe  finm  Si-

At^,  A0m(^  Iao^  Se«  die ocfaer  aocicea  cfaera  oa  m  part  «f  Mosat  GeiiiiiD :  aee  ia

'-^«cied  br  Bdand  frm  iomeftsam  aod  L.  Alktn  STmnukta,  CoL  Agr.  16S3.  ppt.

-ewhm,  Pabeat.  p.  636L  111,  112.    See  afao  BuTdenbadi,  Beiait.

'  TfaosibrHeb.  J  ew.  It  was  a  great  city,  as  one  of  the  royal
cities  ;  "  and  to  its  jurisdiction  belonged  originally  the  towns  of
Beeroth,  Chephirah,  and  Kirjath-Jearim.^  The  city  is  first  men-
tioned in  connection  with  the  deceit  practised  by  its  inhabitants
upon  Joshua;  by  which,  although  Canaanites  (Hivites),  they
induced  the  Jewish  leader  not  only  to  make  a  league  with  them
and  spare  their  Hves  and  cities  ;  but  also  in  their  defence  to  make
war  upon  the  five  kings  by  whom  they  were  besieged.  It  was  in
this  great  battle  that  "the  sun  stood  still  on  Gibeon."'  The
place  afterwards  feU  to  the  lot  of  Benjamin,  and  became  a  Levi-
tical  city  ; "  where  the  tabernacle  was  set  up  for  many  years
under  David  and  Solomon.*  Here  the  latter  youthftd  monarch
offered  a  thousand  burnt  offerings  :  and  in  a  dream  by  night
communed  with  God,  and  asked  for  himself  a  wise  and  onder-
standing  heart  instead  of  riches  and  honour.'  Here  too  it  was,
that  Abner's  challenge  to  Joab  terminated  in  the  defeat  and  flight
of  the  former,  and  the  death  of  Asahel ;  and  here  also  at  a  later
period  Amasa  was  treacherously  slain  by  Joab." — The  notices  of

road  cannot  -well  be  less  than  three  hours,  '  Josh.  18,  25.    21,  17.    In  these  pa*-

or  some  seventy  stadia. — See  further  no-  sages  the  three  towns  Gibeon,  Geba,  and

tices  in  Reland'PaLsst.  p.  810.  Gibeah  (Gibeath',  are  distinctly  enume-

■  See  above,  p.  255.  n.  2.  rated:  comp.  18,  24.  28.    These  names,

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  2.  19.  1.  however,  were  sometimes  confonnded  ;  e.

'  Hieron.  Ep.  86,  ad  Enstoch.  Epitaph,  g.  Gibeon  for  Geba,  1  Chron.  14,  16.

Panl«.  0pp.  T.  TV.  iL  p.  673.  ed.  Mart.  Comp.  2  Sam.  5,  25.

*  Pococke  saw  el-Jlb  from  Xeby  Sam-  "  1  Chron.  16,  39.  21,  29.  2  Chroa  L
wil,  and  also  held  it  to  be  Gibeon  ;  Descr.  3. — The  ark  at  this  time  was  at  Jerasalem;
of  the  East,  IL  i.  p.  49.  foL    So  too  Von  2  Chron.  1,  4.

Troilo  in  1666;  Keisebeachr.  p.  290.  '  1  K.  3,  4-15.  2  Chr.  1,  3-13.

»  Josh.  10,  2.  9,  17.  '"2  Sam.  2,  12-32.    20,  8-12.  The

*  Josh.  c.  9.  c  10,  1-14.  '  Pool  of  Gibeon,'  mentioned  in  the  story

ii.  137,  138

Mat  5.]

EL-JIB.     XEBY  SAMmL.

457

Gibeon  by  J osephus,  and  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  have  already
been  referred  to  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  The  name  Gabaon
is  mentioned  by  writers  of  the  times  of  the  crusades,  as  existing
in  the  present  spot  ;  and  among  the  Arabs  it  already  bore  the
name  el-Jib.'  It  seems  afterwards  to  have  been  overlooked  by
most  trartllers  ;  untU  in  the  last  century  the  attention  of  Po-
cocke  was  again  directed  to  it.

"We  left  el-Jib  at  2.25,  descending  on  the  southern  quarter
through  orchards  of  pears,  apples,  figs,  and  olives,  and  also  vine-
yards, into  the  narrow  strip  of  plain  which  skirts  the  hill  upon
this  side.  "We  now  had  before  us  the  elevated  ridge  of  Xeby  Sam-
wil ;  which,  beginning  at  no  great  distance  on  the  left,  rises  ra-
pidly towards  the  southwest  into  the  highest  point  of  land  in  the
whole  region  ;  and  then  sinks  off  gradually  in  the  same  direction
into  lower  and  less  marked  hilLs  and  ridges.  Its  general  course
is  thus  fix>m  northeast  to  southwest.  The  elevation  cannot  be
less  than  some  500  feet  above  the  plain  ;  and  is  apparently
greater  than  that  of  the  mount  of  OHves.  The  waters  of  the  plain
are  drained  off  eastward  by  a  valley  around  its  northern  end  ;  and
here  passes  also  a  road  to  Jerusalem  which  we  took  at  a  later
period.^  Our  way  now  led  us  directly  to  the  summit,  up  the
steep  but  not  difficult  ascent  of  the  northwestern  side.  The  top
is  crowned  by  a  small  miserable  village  and  a  neglected  mosk.
This  point  we  reached  at  2.55,  in  half  an  hour  from  el-Jib  ;  and
found  ourselves  upjn  the  most  sightly  spot  in  aU  the  country.

The  mosk  is  here  the  principal  object  :  and  is  regarded  by
J ews,  Christians,  and  Muhammedans,  as  covering  the  tomb  of  the
prophet  Samuel  It  is  now  in  a  state  of  great  decay.  We  were
admitted  without  ceremony  to  every  part  of  it  ;  ascen(J»-'d  to  its
fl^at  roof  and  minaret  ;  and  examined,  so  far  as  we  chose,  the  pre-
tended tomb  in  a  more  private  apartment.  This  is  only  a  box
of  boards.  The  building  was  evidently  once  a  Latin  church,
built  up  on  older  foundations  in  the  form  of  *  Latin  cross  ;  and
probably  dates  from  the  time  of  the  crusades.  There  are  few
houses  now  inhabited  ;  but  many  traces  of  former  dwellings.  In
some  parts,  the  rock,  which  is  soft,  has  been  hewn  away  for  several
feet  in  height,  so  as  to  form  the  walla  of  houses  ;  in  one  place  it
is  thus  cut  down  apparently  for  the  foundation  of  a  large  build-
ing. Two  or  three  reservoirs  are  also  in  like  manner  hewn  in  the
rock.  These  cuttings  and  leveUings  extend  over  a  considerable
space.

of  Abner,  m*y  well  be  the  -waters  of  the    68.    Brocard.  c.  9.  p.  184.  Marin.  Saimt.
foantain  or  naervmt  described  ia  the  test ;    p.  249.    Brevdenbach  ct^ies  Brocanhu,
ai>d  these  are  also  probably  '  the  great    Bohaeddin  mentions  el-Jib :  Vita  Saladin.
(or  macT)  waters  in  Gibeoo,'  spoken  of    p.  243.
in  Jer.  41,  12.  '  See  under  June  9th.

'  Win.  Tvr.  8.  1.    Benj.  of  TwL  L  p.

YoL.  i.— 39  iL  139. 140

458

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  IX.

The  view  fi-om  the  roof  of  the  mosk  is  very  commandinoj  in
every  direction.  Below  in  the  southeast  is  the  deep  Wady  Beit
Hanina  stretching  off  towards  the  southwest ;  and  further  in  the
former  direction  are  seen  Jerusalem,  the  mount  of  Ohves.  the
Frank  mountain,  and  a  large  portion  of  the  eastern  slope,  with
the  mountains  beyond  the  Jordan  and  Dead  Sea.  In  the  north-
west the  fertile  plain  of  el-Jib  lies  immediately  below ;  and  further
on,  the  eye  embraces  a  large  extent  of  the  great  lower  plain  along
the  coast,  as  well  as  of  the  Mediterranean  itself.  In  a  clear  day
Yafa  may  be  distinctly  seen  ;  a  slight  haze  now  intercepted  it  from
our  view.  A  large  number  of  villages  were  visible  on  every  side.'

The  tradition  that  here  is  the  tomb  of  the  prophet  Samuel,
necessarily  includes  the  supposition  that  this  spot  is  the  Ramah
or  Ramathaim-Zophim  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  birthplace,
residence,  and  burial-place  of  that  prophet.^  That  this  was  a
different  city  from  the  Ramah  near  Gibeah  of  Saul  (now  er-Ram)
on  the  east  of  the  Xabulus  road,  is  obvious ;  for  the  latter  is
only  half  an  hour  from  Gribeah,  Said's  residence  ;  and  its  situa-
tion does  not  at  all  accord  with  the  circumstances  of  his  first  visit
to  Samuel  when  in  search  of  his  father's  asses,  nor  with  David's
subsequent  flight  to  Samuel  for  refuge.^  But  the  same  difficulties
lie  with  almost  equal  force  against  the  supposition,  that  the  pre-
sent Neby  Samwil  can  be  the  Ramah  of  the  prophet.  As  such,
it  could  not  well  have  been  unknown  to  Said  ;  since  as  being
the  highest  point  in  the  country  and  hardly  an  hour  distant  from
his  native  place,  with  no  intervening  hills,  it  must  have  been
continually  in  full  view  before  his  eyes.

But  there  are  still  greater  difficulties.  It  is  usually  supposed,
that  the  visit  of  Saul  to  Samuel,  above  alluded  to,  took  place  in
Ramah,  wVre  the  prophet  entertained  him  in  his  own  house.  At
his  departure  in  order  to  return  to  Gibeah,  the  prophet  anoints
him  as  king,  and  describes  his  way  home  as  leading  him  '"by
Rachel's  sepidchre  in  the  border  of  Benjamin."  *  This  circum-
stance is  decisive  agfunst  the  identity  of  Xeby  Samwil  with  such
a  Ramah.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  site  of  Rachel's  tomb
cannot  well  be  called  in  t^uestion  ; '  and  therefore  the  Ramah  of

'  The  most  important  be.irings  \rtii?h  the  convent  of  St.  John,  S.  20°  W.  Deir

we  pot  here,  were  the  following :  Mount  Yesin  S.  57°  W.    Beit  Dukkah  K.  77°

of  Olives  S.  40°  E.    Jerusalem  S.  35=  E.  W.    Biddu  X.  48°  \V.    Beit  I'nia  K  4"

Frank  mountain  S.  10'  E.    el-Kustul  S.  W.    Rim-Allah  N.  18°  E.    Jedireh  N.

50=  W.    Soba  S.  54°  W.    Ramleh  N.  66°  37°  E.    Kulundia  X.  44°  E.    Bir  Xeb41a

W.    el-Jib  N.  21°  E.    el-Bireh  X.  30°  E.  N.  51°  E.    Rummim  X.  55°  E.  er-Rdm

Taiyibeh  N.  50°  E.— Other  bearings  of  N.  75°  E.

miuor  places  were:  Beit  Haniua  across       '  1  Sam.  1,  1.19.  2,  11.  8,  4.  19,  18.

the  vallev  below,  S.  72'  E.    Sha'tat  S.  25,  1.    28,  3.

60"  E.    Lifta,  in  the  great  valley,  S.  12°       '  1  Sam.  c  9.    c.  19,  18.

E.    Mar  Elyas,  south  of  Jerusalem,  S.  7°       M  Sam.  10,  1.  2.

R    Bethlehem  S.  1°  E.    Beit  Ikso,  below       '  See  above,  pp.  218  8q.254.

US  on  thfc  hills,  S.  4°  W.    'Ain  Karim  with

ii.  140, 141

May  5.]

NEBT  SAMWIL,

459

the  prophet  must  have  been  so  situated,  that  a  person  going  from
it  to  Gibeah  would  naturally,  or  at  least  without  difficulty,  pass
near  to  the  present  sepulchre  northwest  of  Bethlehem.  But  from
Neby  Samwil,  Gibeah  lies  about  E.  S.  E.  and  hardly  more  than
one  hour  distant ;  while  the  tomb  of  Rachel  bears  directly  south
at  the  distance  of  nearly  three  hours.  Hence,  every  step  taken
from  Neby  Samwil  towards  the  sepidchre  of  Rachel,  only  carries
a  person  away  from  Gibeah. — I  shall  have  occasion  hereafter  to
speak  again  of  the  Ramah  of  the  prophet ;  my  sole  object  here
has  been  to  show,  that  it  could  noff  have  been  the  present  Neby
Samwil.

The  true  site  of  the  Ramah  of  Samuel  seems  to  have  been
early  forgotten;  since  both  Eusebius  and  Jerome  place  it,  with
stm  less  probability,  in  the  plain  near  Diospolis  or  Lydda. '  Yet
the  present  tradition  as  to  the  prophet's  tomb  must  have  sprung
up  not  long  after  their  day ;  for  apparently  Procopius  alludes  to
this  spot,  when  he  relates  that  Justinian  caused  a  well  and  a
wall  to  be  constructed  for  the  (monastery  of)  St.  Samuel  in  Pa-
lestine.* At  the  close  of  the  seventh  century  Adamnanus  des-
cribes the  ground  north  of  Jerusalem  as  rocky  and  rough,  as  far
as  to  the  city  of  Samuel  or  Ramah. ^  The  crusaders  found  here
the  name  of  St.  Samuel ;  and  with  httle  regard  to  consistency,  held
the  place  to  be  also  the  Sluloh  of  Scripture  ;  or  as  Brocardus
expresses  it,  "  Mount  Sluloh,  which  is  now  called  St.  Samuel."*
Here  stood  a  Latin  convent  of  the  order  of  Praemonstrants  ;
which  was  plundered  by  the  troops  of  Saladin  as  he  was  preparing
to  besiege  Jerusalem  in  A.  D.  1187.^  To  the  same  period  proba-
bly belongs  the  Latin  church  now  converted  into  a  mosk.  From
that  time  onward  to  the  present  day,  the  natives  have  known  the
place  only  as  Neby  Samwil ;  while  the  monks  and  travellers  have
varied  in  describing  it  either  as  ShUoh  or  Ramah.  In  later  cectu-
ries  the  name  of  Ramah  has  predominated.^   Most  travellers  have

'  Onomast.  art.  Armatha  Sophim.  St.  Samuel,  after  erecting  there  a  large

*  Procop.  de  ^dific.  5.  9.  church  ;  Benj.  of  Tud.  I.  p.  78.  Nothing
'  De  Loc.  Sanct.  1.  21.  of  all  this  is  found  in  any  of  the  historians

*  "  Mons  Silo,  qui  nunc  ad  St.  Samuel-  of  the  crusades,  who  would  not  have  been
an  dicitur ; "  Brocardus  c.  9.  p.  184.  Will,  likely  to  overlook  such  a  transaction ;
Tyr.  8.  1. — The  true  Shiloh  lay  north  of  while  too,  as  we  have  seen,  the  present
Bethel  towards  Shechem  or  Nabulus ;  Judg.  name  is  older  than  the  time  of  the  cru-
21,  19.  sades.    Besides,  Jerome  relates,  that  the

'  Rad.  Coggesh.  Chron.  Anglican,  in  bones  of  Samuel  were  removed  to  Thrace

Martene  et  Durand  ColL  ampl.  T'lm.  V.  p.  under  the  emperor  Arcadius ;  Hieroa  adv.

565.  Wilken  Gesch.  der  Kreuzz.  III.  ii.  "Vigilant,  p.  28.3.  Reland  Pahcst.  p.  965.
pp.  298,  299. — Benjamin  of  Tudela  also       ^  Thus  we  find  Shiloh  in  Marin.  Sannt.

has  the  name  St.  Samuel  of  Shiloh  ;  and  p.  249.    Breydenbach  in  Reissb.  pp.  130,

relates  the  legend,  that  when  the  Edomites  136.     Nau,  p.  501.     Zuallart  names  it

(Christians)  took  Ramteh  from  the  Ish-  both  Sliiloh  and  Ramah,  Viaggio  p.  119.

raaelites,  they  found  there  near  the  Jews'  Quarosmius  gives  it  as  Ramah,  II.  p.  727;

synagogue  the  tomb  of  Samuel,  from  which  and  so  Von  Troilo,  p.  290.    Pococke  XL

they  transferred  his  body  to  the  present  i.  p.  48.    Elliott,  Travels  II.  p.  412.

ii.  142  143

460

EXCURSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec.  IX

been  contented  to  adopt  the  information  of  their  monastic  guides  ;
.  although  a  few  have  ventured  to  call  in  question  its  accuracy.*

As  however  Neby  Samwil  is  one  of  the  most  marked  places
in  the  vicinity  of  J erusalem,  and  w^as  unquestionably  the  site  of
an  ancient  town,  it  became  to  us  a  matter  of  interest,  to  ascer-
tain, if  possible,  w^hat  city  of  antiquity  had  occupied  this  sightly
spot.  Among  the  scriptural  names,  after  which  we  made  dili-
gent search  in  this  region,  though  without  success,  was  that  of
Mizpeh,  a  city  of  Benjamin  renowned  in  the  Old  Testament ;
where  the  tribes  often  assembled  ;  where  Samuel  offered  sacrifice
and  judged  the  people  ;  where  Saul  was  chosen  king  by  lot ;  and
where  under  the  Chaldeans,  Gedaliah  the  governor  resided  and
was  assassinated.''  The  position  of  this  city  is  nowhere  described,
neither  in  the  Old  Testament  nor  by  Josephus  ;  and  we  only
know  that  it  must  have  lain  near  Ramah  of  Benjamin  ;  since
king  Asa  fortified  it  with  materials  brought  from  the  latter
place.'  The  name,  too,  which  signifies  "a  place  of  look  out,
watch  tower,"  implies  that  it  was  situated  on  an  elevated  spot.

On  these  grounds,  as  well  as  from  the  traces  of  an  ancient
town  upon  it,  I  am  incHned  to  regard  Neby  Samwil  as  the  pro-
bable site  of  Mizpeh.  Further,  the  writer  of  the  first  book  of
Maccabees  describes  Mizpeh  as  situated  "overagainst  Jerusalem,"
implying  that  it  was  visible  from  that  city  ;*  a  description  which
is  true  of  K^eby  Samwil.  Eusebius  also  and  Jerome  describe
Mizpeh  as  lying  near  to  Kirjath-Jearim,  which  must  have  been
on  the  west  of  Gibeon,  probably  at  Kuryet  el-'Enab  ;  and  this  too
points  to  Neby  Samwil  rather  than  to  any  other  hill.^

From  Neby  Samwil  we  bent  our  course  towards  Jerusalem.
The  distance  is  reckoned  at  two  hours  ;  but  as  our  horses  were
now  travelling  homewards,  we  accomplished  it  in  one  hour  and
fifty  minutes.  Leaving  at  3|  o'clock  we  descended  along  smaller
spurs  and  ridges  towards  the  great  valley  ;  the  declivity  on  this
side  being  in  general  much  less  steep  than  the  ascent  from  el-Jib.
We  had  here  on  the  left  Beit  Hanina  across  the  valley ;  and  on
the  right  Beit  Iksa  on  the  hills  ;  while  before  us  low  down  in
the  Wady,  on  its  eastern  side,  was  seen  the  village  of  Lifta,
where  many  mules  are  kept.  Here,  somewhere  towards  the
right,  is  situated  apparently  the  fountain  of  St.  Samuel  men-

*  Cotovicns  appears  to  confound  this  1  Sam.  7,  5-16.    10,  17  sq.    2  K.  25,  22-

spot  with  Siba;  his  description  of  Soba  25.    Jer.  c.  40.  41.

applies  only  to  the  present  Neby  Samwil;  '  1  Kinj^  15,  22.    2  Chr.  16,  6.

pp.  316,  .^^17.    Doubdan,  following  the  au-  *  Kartvayrt  'l(povdi  Maxtefd,

Ramleh;  pp.  488,  489;  comp.  p.  114.  Botli  writers  confound  here  the  Mizpeh  of

Sandys  also  questions  the  report  of  his  Gilead,  where  Jephthah  dwelt  (Judj;,  11,

monkish  guides,  p.  135.  Lond.  1G58.  34),  with  the  Mizpeh  of  the  text.  Comp.

'  Josh.  18,  26.    Judg.  20,  1.    21,  1.  also  Jer.  41,  10.  12.  16.
i . 143-145

May  5  ]

MIZPEH.  KULONIEH.

461

tioned  by  travellers,  in  a  sort  of  grotto.*  At  4.20  Beit  Hanina
bore  N.  45°  E.  and  Lifta  S.  10°  W.

We  reached  the  bottom  at  4.40,  which  is  here  narrow  and
very  stony,  but  planted  with  fine  vineyards  and  orchards  of  fig
and  olive  trees.  This  valley  has  two  main  heads  ;  one  coming
from  the  plain  around  el- Jib,  down  which  passes  a  difierent  road
to  Jerusalem;  and  the  other  from  near  er-Ram.  They  unite
just  below  Beit  Hanina  which  stands  on  the  ridge  between,  and
gives  its  name  to  the  Wady  below,  as  it  passes  off  towards  the
southwest.*  We  crossed  the  bottom  very  obliquely,  having  over
us  on  the  right  a  little  village  with  green  gardens  around  it ;  and
began  immediately  to  ascend  by  a  smaU  branch  Wady  on  the
opposite  side.  After  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  we  left  its  bed,  and
passed  up  the  very  rocky  slope  to  the  tombs  of  the  Judges  and
head  of  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  This  point  we  reached  at
5.05  ;  and  came  in  another  half  hour  to  the  Damascus  gate.
Here  we  found  a  quarantine  guard  stationed,  to  watch  against
the  entrance  of  persons  coming  from  Yafa,  where  the  plague  was
now  raging.  In  Jerusalem  itself  no  new  cases  had  occurred  ;
and  we  hoped  the  alarm  was  over.

One  of  the  two  Mukariyeh  who  accompanied  us  on  this  ex-
cursion, was  from  Kfdonieh,  a  village  overhanging  the  western
side  of  the  great  valley  below  Lifta,  at  the  point  where  it  is
crossed  by  the  direct  road  from  Jerusalem  to  Ramleh.'  As  we
came  from  Neby  Samwil,  he  gave  us  the  following  account.  The
village  of  Kulonieh  belongs  to  Omar  Eflfendi,*  to  whom  it  pays
110  Mids  of  grain  annually.  The  tax  to  the  government  con-
sists of  one  piastre  for  every  ewe  and  she  goat,  ten  piastres  for
every  ass,  twenty  for  every  horse  and  mule,  thirty  for  every  camel,
and  seventy-five  on  every  ox  ;  one  piastre  for  every  olive  tree,
and  thirty-five  on  each  feddan  of  fig  trees  or  vineyards.  The
Firdeh  or  capitation-tax  the  preceding  year  was  sixty-nine  pias-
tres. As  fast  as  men  are  taken  away  for  soldiers,  or  die,  the
Firdeh  is  divided  among  the  remainder ;  so  that  the  government
takes  care  to  lose  nothing.  Our  attendant  had  been  taken  as  a
soldier ;  but  proved  unfit  and  was  therefore  released.  Yet  he
had  to  pay  thirty  dollars  to  procure  a  man  to  serve  in  his  place.

'  Most  distinctly  by  Doubdan,  p.  114.  a  diflferent  place  ;  see  further  on,  under

Also  by  Quaresmius,  II.  p.  728.    Von  May  18th.

Troilo,  p.  291.    Pococke  II.  p.  48.  fol.  '  Kulonieh  is  an  hour  and  a  half  from

'  For  the  lower  part  of  this  valley,  see  Jerusalem.    From  the  convent  of  St.  John

under  May  17th.    Ecclesiastical  tradition  ('Ain  Karim),  it  bears  N.  10°  E.    The  part

regards  it  as  the  valley  of  Elah  (Terebinth),  of  the  great  valley  between,  is  broad  and

in  which  David  slew  Goliah,  1  Sam.  17,  planted  with  trees.  Prokesch  Reise,  p.  120.

2  eq.  Hence  travellers  usually  give  it  the  — See  more  in  Vol.  III.  Sect.  Ill,  penult,
name  of  the  Terebinth  valley.    But  the       *  Apparently  the  same  personage  who

scene  of  that  battle  was  unquestionably  in  figures  in  Richardson,  Vol.  II.  p.  239  sq.
Vol.  1—39*  ii.  145,  146

462

EXCtmSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sbc.  IX.

To  raise  this  smn  he  sold  an  ox  and  several  sheep  ;  and  after
they  were  sold,  had  to  pay  taxes  upon  the  proceeds.

The  price  of  our  horses  and  mules  on  this  and  other  excur-
sions was  fifteen  or  sixteen  piastres  a  day  for  each  animal ;  or  if
at  any  time  we  chose  to  lie  by,  the  half  of  this  price  only  was  to
be  paid  for  every  such  day  of  rest.  With  the  keeping  of  the
animals  or  attendants,  we  had  no  concern  ;  nor  was  any  thing
extra  paid  for  the  men.  The  horses  we  had  now  and  afterwards,
were  slender  and  active,  and  also  exceedingly  hardy.  They  were
fed  usually  only  at  night ;  commonly  on  barley  or  other  grain,
with  straw  ;  and  occasionally  when  there  was  a  scanty  herbage
around  the  tent,  they  were  suffered  to  crop  it.  Their  gait  is  a
fast  walk  ;  never  a  trot ;  for  upon  the  mountains  the  state  of  the
roads  renders  this  for  the  most  part  impossible.  They  are  sure-
footed, and  exceedingly  sagacious  in  picking  their  way  among  the
rocks  ;  and  we  found  little  difference  in  this  respect  between
horses  and  mules.  These  remarks  apply  of  course  only  to  horses
for  hire  ;  and  not  to  the  sleek  and  well-fed  animals  (usually
mares)  of  the  Sheikhs  and  wealthy  individuals  ;  which  with  equal
hardiness,  exhibit  a  wonderful  degree  of  activity  and  fleetness.

The  caparison  of  the  animals  for  hire  is  also  not  very  splendid.
Arab  riding  saddles  with  stirrups  are  sometimes  given  ;  but  they
are  usually  narrow  and  hard ;  so  that  we  at  last  came  to  prefer
the  common  huge  pack-saddles.  These  are  very  long  and  broad,
stuffed  with  a  large  mass  of  straw  ;  and  cover  almost  the  whole
of  the  poor  animal,  from  whose  back  they  are  seldom  removed.
"We  had  our  own  stirrups  ;  and  usually  were  able  (though  not
always)  to  muster  a  bridle  for  each  of  ourselves  ;  while  our  ser-
vants were  quite  contented,  if  they  made  out  to  obtain  a  halter.

Our  rate  of  travel  with  horses  and  mules  appears  to  have
been  on  the  average  very  nearly  three  Roman  rmles  the  hour  ;
which  is  equivalent  to  2.  4  geographical  miles  of  60  to  the  degree,
or  2.  78  (nearest  2f )  English  miles. '  This  wovdd  apply,  I  think,
very  accurately,  during  our  present  excursion,  to  the  distance
passed  over  between  Beitin  and  el-Jib.  But  on  the  other  hand,
between  'Anata  and  Tainbeh,  where  we  had  to  cross  several  very
deep  and  rugged  valleys,  and  found  the  whole  road  rough,  a  con-
siderable allowance  must  be  made  from  this  average.  On  the
plains  again,  where  the  roads  were  level  and  smooth,  the  rate  of
travel  naturally  rose  somewhat  above  the  average.

This  excursion  was  to  us  deeply  interesting,  and  we  returned

'  The  Roman  mile  is  usually  reckoned  at  75  to  the  degree.    See  more  in  Note
Vn,  end  of  the  volume,
ii.  14  -148

S*i  EX.]

K£STJLTS.

from  h  highly  grstified.  It  had  led  us  through  scenes  associated
■mjA  the  names  and  historic  incidents  and  deeds  of  Abraham  and
jMob^  of  Samuel  and  Sard,  of  Jonathan  and  David  and  Solo-
■lon ;  and  we  had  been  able  to  trace  out  the  places  -where  they
bad  Kred  and  acted,  and  to  tread  almost  in  their  very  footsteps.
Trae,  in  Jerusalem  itself  the  associationa  of  this  kind  are  still
more  nnmeioos  and  sacred  ;  but  there  they  are  so  blended  toge-
tiier,  as  to  become  in  a  measure  indistinct  and  less  impressive  ;
while  here  in  the  ooontiy,  they  stand  forth  before  the  s<5ul  in  aU
their  original  fresbness  and  individuaKty.  It  was  Hte  commun-
ing with  these  holy  naen  themselves,  to  visit  the  places  where  their
fact  had  trod,  and  where  many  of  them  had  held  converse  with
Ae  Moot  High  I  hope  that  in  this  respect  the  visit  was  not
vithoitt  its  proper  influence  upon  our  own  minds  ;  at  any  rate,
it  served  to  give  us  a  deeper  impression  of  the  reality  and  vivid-
Bcaa  of  the  Bible  history,  and  to  confirm  our  confidence  in  the
tiuth  and  power  of  the  sacred  volume.

The  region  through  which  we  passed  on  the  first  day,  as  I
l^Tc  already  remarked,  was  that  described  by  the  prophet  Isaiah
as  the  scene  of  Sennecharib's  approach  to  Jerusalem.'  This
approach  is  portrayed  in  the  most  vivid  colours  ;  indeed,  the
whole  deacnptioa  is  the  highly  wrought  poetic  expression  of  a
fmpbetic  vinoiL  Every  thing  Hves  and  moves  :  the  various
towns  upon  the  conqueror's  route,  tremble  and  cry  aloud  and  flee
away  in  tem^r.  AU  this  is  probably  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of
a  divine  threat  or  prophetic  warning  :  for  although  Sennecharib
at  a  later  period  actually  invaded  Juiaa,  yet  he  himself  did  not
come  against  Jerusalem ;  but  sent  Babshakeh  thither  from  La-
diisb  with  an  army.*  The  route  too  which  the  prophet  describes,
can  never  have  been  a  common  way  of  approach  to  Jerusalem.
It  presupposes,  that  the  monarch  and  his  army,  instead  of  keep-
ing along  the  great  feasible  northern  road  to  the  city,  turned  ofT
at  or  near  Bethel  towards  Ai,  situated  doubtless  in  the  vicinity
rf  the  present  Deir  Duwan ;  fi'om  which  point  to  Jerusalem  by
Micbmash  and  Anathoth,  they  would  have  to  cross  not  less  than
three  very  deep  and  difficult  valleys.

However  this  may  be,  the  route  itself  is  very  distinctly  traced,
and  we  were  able  in  a  great  measure  to  foUow  it  out.  Of  the
probable  site  of  Ai,  I  have  already  spoken ;  we  ourselves  visited
Mirbmash,  Geba,  Kamah,  and  Anathoth  :  and  Gibeah  of  Saul
was  almost  ever  in  sight.  Of  the  other  places  mentioned,  no
farther  trace  remain^.  Migron  must  have  been  situated  some-
where between  Deir  Duwan  and  Michmash  ;  and  Gallim  and
Laish.  Madmenah  and  G^him,  were  probably  ftirther  south  and

'  Is.  c  3«.  37.    2  K  c  13.  19.

D.  148, 149

464

EXCUBSION  TO  BETHEL,  ETC.

[Sec  IX.

nearer  to  Anathoth.*  Arrived  at  Nob,  the  Assyrian  makes  a
halt ;  and  "  shakes  his  hand  against  the  monnt  of  the  daughter
of  Zion."  This  language  implies  that  the  holy  city  was  in  sight
from  Xob  ;  which  therefore  must  have  been  situated  somewhere
upon  the  ridge  of  the  mount  of  Olives,  northeast  of  the  city.*
We  sought  now  and  afterwards  all  along  this  ridge,  from  the
Damascus  road  to  the  summit  opposite  the  city,  for  some  traces
of  an  ancient  site  which  might  be  regarded  as  the  place  of  Nob ;
but  without  the  sHghtest  success.  This  was  probably  the  city
of  the  priests  destroyed  by  Saul ;  for  although  there  appears  to
have  been  another  Nob  near  the  plain  towards  Lydda,  yet  the
ark  of  Grod  after  its  return  from  the  Philistines  in  the  days  of
Samuel,  seems  never  again  to  have  departed  from  the  moun-
tains.^

As  one  result  of  this  excursion,  as  well  as  of  our  subsequent
researches,  the  remark  presents  itself,  that  while  very  many  of
the  ancient  Hebrew  names  have  in  this  way  perished,  there  exists
at  the  present  day  a  class  of  names,  which,  although  not  occur-
ring in  the  Scriptures,  are  nevertheless  probably  of  Hebrew
origin,  and  have  come  down  from  the  earliest  times.  Thus,  I
apprehend  that  all  (or  nearly  all)  those  appellations  in  which
the  Arabic  word  Beit  appears  as  a  component  part,  are  only  the
successors  of  ancient  Hebrew  names  with  Beth  (house),  whether
found  in  the  Scriptures  or  not.  Many  of  these  indeed  do  thus
occur,  as  Bethlehem,  Bethel,  Beth-horon,  and  the  Uke  ;  but  a
still  larger  number  exist  at  the  present  day,  of  which  the  Bible
makes  no  mention.  Such  are  Beit  Hanina,  Beit  Iksa,  Beit
Unia,*  Beit  Jala,  which  have  been  already  noticed,  and  very
many  others.  The  same  is  true  of  names  like  el-Hismeh,  TeU
'Asur,  'Atara,  and  others  similar ;  which  although  apparently  of
Hebrew  origin,  are  not  distinctly  found  in  connection  with  the
district  in  which  they  now  exist.'

'  All  these  places  obviouslv  lay  within
this  tract,  and  almost  within  sight  of  each
other.  It  is  contrary  to  aU  the  curum-
stances  of  the  case,  to  connect  this  Laish
with  that  on  the  northern  border  of  Pales-
tine ;  Judges  18,  7.  29.  It  more  proba-
bly had  some  relation  to  the  person  of  that
name,  a  native  of  GaUim  ;  1  Sam.  2.5,  44.

'  So  Jerome  professedly  from  Hebrew
tradition :  "  Stans  in  oppidnlo  Nob  et  pro-
cul  urbem  conspiciens  Jerusalem  ; "  Comm.
in  Esa.  x.  32.  Nob  is  also  mentioned  as
one  of  the  cities  of  Benjamin  near  to  Ana-
thoth,  Neh.  11,  32.

»  1  Sam.  c  6,  c.  21,  1-9.  32,  9-19.
Jerome  mentions  a  Nobe  not  far  from
Lydda ;  probably  the  Beit  Nflba  of  the
crusaders  and  of  the  present  day ;  see  un-
ii  150,  151

der  Jane  9th.  Hieron.  Ep.  86,  ad  Eu-
stoch.  Epitaph.  Panlse,  p.  673.

*  This  name  might  be  snpposed  to  cor-
respond to  the  Hebrew  BethoUa  ;  but  the
Bible  mentions  no  such  place  in  this  re-
gion.   See  Reland  PaL  pp.  658,  639.

'  Does  Tell  'Asur  peiliaps  correspond  to
the  Azor  of  Benjamin,  which  is  mentioned
with  Kamah  and  Anathoth  .'  Neh.  1 1,  33.
If  so  the  Hebrew  P!  has  passed  over  into
the  Arabic  'Ain,  as  in  Beit  *Ur  for  Beth-
horon.  We  saw  Tell  'Asur  from  el-'Alya,
el-Bireh,  and  JLfna. — 'Atara  is  the  Heb.
Ataroth,  bnt  seems  hardly  to  correspond
to  the  place  so  called  on  the  border  of  Ephra-
im,  JosL  16,  5.  7.  See  more  under  May
15,  and  June  13.

Sec.  IX.]

BESXJLTS,

465

That  such  should  be  the  general  fact,  is  not  surprising  ;  al-
though so  far  as  I  know,  it  has  never  been  distinctly  brought
into  notice.  The  Bible  does  not  claim  to  be  a  geographical  work,
nor  to  enumerate  all  the  towns  and  villages  of  the  Promised  Land.
Indeed,  in  most  of  the  recorded  Ksts  of  Hebrew  cities,  we  find
the  express  addition  of  "  their  TdUages,"  and  sometimes  of  "  their
towns  and  villages,"  of  which  no  names  are  given. '  Among  these
unknown  names,  were  doubtless  many  of  those  which  have  sur-
vived to  our  time.

Another  trait  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  topography  is  the  repeated
occurrence  of  the  same  name.  Thus  there  were  several  Eamahs
and  Gibeahs,  two  Carmels,  two  Mizpehs,  two  Arders,  two  Socohs,
and  many  similar  instances.  The  same  trait  appears  also  in  res-
pect to  the  Arabic  names  of  the  present  day.  "We  found  not
less  than  three  Jeba's,  three  or  four  Taiyibehs,  two  el-Birehs,
two  'Ataras,  two  Shuweikehs  (Socoh),  two  Rafats,  and  many
other  like  examples.

'  So  Josh.  15,  32.  36.  41.  47.  etc  18,  24.  28.  19,  7.  8.  16.  23.  etc.  1  Chr.  8.
12.  Xeh.  11,  25-31.

iL  151

SECTIOJf  X.

EXCURSION  TO  ' AIS  JIDT,  THE  DEAD  SEA,  JORDAN,  ETC.

We  remained  in  Jerasalem  after  oxir  return,  only  so  long  as
was  necessary  to  make  preparations  for  another  jonmey.  Our
former  excursion  liad  led  us  along  the  eastern  slope  of  the  moun-
tains on  the  north  of  the  Holy  City ;  and  we  now  proposed  to
explore  the  continuation  of  the  same  tract  on  the  south,  com-
prising the  district  lying  between  the  Hebron  road  and  the  Dead
Sea,  as  far  south  at  least  as  to  the  place  called  'Ain  Jidy  ;  and
then  along  the  western  shore  of  that  sea  to  the  Jordan.  A  pro-
minent object  in  my  own  mind,  was  to  find  (if  possible)  some-
where upon  or  near  the  coast  two  high  points,  from  which  we
might  obtain  a  view  of  the  whole  extent  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and
make  observations  in  order  to  determine  its  length  and  breadth.
In  this,  however,  we  were  only  partially  successful ;  the  nature
of  the  country  and  the  basin  of  the  sea  turning  out  to  be  very
different  from  what  I  expected.  *

The  districts  we  were  now  about  to  visit,  are  usually  regarded
as  among  the  most  insecure  in  Palestine.  The  desert  along  the
sea  is  inhabited,  if  at  all,  only  by  a  few  Bedawin,  of  whom  we
heard  the  worst  reports  as  thieves  and  robbers.  The  tract  was
said  now  also  to  be  full  of  deserters  and  outlaws,  who  lay  here
concealed,  and  subsisted  by  thieving  and  robbery  ;  as  was  like-
wise the  case  on  the  north  of  Jerusalem.'  Whether  this  repu-
tation of  the  country  was  well  founded  or  not,  I  wUl  not  under-
take to  decide  ;  but  certainly  the  district  had  a  right  to  it  by
ancient  prescription  ;  for  it  is  the  very  same  region  into  which
David  with  his  band  of  six  hundred  adventurers  withdrew  from
the  pursuit  of  Saul,  and  dwelt  long  in  the  caves  and  lurking-
places.^    The  plain  of  the  Jordan  too,  around  Jericho,  was  con-

•  See  under  Jeba'  and  Taiyibeh,  pp.  440,       '  1  Sam.  23,  13-26.  c.  24.
446.

iL  152, 153

Sec.  X."1

PREPABATIONS.

467

sidered  as  very  unsafe  ;  partly  because  of  the  thievish  character
of  the  inhabitants,  and  partly  as  being  exposed  to  excursions  from
the  lawless  Arabs  of  the  eastern  mountains.  Three  weeks  before
this  time,  some  of  our  friends  had  accompanied  the  annual  cara-
van of  pilgrims  to  the  J ordan  ;  and  had  there  spoken  with  several
merchants  from  Damascus,  who  were  going  to  es-Salt  and  Kerak.
The  very  next  day,  these  merchants  were  shot  dead  and  their
goods  plundered.

As  our  intended  journey  became  known,  our  ears  were  filled
with  stories  of  this  kind ;  and  we  were  urged  to  take  with  us  a
guard  of  soldiers  from  the  governor  of  Jerusalem.  For  this  we
had  no  sort  of  inchnation ;  partly  because  we  must  then  have
been  in  a  measure  under  their  control,  and  not  they  under  ours  ;
and  partly  because,  with  such  a  guard,  we  could  only  expect  to
excite  the  ill  will  and  perhaps  the  hostility  of  the  Arabs  we  might
fall  in  with  ;  and  thus  frustrate  in  a  degree  the  very  object  of
our  journey.  Still,  as  it  was  not  prudent  to  travel  without  some
escort,  we  thought  it  more  advisable  to  obtain  the  services  of  the
supposed  robbers  themselves,  or  of  persons  on  good  terms  with
them,  who  might  at  the  same  time  act  both  as  guards  and  guides.
Sheikh  Mustafa,  the  head  of  a  wandering  tribe  of  half  Derwishes
who  frequent  the  vicinity  of  Jericho,  was  spoken  of;  but  was
not  then  to  be  found  at  Jerusalem.  Another  person  was  then
recommended,  who  had  been  a  leader  in  the  rebellion  of  1834  ;  a
price  was  set  upon  his  head,  and  he  had  been  ever  since  an  out-
law, but  had  never  been  taken.  He  was  known  to  be  often  in
J  erusalem,  and  was  on  good  terms  wi  ca  the  convent  in  Bethle-
hem. Indeed,  a  few  days  before,  he  had  been  guide  and  escort  to
a  party  of  our  friends,  including  several  ladies,  during  an  excur-
sion from  that  convent  to  several  places  in  the  vicinity  of  Bethle-
hem. As  he  was  of  course  on  good  terms  with  all  the  other  out-
laws and  Arabs,  and  could  thus  protect  us  from  any  attack,  we
commissioned  our  Arab-Greek  friend  and  agent  Abu  Selameh,
to  find  him  out  and  engage  him.  The  latter  applied  to  the  Greek
convent  at  Bethlehem,  which  readily  undertook  the  matter  ;  but
they  afterwards  sent  word,  that  as  the  country  was  now  very
unsafe,  it  would  be  prudent  to  take  a  larger  escort,  and  not  trust
ourselves  to  the  care  of  a  single  person.  They  accordingly  sent
to  us  the  Sheikh  of  the  Ta'amirah,  a  tribe  of  Arabs  living  south-
east of  Bethlehem  towards  the  Dead  Sea,  and  noted  as  being
among  the  foremost  on  occasions  of  rebellion  and  robbery.  He
was  a  noble-looking  man,  and  we  at  once  made  a  bargain  with
him,  that  he  should  accompany  us  with  three  of  his  men.  We
were  to  pay  him  ten  piastres  a  day  for  himself,  and  five  or  six
piastres  for  each  of  his  attendants.  He  fulfilled  his  contract
honourably ;  and  we  had  no  reason  to  repent  of  our  choice.

ii.  153, 154

468

EXCURSION  TO  'aIX  JIDT.

[Sec.  X.

The  Christian  Sabbath  passed  away  in  quiet  enjoyment  ;  and
Monday  was  occupied  in  writing  out  our  journals  and  various
other  preparations.  We  hoped  for  a  time  that  Mr  "Whiting  would
have  accompanied  us  ;  but  it  was  not  convenient  for  him  ;  so
that  the  party  was  limited  to  ourselves,  with  our  two  servants.
We  engaged  six  horses,  including  one  for  the  tent  and  luggage ;
with  the  condition  that  they  should  be  accompanied  by  three
men,  in  order  to  render  our  party  as  large  as  possible.  At  even-
ing our  Sheikh  came  and  slept  in  the  house ;  having  appointed
his  men  to  join  us  at  Bethlehem.

Tuesday,  May  8th.  The  horses  were  brought  between  6  and
7  o'clock  ;  but  with  only  two  men  and  without  bridles.  We  de-
murred to  this  state  of  things  ;  and  a  difficulty  arising,  they  went
off  again,  leaving  their  earnest-money  in  our  hands.  While  we
were  endeavouring  to  procure  other  horses,  Abu  Selameh  came
in,  and  immediately  set  off  after  the  men  to  bring  them  back  ;
as  the  owner  of  the  horses  seemed  to  be  his  particular  friend.
In  this  he  succeeded,  as  he  said  ;  the  men  and  the  horses  came
back,  and  a  brother  of  the  owner  with  them.  But  we  found  that
our  Arab  friend  had  gone  a  Httle  beyond  his  instructions  in  the
terms  of  conciliation  ;  we  were  indeed  to  have  the  bridles,  but  the
owner  was  to  send  only  the  two  men  ;  the  third  was  to  be  fur-
nished by  our  Sheikh  from  his  tribe,  and  we  were  to  pay  for  him.
We  thought  it  best  on  the  whole  to  submit  to  this  imposition,
rather  than  to  lose  more  time  ;  and  accordingly  got  all  things  in
readiness  to  mount.  We  took  our  tent  as  before  ;  but  carried
all  our  bedding  and  blankets  upon  our  own  saddles.  Our  pro-
visions and  utensils  were  distributed  in  small  sacks  ;  which  were
then  deposited  in  capacious  saddle-bags,  slung  across  the  horses
of  our  servants.

But  another  delay  now  arose  ;  the  brother  of  the  owner  and
the  muleteers  all  affirming,  that  in  order  to  visit  Jericho,  where
there  is  a  small  garrison,  it  was  necessary  to  have  a  Tezkirah
from  the  governor.  We  doubted  the  fact,  and  afterwards  found
that  we  were  right ;  yet  in  order  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  we  sent
Komeh  with  our  Firman  to  the  governor,  accompanied  by  the
owner's  brother,  in  order  to  obtain  the  desired  paper.  This  lat-
ter was  a  man  of  enterprise  and  daring  ;  some  ten  years  before,
he  had  combined  with  a  few  others  and  suddenly  got  possession
of  the  citadel,  turning  out  the  garrison  and  afterwards  closing
the  gates  of  the  city  for  a  time  against  the  Turkish  government.
As  our  messenger  he  was  now  courteously  received  by  the  gover-
nor ;  and  it  so  happened  that  the  Aga  in  command  at  Jericho
was  present.  The  governor  immediately  gave  him  verbal  orders
to  receive  us  at  Jericho,  and  attend  to  all  our  wants  ;  and  also

ii.  154-156  ♦

Mat  8  ]

WAT  TO  BETHLEHEM.

469

to  send  with  ns  an  escort  of  soldiers  to  the  Jordan.  This  latter
kindness  we  afterwards  took  care  to  avoid.

All  these  matters  being  at  length  arranged,  we  left  the  Yafa
gate  at  ten  minutes  before  10  o'clock,  on  our  way  to  Bethlehem,
across  the  valley  of  Hinnom  and  along  the  plain  of  Eephaim,  by
the  same  route  by  which  we  had  first  approached  Jerusalem.^
At  10  o'clock  we  were  opposite  to  Wady  el-"Werd,  leading  out
between  high  hills  from  the  southwest  comer  of  the  plain.  It
here  runs  W.  by  S.  and  is  joined  further  down  by  the  Wady
Ahmed.  In  this  valley,  in  sight  of  our  road,  lies  the  village  of
Beit  Sufafa  ;  and  further  off  in  the  same  direction,  esh-Sherafat,
on  the  southern  lull.  Both  of  these  now  bore  west.  On  the
northern  lull,  overagainst  the  latter  place,  we  could  see  the  vil-
lage el-Mahhah,  bearing  X.  70^  W.  Further  down  the  valley,
out  of  sight,  lies  'Ain  Yalo,^  a  fountain,  from  which  water  is  of-
ten brought  to  Jenisalem.  At  10.45  Sherafat  bore  N.  80°  W.
and  Malihah  N.  55^  W.'  When  we  reached  the  gate  leading
to  the  Greek  convent  Mar  Elyas,  ten  minutes  later,  these  vil-
lages were  already  shut  out  from  view  by  intervening  hills.

We  had  lingered  on  the  wav,  so  that  we  were  now  as  long  in
passing  over  this  interval  to  the  convent  with  horses,  as  we  for-
merly had  been  with  camels.  It  is  usually  reckoned  one  hour.
The  convent  lies  in  the  fields  at  some  distance  from  the  road,  on
the  verge  of  the  ridge,  having  a  wide  prospect  across  the  deep
valleys  on  the  south.*

From  this  point  two  paths  lead  to  Bethlehem  ;  one  direct,
descending  and  crossing  the  deep  valley  on  the  south ;  the  other
passing  more  to  the  right  around  the  head  of  the  valley,  and  so
bv  Rachel's  tomb.  We  took  the  latter,  now  as  before ;  and  at
11.10  Mar  Elyas  behind  us  bore  N.  44=  E.  and  Beit  Jala  S.  60=
W. — At  11.20  there  was  a  little  ruin  on  the  right,  called  el-
Khamis.^  We  came  to  Rachel's  tomb  in  five  minutes  more,
which  has  already  been  described.'  The  MusHms  keep  the  tomb
in  order  ;  and  those  of  Bethlehem  were  formerly  accustomed  to
bury  around  it.  The  whole  tract  before  us  was  full  of  olive
groves,  especially  in  Wady  Ahmed  and  on  the  slopes  of  Beit  Jala,
and  also  in  the  valleys  on  the  east  of  the  low  swell  or  water-shed ;
while  towards  Bethlehem  were  likewise  many  orchards  of  fig
trees.

'  See  above,  p.  219.  ings  :  Jerusalem  N.  25°  E.    Nebv  Samwil

'  Seep.  326.  Forthisandotherfomitains  X.iW.  Bethlehem  S.  15'  W.  "  Convait
in  Wadv  el-Werd,  see  YoL  m.  See.  VL      of  Bethlehem  S.  10''  W.    Beit  Sahur  S.

'  Prokesch  passed  from  Beit  Suflfa  to    50'  E.  Frank  monntain  S.  16'  E.
Malihah  in  half  an  hoxir ;  and  thence  to       '  See  more  in  Vol.  HL  Sec.  VI.
the  village  of  St  John  ('Ain  Karim  1  in  three       •  See  above,  p.  218. — From  Rachel's
qaarters  of  an  honr.    Keise.  pp.  118,  119.    tomb  Bethlehem  bears  S.  5=  E.  distant  25

*  From  the  well  at  the  gate  leading  to  minutes  :  and  Beit  Jala  S.  85'  W.  distant
the  convent,  we  took  the  following  bear-    about £0  minutes.

ToL.  L — 10  ii.  156. 157

470

EXCURSION  TO  'aIN  JIDT.

[Sec.  X.

Passing  on  towards  BetUeliem,  we  met  a  mule  laden  with
water,  said  to  be  from  Bethlehem  for  the  Armenian  convent  in
J erusalem.  "We  took  this  at  first  as  a  confirmation  of  the  excel-
lence of  the  water  longed  for  by  David  but  we  were  afterwards
able  to  find  no  well  in  Bethlehem,  and  especially  none  "  by  the
gate,"  except  one  connected  with  the  aqueduct  on  the  south.
That  to  which  the  monks  give  the  name  of  the  '  "Well  of  David,'
is  about  half  or  three  quarters  of  a  mile  N.  by  E.  of  Bethlehem,
beyond  the  deep  valley  which  the  village  overlooks  ;  it  is  merely
a  deep  and  wide  cistern  or  cavern  now  dry,  with  three  or  four
narrow  openings  cut  in  the  rock.'^

At  11.35  we  came  upon  the  aqueduct  from  Solomon's  pools ;
which  having  wound  far  to  the  east  around  the  ridge  on  which
Bethlehem  and  the  convent  stand,  curves  here  again  to  the  west
in  order  to  preserve  its  level.  It  had  lately  been  repaired,  and
the  water  was  now  flowing  in  it  at  this  point.  Crossing  the  low
water-shed,  we  now  ascended  gradually  towards  Bethlehem  around
the  broad  head  of  a  valley  running  northeast  to  join  that  under
Mar  Elyas.  The  town  hes  on  the  E.  and  N.  E.  slope  of  a  long
ridge  ;  another  deep  valley,  Wady  Ta'amirah,  being  on  the  south
side,  which  passes  down  north  of  the  Frank  mountain  towards
the  Dead  Sea,  receiving  the  valley  under  Mar  Elyas  not  far  be-
low.' Towards  the  west  the  hill  is  higher  than  the  village,  and
then  sinks  down  very  gradually  towards  Wady  Almaed.

"We  reached  Bethlehem  at  ten  minutes  before  noon,  in  just
two  hours  from  Jerusalem.  As  we  entered  the  gate,  we  were
met  by  a  procession  or  party  of  armed  Bedawin  on  horseback,
passing  through  the  town  apparently  towards  Jenisalem.  Some
had  fireanns,  and  the  rest  swords  and  long  spears.  They  seemed
much  disposed  to  be  on  good  terms  with  us ;  saluted  us  courte-
ously ;  and  some  of  them  in  passing  reached  us  their  right  hand.
We  hardly  knew  what  to  make  of  all  this  ;  and  our  Sheikh  was
too  much  of  a  diplomatist  to  inform  us  at  the  time  ;  but  we  af-
terwards found  that  they  belonged  to  a  larger  party  of  the  Tiya-
hah  and  Jehalin,  who  were  on  their  way  to  cross  the  Jordan,  on
a  marauding  expedition  against  their  enemies,  under  the  sanc-
tion of  Sheikh  Sa'id  governor  of  Gaza.  The  result  we  learned
at  a  later  period  from  the  Jehalin.*

We  proceeded  directly  through  the  town,  and  stopped  for
fifteen  minutes  on  the  level  part  of  the  ridge  between  it  and  the
convent.  The  latter  is  some  thirty  or  forty  rods  distant  from  the  vil-
lage  towards  the  east,  and  overlooks  the  deep  valley  on  the  north.

•  2  Sam.  23,  15-17.  1  Chr.  11,  17-19.  speaks  of  it  expressly  as  a  cistema;  c  9.

'  Quaresmius  II.  p.  614.    Maundrell,  p.  184.
Apr.  1.  Turner's  Tour  in  the  Levant,  II.  p.       '  See  more  uoder  May  llth.
270.    Monro  I.  pp.  251,  252.— Brocardua       ♦  See  under  May  26th.
ii.  158,  159

May  8.]

BETHLEHEM.

471

It  is  occupied  by  the  Greeks,  Latins,  and  Armenians  ;  and  encloses
the  church  built  by  Helena  over  the  aUedged  cave  of  the  Nati-
^^it\.  The  monks  had  now  shut  themselves  up  in  quarantine  on
account  of  the  plague  ;  so  that  we  did  not  enter  the  convent.
We  were  expecting  at  the  time  to  visit  Bethlehem  again,  and
examine  it  more  at  leisure ;  but  this  hope  was  afterwards  frus-
trated ;  and  I  am  therefore  able  to  add  Kttle  to  the  stock  of
information  already  known.'

No  one  has  ever  doubted,  I  beheve,  that  the  present  Beit  Lahm,
'  House  of  Flesh,'  of  the  Arabs,  is  identical  ^vith  the  ancient  Beth-
lehem, 'House  of  Bread,'  of  the  Jews;  and  it  is  therefore  not
necessary  here  to  dwell  upon  the  proofs.*  Not  only  does  the
name  coincide  ;  but  the  present  distance  of  two  hours  from  Je-
riisalem  corresponds  very  exactly  to  the  six  Roman  miles  of  an-
tiquity. Tradition  moreover  has  never  lost  sight  of  Bethlehem  ;
and  in  almost  every  century  since  the  time  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, it  has  been  visited  and  mentioned  by  writers  and  travel-
lers.' Helena  built  here  a  church,  which  appears  to  have  been
the  same  that  still  exists.^  Jerome  afterwards  took  up  his  resi-
dence in  the  convent,  which  early  sprung  up  around  it ;  and  the
Roman  matron  Paula  came  and  erected  other  convents,  and  spent
here  the  remainder  of  her  days.'  As  to  the  value  of  the  early
tradition,  which  fixes  the  birthplace  of  the  Saviour  in  a  cavern
at  some  distance  from  the  village,  I  have  already  expressed  a
judgment.'  Although  in  this  respect  I  felt  no  desire  to  visit  the
spot  ;  yet  it  would  have  been  gratifying  to  have  seen  it,  as  the  place
where  Jerome  Kved  and  prepared  his  version  of  the  Bible  and  so
many  other  works.    His  cell  or  cave  is  still  professedly  shown.

The  crusaders,  on  their  approach  to  Jerusalem,  first  took
possession  of  Bethlehem,  at  the  entreaty  of  its  Christian  inhabi-
tants. In  A.  D.  1110,  king  Baldwin  I  erected  it  into  an  epis-
copal see,  a  dignity  it  had  never  before  enjoyed  ;  but  although
this  was  confirmed  by  pope  Pascal  II,  and  the  title  long  retained
in  the  Romish  church,  yet  the  actual  possession  of  the  see  appears

'  From  this  point,  between  the  town  and
conv  ent,  vre  took  the  following  bearings  :
Frank  Mountain  S.  27°  E.  Beit  Ta'mar,
the  nllanje  of  the  Ta'amirah,  S.  40'  E.
Beit  S.'.hur  S.  55°  E.  Deir  Ibn  'Obeid
not  far  from  Mur  S  iba,  S.  80°  E.  This
seems  to  be  the  Der-Benalbede  of  Pococke,
on  the  way  to  M.ir  Saba ;  II.  i.  p.  34.

'  They  may  be  seen  in  Reland  Palaest.  p.
642.  Euseb.  et  Hieron.  Onomast.  art.
Bihleem.

'  By  .lustin  Martyr  in  the  second  centu-
ry; bv  Origen  in  the  third:  and  then  by
Eusebius,  Jerome,  the  Bourdeaux  pilgrim,
and  so  on  by  hundreds  to  the  present  day.

For  the  general  character  of  this  tradition,
see  above,  p.  416  sq.

*  One  of  the  churches,  that  of  St.  Cath-
arine, is  supposed  by  Quaresmius  to  have
been  built  by  Paula ;  but  he  assigns  no  bet-
ter reason  than  mere  conjecture;  II.  pp.
675,  676.  He  is  followed  by  some  later
writers.  Early  history,  so  far  as  I  know,
makes  no  mention  of  any  such  fact

'  See  above,  p.  .378.

*  See  above,  p.  417.

'  The  monks  have  fixed  the  spot,  where
the  angels  appeared  to  the  shepherds,  in  a
valley  about  half  an  hour  eastward  from
Bethlehem.

iL  159.  160

472

EXCTTBSION"  TO  'aIK  JIDT,

[Sec.  X,

not  to  hare  been  of  long  continuance.*  In  A.  D.  1244,  Bethle-
hem like  Jerusalem  was  desolated  bv  the  wild  hordes  of  the
Kharismians.'

The  present  inhabitants  of  Bethlehem  are  all  Christians  ;  and
are  rated  at  eight  hundred  taxable  men,  indicating  a  population
of  more  than  three  thousand  souls.  There  was  formerly  a  ilu-
hammedan  quarter  ;  but,  after  the  rebellion  in  1834,  this  was
destroyed  by  order  of  Ibrahim  Pasha.  The  town  has  gates  at
the  entrance  of  some  of  the  streets  ;  the  houses  are  soKdly  built,
though  not  large.  The  many  olive  and  fig  orchards  and  vineyards
round  about,  are  marks  of  industry  and  thrift ;  and  the  adjacent
fields,  though  stony  and  rough,  pri>duce  nevertheless  good  crops
of  grain.  Here  indeed  was  the  scene  of  the  beautiful  narrative
of  Ruth,  gleaning  in  the  fields  of  Boaz  after  his  reapers  ;  and  it
required  no  great  stretch  of  imagination  to  call  up  again  those
transactions  before  our  eyes.^  The  present  inhabitants,  besides
their  agriculture,  employ  themselves  in  carving  beads,  crucifixes,
models  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and  other  similar  articles,  in  olive
wood,  the  fruit  of  the  Dom  pahn,  mother  of  pearl,  and  the  like,
in  the  same  manner  as  the  Christians  of  J erusalem.*  Indeed  the
neatest  and  most  skilfolly  wrought  specimens  of  all  these  little
articles,  come  fi^m  Bethlehem.

The  Bethlehemites  are  a  restless  race,  prone  to  tumult  and
rebellion,  and  formerly  hving  in  frequent  strife  with  their  neigh-
bours of  Jerusalem  and  Hebron.^  In  the  rebellion  of  1834  they
naturally  took  an  active  part ;  and  the  vengeance  of  the  Egyp-
tian government  fell  heavily  upon  them.  The  Muslim  quarter
was  laid  in  ruins  ;  and  aU  the  inhabitants,  Hke  those  of  other
towns  and  villages,  disarmed.  The  manner  in  which  this  disarm-
ing of  the  population  is  carried  into  efiect,  is  highly  illustrative
of  the  character  of  oriental  despotism.  A  town  or  village  is  re-
quired to  surrender,  not  what  arms  they  may  actually  have  ;  for
this  would  hardly  be  eflPectual,  and  many  might  be  concealed ;
but  a  requisition  is  made  upon  them,  and  rigidly  enforced,  to
deliver  up  a  certain  amoimt  of  muskets  and  other  weapons,
whether  they  have  them  in  possession  or  not.  The  consequence
is,  that  the  people  of  a  place  are  often  compelled  to  search  out
and  purchase  arms  elsewhere  at  an  enormous  price,  in  order  thus
to  deliver  them  up  ;  or,  if  unable  to  do  this,  they  are  thrown  into
prison,  and  sometimes  marched  ofi"  as  conscripts.*  In  either  case
the  intentions  of  the  government  are  answered.

'  WiU.  Tyr.  11.  12.    Le  Quien  Oriens  *  See  abore,  p.  428.

Christ.  HI.  p.  1275  »q.    Wilken  Gesch.  der  '  Such  was  the  case  in  Hasselquist's  d»y

Kreuzz.  II.  p.  366.  A.  f>.  1751 :  Reise.  p.  170.    See  too  Ali

'  Wilken  Ge^ch.  der  Kreuzz.  \l.  p.  Bey's  Travels,  VoL  IL  p.  231.

635.  *  See  the  case  of  el-Bireh  above,  p.  45 1  sq.

•  Rath  c.  2-t.
u.  161.  162

Mat  8.]

BETHLEHEM.

473

When  tliis  process  was  going  on  at  Bethlehem  after  the  rehel-
lion,  an  interesting  circumstance  took  place,  which  serves  to
illustrate  an  ancient  custom.  At  that  time,  when  some  of  the
inhabitants  were  already  imprisoned,  and  all  were  in  deep  dis-
tress, Mr  Farran,  then  English  consul  at  Damascus,  was  on  a
visit  to  Jerusalem,  and  had  rode  out  with  Mr  Nicolayson  to  So-
lomon's pools.  On  their  return,  as  they  rose  the  ascent  to  enter
Bethlehem,  hundreds  of  the  people,  male  and  female,  met  them,
imploring  the  consul  to  interfere  in  their  behalf,  and  afford  them
his  protection  ;  and  all  at  once,  by  a  sort  of  simultaneous  move-
ment, "  they  spread  their  garments  in  the  way "  before  the
horses.'  The  consul  w*fe  affected  unto  tears  ;  but  had  of  course
no  power  to  interfere.  This  anecdote  was  related  to  me  by  Mr
Nicolayson  ;  who,  however,  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  any  thing
else  of  the  kind,  during  his  residence  in  Palestine.

Bethlehem  is  celebrated  in  the  Old  Testament  as  the  birthplace
and  city  of  David  ;  and  in  the  New,  as  that  of  David's  greater
son,  the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  What  a  mighty
influence  for  good  has  gone  forth  from  this  little  spot  upon  the
human  race,  both  for  time  and  for  eternity  !  It  is  impossible  to
approach  the  place,  without  a  feeling  of  deep  emotion,  springing
out  of  these  high  and  holy  associations.  The  legends  and  pueril-
ities of  monastic  tradition  may  safely  be  disregarded  ;  it  is
eno\igh  to  know  that  this  is  Bethlehem,  where  Jesus  the  Ke-
deemer  was  born.  Generation  after  generation  has  indeed  since
that  time  passed  away,  and  their  places  now  know  them  no  more.
For  eighteen  hundred  seasons  the  ecrth  has  now  renewed  her
carpet  of  verdure,  and  seen  it  again  decay.  Yet  the  skies  and
the  fields,  the  rocks  and  the  hills,  and  the  valleys  around,  remain
unchanged  ;  and  are  still  the  same,  as  when  the  glory  of  the
Lord  shone  round  about  the  shepherds,  and  the  song  of  a  multi-
tude of  the  heavenly  host  resounded  among  the  hills,  proclaiming
"Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will
toward  men."*

We  were  joined  at  Bethlehem  by  the  remainder  of  our  es-
cort ;  and  left  the  place  five  minutes  past  noon,  for  Solomon's
pools  ;  taking  the  path  which  follows  the  aq[ueduct  around  the
lulls,  considerably  to  the  eastward  of  our  former  route.  Going
down  the  steep  descent  from  the  town,  we  came  after  a  few  rods
to  what  seemed  at  first  to  be  two  wells  ;  but  they  proved  to  be
only  openings  over  the  aqueduct,  which  here  passes  through  a
sort  of  deep  vault  or  reservoir,  from  which  the  water  is  drawn  up
about  twenty  feet.  Many  females  were  drawing  water,  and  bear-
ing it  away  in  skins  upon  their  shoulders.  They  assured  us,
that  there  is  no  well  of  living  water  in  or  near  the  town.

^  Matt.  21,  8.  Mark  11,  8.  Luke  19,  36.       '  Luke  2,  8-14.
Vol.  I.— 40*  u.  162,  163

474

EXCTBSIOX  TO  'AIS  JIBT,

The  "Wady  Ta'amirah,  into  which  we  now  descended,  has  its
head  just  at  tiie  right ;  the  aqueduct  is  carried  around  it.  The
decKrities  are  fall  of  gardens  and  Tinevards  and  fine  oKre  trees.
Ascending  upon  the  other  side,  at  12^0,  Bethlehem  hehind  ua
bore  X.  30°  E.  Ten  minutes  later  we  struck  the  aqueduct  again,
and  followed  rt  now  quite  to  the  pools,  along  and  around  the
eastern  and  southern  sdes  of  a  steep  hfjl,  looking  down  on  the
■oizth  into  the  deep  "Wadv  Urtas,  which  also  runs  towards  the
east.  At  12.50  the  ruined  village  Urtas  was  on  the  declivity
"bdow  u=,  with  a  fine  fountain  and  streamlet;  which  waters  many
gardens  in  the  vaDey.  A  few  minutes  ^igher  up,  the  valley  di-
vides ;  one  branch  comes  in  from  the  S.  S.  W.  which  I  suppoee
to  be  the  continuation  of  "Wady  et-Tuheishimeh  the  other
leads  westward  directly  up  to  the  pools.  Just  at  the  foot  of
these,  it  is  joined  by  another  small  parallel  yaUey  from  the  left
with  an  aquedtict.*  Above  the  fotmtain  at  Urtas  all  these  val-
leys are  comparatively  sterile.

"We  reached  the  pools,  called  by  the  Arabs  el-Burak,  at  ten
minutes  past  1  o'clock.  These  three  huge  reservoirs,  built  of
squared  stones  ai»d  bearing  marks  of  the  highest  antiquity,  lie
one  above  another  in  the  steep  part  of  the  valley,  though  not  in
a  direct  line  ;  and  are  so  situated  that  the  bottom  of  die  one  is
higher  than  the  surface  of  the  next  below,  rising  one  above  ano-
ther towards  the  west.  The  top  of  the  side  waUs  is  not  entirely
level ;  for  the  water-mark  extending  from  the  lower  end  along
the  sides,  strikes  sereial  feet  bdow  the  top  as  it  reaches  the
upper  end.  The  upper  pool  was  by  no  means  fuH,  thotigh  the
idftole  of  the  bottom  was  covered  with  water.  In  the  two  others,
water  stood  only  in  the  lower  part  In  these  the  bottom  is
fimned  by  the  naked  shelving  rock,  which  constitutes  the  ste^
ades  of  the  valley,  leaving  only  a  narrow  channel  through  thd
middle,  and  having  sever^  offeets  or  terraces  along  each  side.
The  inside  walls  and  bottoms  of  all  the  reservoirs,  so  &r  as  visible,
are  covered  with  cement ;  and  the  lower  one  had  been  recently
repaired.  Flights  of  steps  lead  down  in  various  places  into  all
the  pools.

Our  first  business  was  to  measure  the  several  pools  ;  and  the
{bUowing  is  the  result  in  English  feet.

L   LOWEB  POOL

-         .  ,  .  n  i,v  5Em*  end  807  fiwt

Deptk  at  c«t  end  60  feet ;  of  wbkii  C  feet  water.
Direetian  cf  north  ode  N.  45=  W.

a

>  See  abore,  pL  S17.
i.164,  165

■  SeeUd.

1£at  s.]

475

II.    MIDDLE  POOL.

Dijtaoce  above  lover  pool  248  feet.

T      1.       *  ^  T>         JEast  and  330  feet

Length  423  feet.  Breadth  <        end  160  •*

Depth  at  east  end  39  feet ;  of  which  14  fe^  water.
Direction  d  south  sde  W.  W.

in,     UPPEB  POOL.

Distance  above  middle  pool  160  feet.

Length  380  feet  Breadth  |  ^  ^  g«

Depth  at  eaat  end  25  feet :  of  which  15  feet  water.
Dii^ctioa  of  north  side,  N.  65^  W.

The  road  by  which  we  had  formerly  come  ftom  Hebron,
passes  along  at  the  western  end  of  the  npper  pool ;  adjacent  to
which  on  the  north  stands  the  old  Saracenic  fortress  already
mentioned.'  The  main  source  from  which  these  reservoirs  have
always  been  supplied,  (when  suppKed  at  aD.)  appears  to  be
a  sxmken  fonntain,  situated  in  the  open  and  gradually  ascend-
ing fields,  about  forty  rods  northwest  of  the  castle.  Here  one
sees  only  the  mouth  of  a  narrow  well,  which  at  this  time  was
stopped  by  a  lai^e  stone,  too  heavy  for  us  to  remove.  This
is  the  entrance  to  the  fountain  below,  which  my  companion  had
formerly  explored.  It  cannot  perhaps  be  better  described  than
in  the  words  of  MaundreU  :  "  Through  this  hole  you  descend
directly  down,  but  not  without  some  difficulty,  for  about  four
yards  ;  and  then  arrive  at  a  vaulted  Tiom  fifteen  paces  long  and
eight  broad.  Joining  to  this  is  another  room  of  the  same  fesh-
ion,  but  somewhat  less.  Both  these  rooms  are  covered  with
hand.some  stone  arches  very  ancient,  and  perhaps  the  work  of
Solomon  himself  You  find  here  four  places  at  which  the  water
rises.  From  these  separate  sources  it  is  conveyed  by  little  rivu-
lets into  a  kind  of  basin  ;  and  from  thence  is  carried  by  a  laive
subterraneous  passage  down  to  the  pools."*

This  passage  terminates  at  the  northwest  comer  of  the  upper
pool ;  not  in  the  pool  itself,  but  in  a  sort  of  artificial  fountain
just  above,  so  arranged  that  the  water  here  divides.  A  part
now  passes  ofi"  through  a  small  aqueduct,  which  runs  along  the
northern  side  of  the  pools  ;  while  another  part  is  turned  down  a
descent  into  a  vaulted  subterranean  chamber,  twenty-four  feet
long  and  five  or  six  feet  wide  ;  at  the  further  end  of  which  it
runs  off  through  a  square  passage  in  the  side,  apparently  to  the
adjacent  pooL    The  aqueduct  above  mentioned  continues  along  on

*  See  aWe,  p.  218.  above,  p.  346.    The  monka  hold  the  foan-

'  ManndrelTs  Journey,  Apr.  1st. — In  a    tain  here  described  to  be  the  "  Maled

BmrUr  way  the  foontain  of  Gihon  waa    fotmtain "  of  Cant.  4,  12.  Qaareoniiu

ptobsbly  "  stopped "  by  Hezekiah ;  lee    XL  p.  7&4.

iL  165,  166

476

EXCURSION  TO  'AIN  JIDT.

[SkcX.

the  north  side  of  all  the  reservoirs  ;  giving  off  in  like  manner  a
portion  of  its  waters  to  the  middle  pool,  and  another  portion  to
the  lower  one.  It  then  passes  down  a  steep  declivity  to  join  a
similar  channel  issuing  from  the  lower  end  of  the  lower  pool.

This  main  supply  of  water,  however,  was  originally  not  the
only  one.  The  aquediict  which  we  had  formerly  seen  in  the  par-
allel valley  on  the  south,'  is  brought  down  across  the  point  of
the  southern  hill,  and  descends  steeply  to  the  lower  pool,  one
hundred  feet  west  of  its  southeast  comer.  We  traced  this  up
for  some  distance,  and  found  that  still  another  hranch  joined  it
above.  We  were  told  in  Jerusalem,  that  the  principal  source
was  iu  this  southern  valley ;  but  that  two  or  three  years  ago  a
large  mass  of  rock  fell  into  the  fountain  and  stopped  it,  or  at
least  diverted  its  waters  from  the  aqueduct,  which  was  now  dry.
We  doubted  the  truth  of  the  story  ;  for  the  aqueduct  in  question
seemed  to  have  been  long  neglected. — The  southern  valley  itself
comes  in  just  below  the  lower  pool ;  and  along  or  near  its  bed
passes  another  similar  aqueduct,  which  we  traced  up.  There  is
here  a  well  of  some  depth,  across  the  bottom  of  which  the  water
was  seen  running ;  it  then  flows  down  and  joius  the  channel
coming  from  the  lower  pool.

At  the  eastern  end  of  the  lower  pool,  a  large  abutment  is  built
up,  in  which  is  a  passage  and  a  chamber  extending  under  the
massive  wall  of  the  reservoir  quite  up  near  to  the  water.  The
manner  in  which  the  water  is  drawn  out  or  let  oft',  we  could  not
distinguish,  as  we  had  no  lights  ;  but  it  seemed  to  trickle  out  in
a  small  stream,  and  passed  oft'  below  in  a  narrow  channel.''

Thus  the  aqueduct  which  leads  from  hence  to  Bethlehem  and
Jerusalem  is  here  formed  by  the  union  of  three  branches,  viz.  first,
that  coming  from  the  fountain  northwest  of  the  castle  along  the
north  side  of  the  pools  ;  second,  that  from  the  eastern  end  of  the
lower  pool ;  and  third,  that  from  the  mouth  of  the  small  southern
valley.  It  would  seem,  however,  to  have  been  the  original  inten-
tion, that  the  aqueduct  should  be  ordinarily  and  mainly  supplied
from  the  fountain  above  the  castle  ;  its  superabundant  waters  being
turned  oft"  at  three  points  as  above  described,  in  order  to  aid  in
fiUing  these  great  reservoirs  ;  while  these  latter  again,  in  time  of
need,  could  be  drawn  oft' gradually  to  supply  the  aqueduct.  They
thus  form  all  together  an  immense  work,  which  is  still  of  incal-
culable importance  to  Bethlehem,  and  might  easily  be  made  so
to  Jerusalem. — The  form  and  general  course  of  the  aqueduct,  and
its  termination  in  Jerusalem,  have  already  been  described  ;  and

'  VoL  I.  p.  217.  seem  to  be  similar  to  the  subterranean

*  In  1853  a  vaulted  room  of  consider-  chambers  above  described  at  the  fountain

able  size  was  discovered  underneath  the  above  the  pools,  and  at  the  northwest  ooi^

eastern  end  of  the  lower  pool    It  would  ner  of  the  upper  pooL

iL  16&-168

Mat  8.]

WADT  URTAS.

477

all  the  historical  traces  that  I  have  been  able  to  find  relating
either  to  the  aqueduct  or  the  pools,  have  in  like  manner  been
given. '

We  left  the  pools  at  3^  o'clock  for  the  Frank  mountain  ;  re-
turning for  ten  minutes  by  the  way  we  came,  and  then  striking
down  to  the  ruined  village  of  Urtas  near  the  bottom  of  the  valley,
which  we  reached  at  3.35.  The  place  is  still  inhabited,  though
the  houses  are  in  ruins  ;  the  people  dwelling  in  caverns  among
the  rocks  of  the  steep  declivity.  Here  are  manifest  traces  of  an
ancient  site, — the  foundations  of  a  square  tower,  a  low  thick  wall
of  large  squared  stones,  rocks  hewn  and  scarped,  and  the  like.
If  we  are  to  look  anywhere  in  this  quarter  for  Etam,  which  was
decorated  by  Solomon  with  gardens  and  streams  of  water,  and
fortified  by  Rehoboam  along  with  Bethlehem  and  Tekoa  ;  and
whence  too,  according  to  the  Rabbins,  water  was  carried  by  an
aqueduct  to  Jemsalem  ;  I  know  of  no  site  so  probable  as  this
spot.'  The  fountain  here  sends  forth  a  copious  supply  of  fine
water,  and  forms  a  beautiful  purling  rill  along  the  bottom  of  the
valley.  This  to  me,  was  the  more  delightful,  as  being  the  first
I  had  seen  in  Asia.

After  stopping  here  five  minutes,  we  passed  down  the  valley
on  a  general  course  about  E.  S.  E.  along  the  streamlet,  and
through  the  midst  of  gardens  and  fields  fertihzed  by  its  waters.
In  the  valley  and  on  the  hills  were  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats
minojled  together  ;  and  this  would  seem  to  have  been  also  the
patriarchal  mode  of  pasturage.^  The  sheep  of  Palestine  are  all
of  the  broad-tailed  species  ;  the  broad  part  being  a  mere  excres-
cence of  fat,  with  the  proper  tail  hanging  out  of  it.  A  few  camels
were  also  seen,  and  many  neat  cattle,  all  looking  in  fine  case  ;
thus  showing  that  this  is  a  good  grazing  district, -however  rocky
and  sterile  it  may  be  in  appearance.  The  little  stream  was  soon
absorbed  in  the  thirsty  gravelly  sod.  of  the  vaUey,  and  the  gardens
ceased.

Our  Sheikh  had  been  all  day  unwell,  and  now  became  quite
ill ;  so  that  we  persuaded  him  to  mount  the  horse  of  one  of  our
servants.  At  a  quarter  past  four,  the  valley  turned  more  to  the
right,  and  we  sent  ofi"  our  servants  and  baggage  with  the  Sheikh
to  the  encampment  of  his  tribe,  where  we  had  concluded  to  pass
the  night.  The  Sheikh  had  told  us  that  he  would  kiU  a  sheep
for  us,  if  we  would  do  him  this  honour.  Taking  with  us  the
other  attendants,  we  now  struck  up  the  hill-side  on  the  left  to
the  high  table  land  above,  and  so  continued  our  course  towards

'  See  above,  pp.  347,  348.  closed,'  of  Cant.  4,  12.    Quaresmius  11.

'  See  the  historical  references  on  p.  348,    p.  764.
above. — The  monks  make  the  gardens  be-       '  Gen.  30,  35  sq.
low  to  be  the  hortm  ccmcluaus,  '  garden  en-

ii.  168. 169

478

EXCURSION  TO  'aIN  JIDY.

[SkcX.

tlie  Frank  mountain.  _  Crossing  another  small  Wady  running
down  southeast  to  the  Urtas,  vre  had  at  4.50  the  foundations  of
a  ruined  village  on  our  left,  called  el-Munettisheh.  The  hills
around,  though  now  desolate  and  arid,  had  once  been  built  up  in
terraces  and  cultivated.  At  5.10,  we  reached  the  base  of  the
mountain  ;  which  bears  in  Arabic,  for  what  reason  I  know  not,  the
name  el-Fureidis,  a  diminutive  of  the  word  signifj-ing  Paradise.

The  moimtain  here  rises  steep  and  roimd,  precisely  like  a  vol-
canic cone,  but  truncated.  The  height  above  the  base  cannot  be
less  than  from  three  to  four  hundred  feet ;  and  the  base  jtself
has  at  least  an  equal  elevation  above  the  bottom  of  Wady  Urtas
in  the  southwest ;  towards  which  there  is  a  more  gradual  descent.
There  are  traces  of  terraces  around  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  but
not  higher  up  ;  and  these  would  seem  to  have  been  intended  for
cultivation  rather  than  for  defence.  We  did  not  notice  any  road
to  the  top,  nor  any  fosse  upon  the  south,  as  described  by  Pococke;*
though  our  attention  was  not  particularly  drawn  to  these  points.
Indeed  the  sides  of  the  mountain  above,  present  now  no  appear-
ance of  any  thing  artificial. — Just  on  our  left,  in  the  direction
N.  N.  W.  from  the  mountain,  a  large  tract  had  once  been  levelled
off  and  built  up  on  the  eastern  side  with  a  wall.  In  the  midst
of  this  tract  was  a  large  reservoir,  some  two  hundred  feet  square,
now  dry  ;  and  in  the  middle  of  it  a  square  mound  like  an  island.
There  seemed  also  to  be  ancient  foundations  round  about ;  though
we  did  not  remark  the  church  of  which  Pococke  speaks  ;  and  tra-
ces of  an  aqueduct  were  seen  coming  from  the  north.

Lea%-ing  here  our  horses,  a  steep  ascent  of  ten  minutes  brought
us  to  the  top  of  the  mountain,  which  constitutes  a  circle  of  about
seven  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  circumference.  The  whole  of  this
is  enclosed  by  the  ruined  walls  of  a  circular  fortress,  built  of  hewn
stones  of  good  size,  with  four  massive  round  towers  standing  one
at  each  of  the  cardinal  points.  Either  the  ruins  have  formed  a
mound  around  the  circumference,  or  the  middle  part  of  the  enclo-
sure was  once  excavated  ;  it  is  now  considerably  deeper  than  the
circumference.  The  tower  upon  the  east  is  not  so  thoroughly
destroyed  as  the  rest ;  and  in  it  a  magazine  or  cistern  may  stUl  be
seen.'

This  mountain  commands,  of  course,  a  very  extensive  view
towards  the  north  ;  less  so  towards  the  south  and  west  ;  wliile
on  the  east,  the  prospect  is  bounded  by  the  mountains  of  Moab
beyond  the  Dead  Sea.  A  slight  haze  prevented  us  from  distin-
guishing the  site  of  Taiyibeh  and  also  Kerak.  In  the  \ie\f  of  the
Dead  Sea  I  was  greatly  disappointed.    I  had  hoped  to  have  got

'  Descr.  of  the  East,  II.  i.  p.  42.  few  who  speak  of  having  been  upon  it,

'  The  Frank  mountain  has  not  usually  are  Von  Troilo,  Nau,  le  Brun,  Pococke,
been  ascended  by  travellers.    Among  the    Irby  and  Mangles,  and  some  others.

ii.  160-171

Mat  8.]

THE  FRANK  MOUNTAIN.

479

sight  here  perhaps  of  both  its  extremities  ;  or  at  least  to  have
ascertaioed  some  other  high  points  from  which  that  would  be
possible  ;  but  we  found  that  very  little  more  of  its  surface  is
visible  from  this  spot,  than  is  seen  from  the  mount  of  Olives.
The  mountain  is  too  far  from  the  sea  to  command  a  view  over  it ;
and  other  mountains  intervene,  which,  though  rugged  and  de-
solate, are  low  ;  so  that  while  they  serve  to  shut  out  the  prospect,
they  present  among  themselves  no  better  point  of  view.*

The  present  name  of  the  "  Frank  mountain  "  is  known  only
among  the  Franks  ;  and  is  founded  on  a  report  current  among
them,  that  this  post  was  maintained  by  the  crusaders  for  forty
years  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.^  But,  to  say  nothing  of  the
utter  silence  of  all  the  historians  of  the  crusades,  both  Christian
and  Muhammedan,  as  to  any  occupation  whatever  of  this  post  by
either  party,  it  is  justly  remarked  by  Irby  and  Mangles,  that
"  the  place  is  too  small  ever  to  have  contained  half  the  number
of  men,  which  would  have  been  requisite  to  make  any  stand  in
such  a  country  ;  and  the  ruins,  though  they  might  be  those  of  a
place  once  defended  by  the  Franks,  appear  to  have  had  an  earlier
origin,  as  the  architecture  seems  to  be  Roman."'  The  present
appellation  appears  to  have  sprung  up  near  the  close  of  the  seven-
teenth century.*  Before  that  time  most  travellers  who  mention
the  mountain,  call  it  Bethulia,  and  give  the  same  name  to  the
ruins  at  its  foot  ; '  though  on  what  conceivable  ground  this  latter
name  was  adopted,  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover.

The  earhest  direct  mention  of  the  mountain  in  modern  times,
as  well  as  of  this  story  of  the  Franks,  is  apparently  by  Felix
Fabri  in  A.  D.  1483.  According  to  him  the  Franks  had  plenty
of  water  in  cisterns,  and  land  enough  within  the  fortress  to  raise
corn  and  wine  and  fruits  sufficient  for  each  year  ;  and  they  might
have  held  out  indefinitely,  had  not  a  pestilence  broken  out  among
them  after  thirty  years,  and  destroyed  most  of  the  men  and  all
their  wives  and  daughters ;  after  which  the  remnant  withdrew

'  We  took  on  the  Frank  mountain  the
following  bearings  :  Abu  Xuieim,  a  Wely,
W.  Bethlehem  N.  27°  W.  iSeit  S.ihur  N.
21°  W.  (This  is  the  Bethsaon  of  Pococke,
n.  p.  34.)  Beit  Ta'mar  N.  20°  W.  Mar
Elyds  N.  16°  W.  Nebv  Samw;l  N.  10°
W.  Mount  of  Olives  X"  10°  E.  Abu  Dis,
near  Bethany,  N.  20°  E.  Khureitiin  S.
15°  W.  Tekii'a  S.  50°  \V.  Beit  Fejjar
S.  77°  W.

'  Some  say  by  the  knights  of  St.  John.
Most  travellers  who  mention  the  report,
seem  to  doubt  its  truth.  Yon  Troilo,  p.
314.    Pococke  11.  i.  p.  42.

'  Travels,  p.  340,  [103.]

*  I  have  not  found  it  in  any  writer  ear-
lier than  le  Bmn,  Voyage  p.  279.  So

Maundrell's  Journey,  Mar.  31st.  Morison,
p.  487.

'  So  Felix  Fabri  in  1483,  Reissh.  p.  287.
Zuallart  Vij^g.  p.  218.  Quaresniius  II.  p.
687.  Doubdan,  p.  366.  Von  Troilo,  p.
313.  Morison  has  both  names,  p.  487.
Rauwolf,  and  also  Cotovicus,  confound  this
mountain  with  Tekoa ;  Reissb.  p.  645.
Cotovic.  p.  225. — Brocardus  speaks  of  a
"  coUis  Achilloe  "  overagainst  Tekoa,  c.  9.
p.  184.  This  Breydenbach  and  Adricho-
mius  refer  to  the  site  of  Masada  on  the
Dead  Sea;  Reissb.  p.  132.  Adrichom.  p.
38.  De  S.ilignaco  on  the  contrary  seems
to  make  it  the  Frank  mountain  ;  Tom.  X.
c.  2.  I  have  not  been  able  to  trace  this
name  any  further.

ii.  171. 172

480

EXCURSION  TO  'aIX  JIDT,

[Sec.  X.

to  other  lands.'  Subsequent  travellers  have  repeated  this  report
in  different  forms ;  but  all  the  circumstances  lead  only  to  the
conclusion,  that  it  is  in  all  likelihood  a  legend  of  the  fifteenth
century.*

More  probable  is  the  suggestion,  that  the  spot  is  the  site  of
the  fortress  and  city  Herodium,  erected  by  Herod  the  Great.
According  to  Josephus,  that  place  was  situated  about  sixty  stadia
from  Jerusalem,  and  not  far  from  Tekoa.^  Here  on  a  hill  of
moderate  height,  having  the  form  of  the  femade  breast,  and  which
he  raised  still  higher  or  at  least  fashioned  by  artificial  means,
Herod  erected  a  fortress  with  rounded  towers,*  having  in  it  royal
apartments  of  great  strength  and  splendour.  The  difiicult  ascent
was  overcome  by  a  flight  of  two  hundred  steps  of  hewn  stone.
At  the  foot  of  the  mountain  he  built  other  palaces  for  himself
and  his  friends  ;  and  caused  water  to  be  brought  thither  from  a
distance,  in  large  quantity  and  at  great  expense.  The  whole
plain  around  was  also  covered  with  buUdings,  forming  a  large
city,  of  which  the  hill  and  fortress  constituted  the  acropohs.'  So
important  indeed  was  the  city,  that  one  of  the  toparchies  after-
wards took  the  same  name  ;  and  Ptolemy  also  mentions  it  as  a
town  of  note.'  To  the  same  place,  apparently,  the  body  of  Herod
was  brought  for  burial,  two  hundred  stadia  from  Jericho,  where
he  died.' — All  these  particulars,  the  situation,  the  mountain,  the
round  towers,  the  large  reservoir  of  water  and  the  city  below,  cor-
respond very  strikingly  to  the  present  state  of  the  Frank  moun-
tain ;  and  leave  scarcely  a  doubt,  that  this  was  Herodium,  where
the  Idumean  tyrant  sought  his  last  repose.'

An  earlier  mention  of  this  mountain,  or  indeed  any  mention
of  it  in  the  Scriptures,  cannot  be  assumed  with  the  like  certainty.
Pococke  indeed  suggests,  that  it  may  have  been  the  Beth-hac-

'  Reissb.  des  h.  Landes,  p.  287.  Mori-
son  in  1698  makes  this  story  refer  to  the
time  of  the  conquest  by  Selim  in  1517!
Rclat.  p.  487.  I  cannot  find  that  Quares-
mins  mentions  the  story.

"  Compare  the  simQar  legend  relative
to  the  leaving  out  of  Zion  at  the  rebuilding
of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  in  1542 ;  see
above,  p.  318.  n.  3.

"  Joseph.  Antiq.  15.  9.  4.  B.J.  1.  21. 10.
Also  in  B.  J.  4.  9.  5,  it  is  related,  that
Eleazar,  who  had  laid  siege  to  Tekoa,  sent
messengers  "to  the  garrison  in  Herodium,
■which  was  near,"  irphsrovs  iv  'Hpuihlif    Jer.  6,  1.    Pooocke  EL  i.  p.  42.  foL  '  Travels,  pp.  340,  341,  [103, 104.]  See

'  Hieron.  Comm.  in  Jer.  6,  1.    Neither  alio  Pococke  11.  i.  p.  41.    Turner's  Totip  in

Ensebitu  nor  Jerome  menrion  Herodium,  the  Levant,  U.  p.  238.

nor  elsewhere  Beth-haccerem.

Vol.  I.-41

ii  174,  175

482

EXCURSION  TO  'AIN  JIDT.

[Skc.  X.

listines.'  But  Adullam  is  enumerated  among  tlie  cities  of  the
plain  of  J udali ;  and  Eusebius  and  Jerome  place  it  in  the  vicinity
of  Eleutheropolis,  west  of  the  mountains.^

Following  up  the  branch  valley  among  the  open  hills,  and
then  gradually  ascending  the  higher  ground  towards  the  left,  we
came  in  twenty  minutes  (at  6.40)  to  the  encampment  of  the
Ta'amirah  belongiag  to  our  guides ;  where  we  foimd  our  tent
already  pitched,  and  our  home  for  the  night  prepared.  The  sit-
uation was  high,  lying  on  the  northern  declivity  of  the  high  land
around  Tekoa  ;  and  overlooking  a  large  tract  of  country  towards
the  north.  ^

The  Ta'amirah  were  said  to  muster  in  all  about  three  hun-
dred men.  The  limits  of  their  territory  are  not  very  distinct ;
but  they  may  be  said  to  occupy,  in  general,  the  district  lying  be-
tween Bethlehem,  Tekoa,  and  the  Dead  Sea  ;  the  eastern  part
of  which  is  a  mere  desert.  At  the  place  where  we  now  were,
there  were  only  six  tents  ;  the  rest  of  the  tribe  beiag  dispersed  in
other  similar  encampments.  They  have  but  a  single  village,
Beit  Ta'mar,  and  this  is  rarely  inhabited  ;  here  they  store  their
grain  in  subterranean  magazines  like  cisterns,  as  is  common  in
other  villages.  The  Ta'amirah  occupy  indeed  a  sort  of  border
ground,  between  the  Bedawiii  and  FeUahin  ;  between  the  wan-
dering tenants  of  the  desert  who  dwell  only  in  tents,  and  the
more  fixed  inhabitants  of  the  villages.  Hence,  being  acknow-
ledged by  neither  and  distrusted  by  all,  they  are  regarded  as  a
sort  of  Ishmaelites  whose  "hand  is  against  every  man  ;"  and
have  acquired  for  themselves  a  notorious  character  as  restless  and
daring  robbers  and  rebels.  As  a  matter  of  course,  they  took  part
in  the  insurrection  of  1834  ;  and  at  the  capture  of  Jerusalem,
our  Sheikh  was  said  to  have  been  the  first  man  who  entered  the
city.

They  also  held  out  tUl  the  very  last  against  the  government.
Fearing  the  consequences  of  their  activity  in  the  rebellion,  and
dreading  especially  the  thought  of  being  subjected  to  the  con-
scription, they  retired  into  the  desert  and  encamped  near  the
Dead  Sea.  In  order  to  bring  them  to  terms,  the  Mudir  of  'Akka
came  with  several  thousand  men  and  encamped  in  their  territory
for  some  months ;  and  it  was  only  when  they  saw  their  flocks
and  stores  seized,  their  crops  destroyed,  and  famine  staring  them
in  the  face,  that  they  returned  and  submitted.  They  were  dis-
armed, and  compelled  to  pay  an  annual  ca})itation-tax  of  one
hundred  piastres  for  each  man  ;  but  no  soldiers  were  taken  from
them,  nor  as  yet  had  any  other  tax  been  demanded  in  any  form.

'  1  Sam.  22,  1.  2  Sam.  23,  13.— Will.  '  From  the  encampment  the  Frank
Tyr.  IT).  6.    Quaresmius  II  p.  76G.  mountain  bore  E.  N.  E.  Betlilehem  N.

^  Josh.  15,  35.    Onomast.  art.  Adollam.    Tek(l'a  S.  6°  E.  distant  26  minutes.

ii.  176-177

Mat  8.]

THE  TA'aMIRAH.

483

But  during  the  very  last  year,  orders  had  come  from  Ibrahim
Pasha  to  take  of  them  for  soldiers  ;  upon  which  all  the  young
men  immediately  fled  to  the  east  side  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The
Sheikh  made  representations  to  the  authorities  at  Jerusalem,  and
the  orders  were  recalled ;  though  in  the  mean  time  five  men  had
been  already  seized,  some  of  whom  were  now  dead,  and  the  others
not  yet  given  up.

Such  were  the  character  and  circumstances  of  the  tribe,  in
the  midst  of  whom  we  now  were,  and  into  whose  care  and  keep-
ing we  had  committed  ourselves.  But  we  had  already  learned
enough  of  common  reports,  to  know  that  they  were  in  general
exceedingly  exaggerated  ;  and  we  felt  ourselves  quite  as  secure
here  as  within  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  To  judge  from  our  own
intercourse  of  eight  days  with  the  Ta'amirah,  they  are  much  like
other  Bedawin  ;  though  I  think  braver,  and  more  faithful  and
trustworthy  in  danger.  The  Sheikh  and  his  four  men  who  ac-
companied us,  were  personally  brave,  and  would  probably  have
laid  down  their  lives  at  any  moment  in  our  defence.  Yet,  like
most  Arabs,  they  have  no  regard  for  veracity,  whenever  there  is
the  slightest  personal  motive  to  tell  a  lie  ;  and  like  most  Arabs
too,  their  notions  of  meum  and  tuum  are  not  very  strictly  defined,
except  towards  one  another,  and  towards  those  to  whom  they  are
bound  in  honour.  In  this  particular,  we  at  least  had  no  occasion
for  complaint.

Our  Sheikh  was  in  every  respect  something  more  than  a  com-
mon Arab.  In  stature  he  was  more  than  six  feet  high,  well
buUt  and  finely  proportioned  ;  and  there  was  in  his  movements
a  native  dignity  and  nobleness,  which  we  did  not  find  in  other
Bedawin.  His  countenance  was  intelligent,  and  had  a  mild  and
pensive  cast ;  indeed  there  was  a  seriousness  and  earnestness
about  him,  which  could  not  but  give  him  influence  in  any  situa-
tion. He  was  also  more  than  an  ordinary  Sheikh  ;  he  could  read
and  write  ;  and  was  Kkewise  the  Khatib  or  orator  and  Imam  of
his  tribe.  In  this  capacity  he  was  very  regular  in  the  perform-
ance of  the  MusUm  devotions,  and  often  chanted  long  prayers
aloud.  This  seemed  indeed  to  be  his  chief  character,  and  he  was
addressed  only  as  '  Khatib  ; '  so  that  we  hardly  heard  him  called
by  his  real  name,  Muhammed.  There  was  said  to  be  one  or
more  other  Sheikhs  of  the  tribe ;  though  we  saw  no  one  but  him.
The  learning  of  the  tribe  is  confined  to  the  Khatib,  no  other  in-
dividual being  able  to  read  or  write ;  but  as  even  this  is  an  ex-
ception to  Bedawy  custom,  the  Ta'amirah  stand  degraded  by  it
in  the  eyes  of  their  brethren.

As  the  Khatib  was  unwell,  we  saw  no  more  of  him  that  night.
When  we  sent  forward  our  servants,  we  had  given  them  a  hint
to  evade  (if  possible)  the  sheep,  which  the  Sheikh  had  proposed

ii.  177  178

484

EXCURSION  TO  'aIN  JIDT.

[Sua  X.

to  Irill  in  our  honour;  for  which,  we  were  told  in  Jerusalem,  a
present  of  not  less  than  two  dollars  to  the  Sheikh's  wife  would
be  a  necessary  acknowledgment.  This  they  had  been  able  to  do
without  difficulty.  The  Sheikh  had  indeed  brought  to  the  tent,
not  the  proffered  sheep,  but  a  kid,  to  be  killed  as  a  present ;  and
our  seryants  had  told  him  rather  unceremoniously,  that  we  did
not  eat  goat's  flesh,  and  counselled  him  to  take  it  away  again  ;
which  he  did.

It  was  now  late  ;  and  in  the  bright  light  of  the  moon,  the
scene  was  highly  romantic.  "We  were  here  on  the  lofty  hill-side,
looking  out  upon  the  dark  mass  of  the  Frank  mountain  and  the
sacred  region  of  Bethlehem  ;  while  around  us  were  the  black  tents,
the  horses  -picketed,  and  the  numerous  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats,
all  still  like  the  silence  of  the  desert.

We  had  noticed  on  our  arrival  a  fine  mare  with  many  trappings
picketed  near  the  tents  ;  and  were  told  the  animal  belonged  to  a
Sheikh  of  the  Jehalin,  who  was  here  on  a  visit.  He  came  to
our  tent  during  the  eyening,  and  proved  to  be  Defa'  Allah,  the
chief  Sheikh  of  that  tribe.  He  was  gaily  dressed,  and  wore  red
boots,  which  he  kicked  off  with  some  difficulty  on  entering  our
tent.  As  we  were  expecting  to  visit  Wady  Miisa  with  an  escort
from  his  tribe,  we  were  glad  to  meet  him  here  and  obtain  the
necessary  prehminaiy  information.  He  had  lately  been  there
himself ;  ha%'ing  accompanied  Lord  Prudhoe  thither  directly  across
the  desert  from  Suez.  He  said  they  were  accustomed  to  take
travellers  from  Hebron  either  on  horses  or  dromedaries  ;  but  the
latter  were  preferable,  because  in  case  of  necessity  they  were  fleet-
er, and  could  hold  out  longer.  He  was  quite  talkative,  and  seemed
good  natured  and  spirited ;  but  as  I  could  not  follow  his  talk,
and  was  exceedingly  weary,  I  could  not  resist  falUng  into  a  deep
sleep  as  I  leaned  on  my  couch ;  however  little  honour  tliis  might
reflect  upon  my  courtesy.  He  however  did  not  take  it  ill ;  and
after  some  weeks  we  met  again  as  old  acquaintances  at  Hebron.

The  object  of  Defa'  Allah's  visit  here  we  did  not  learn  at  the
time  ;  but  it  afterwards  turned  out,  that  he  belonged  to  the  war-
like party  we  had  met  in  Betlilehem,  and  had  come  hither  to
induce  the  Ta'amirah  to  join  in  the  expedition.  But  they  had
already  suffered  enough  from  war,  and  were  too  wary  to  make
any  movement,  which  might  draw  upon  them  the  notice  of  the
Egyptian  government  ;  so  that  the  Sheikh  of  the  Jehalin  did  not
effect  his  purpose,  and  left  the  encampment  during  the  night  to
overtake  his  party.  But  the  Khatib  was  still  too  much  of  a
diplomatist  not  to  keep  all  this  for  the  present  to  himself ;  and
it  was  only  after  our  return  to  Jerusalem,  that  he  gave  us  this
information.

Wednesday,  May  9th.  We  rose  soon  after  4  o'clock,  and
ii.  178-180

May  9.]

ENCAMPMEST  OF  THE  TA'aMIRAH.

4d5

looked  about  upon  the  encampment.  All  was  already  in  motion  at
this  early  hour.  There  were  about  six  hundred  sheep  and  goats,
the  latter  being  the  most  numerous  ;  and  the  process  of  milking
was  now  going  on.  They  have  few  cows.  The  six  tents  were
arranged  in  a  sort  of  square  ;  they  were  made  of  black  hair-cloth,
not  large  ;  and  were  mostly  open  at  one  end  and  on  the  sides,
the  latter  being  turned  up.  The  tents  formed  the  common  ren-
dezvous of  men,  women,  children,  calves,  lambs,  and  kids.  The
women  were  without  veils,  and  seemed  to  make  nothing  of  our
presence.  Here  we  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  various  pro-
cesses in  the  housekeeping  of  nomadic  life.  The  women  in  some
of  the  tents  were  kneading  bread,  and  baking  it  in  thin  cakes  in
the  embers  or  on  iron  plates  over  the  fire.  Another  female  was
churning  the  milk  in  a  very  primitive  way,  which  we  often  saw
afterwards  in  different  parts  of  the  country.  The  churn  consists
of  a  common  water-skin,  i.  e.  the  tanned  skin  of  a  goat  stripped
off  whole  and  the  extremities  sewed  up.  This  is  partly  filled
with  the  milk ;  and  being  then  suspended  in  a  slight  frame,  or
between  two  sticks  leaning  against  the  tent  or  house,  it  is  regu-
larly moved  to  and  fro  with  a  jerk  until  the  process  is  completed.

In  another  tent  a  woman  was  kneehng  and  grinding  at  the
hand-mill.  These  mills  are  doubtless  those  of  scriptural  times  ;
and  are  similar  to  the  Scottish  quern.  They  consist  of  two  stones
about  eighteen  inches  or  two  feet  in  diameter,  lying  one  upon
the  other,  with  a  slight  convexity  between  them  and  a  hole
through  the  upper  to  receive  the  grain.  The  lower  stone  is  fixed,
sometimes  in  a  sort  of  cement,  which  rises  around  it  like  a  bowl
and  receives  the  meal  as  it  falls  from  the  stones.  The  upper
stone  is  turned  upon  the  lower,  by  means  of  an  upright  stick
fixed  in  it  as  a  handle.  We  afterwards  saw  many  of  these  miUs  ;
and  saw  only  women  grinding,  sometimes  one  alone  and  some-
times two  together.  The  female  kneels  or  sits  at  her  task,  and
turns  the  mill  with  both  hands,  feeding  it  occasionally  with  one.
The  labour  is  evidentlv  hard  :  and  the  grating;  sound  of  the  mill
is  heard  at  a  distance,  indicating  (like  our  coffee-mills)  the  pre-
sence of  a  family  and  of  household  Hfe.  We  heard  no  song  as  an
accompaniment  to  the  work.'

As  we  were  looking  round  upon  this  scene  of  busy  life,  the
Sim  rose  gloriously  over  the  wide  prospect,  and  shed  his  golden
light  upon  a  landscape,  not  rich  indeed  in  appearance,  for  all  is
rocky  and  sterile  to  the  view  ;  yet  fertile  in  pasturage,  as  was
testified  by  the  multitude  of  flocks.    The  curling  smoke  ascend-

'  "  Two  women  shall  be  grinding  at  the  gladness,  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom  and

mill ;  the  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  the  voice  of  the  bride,  the  sound  of  the

left; "Matt.  24.  41.  Luke  17,  3.5.    Comp.  mill-stones  and  the  light  of  the  candle;"

Ex.  11,  5. — "Moreover  I  will  take  from  Jer.  25,  10.    Compare  Rev.  18,  22.  23.
them  the  voice  of  mirth  and  the  voice  of

Vol.  I.— 41*  ii,  180,  181

486

EXCURSION  TO  'aIN  JIDY.

[Sec.  X.

ing  from  various  Arab  encampments  in  the  distance,  added  to
the  picturesque  eflfect  of  the  landscape.

We  left  the  encampment  at  6.10  for  TekH'a,  keeping  along
the  eastern  brow  of  the  lugh  ground.  The  Khatib  had  shaken
off  his  illness  during  the  night ;  and  now  marched  as  our  leader
with  vigour  and  spirit.  As  his  tribe  had  been  disarmed,  our
guides  could  lawfully  carry  no  better  weapons  than  short  clubs
and  staves  ;  but  they  prided  themselves  on  bearing  our  muskets
and  pistols  ;  and  took  with  them  also  a  gun  of  their  own,  which
was  clandestinely  kept  among  them.

We  reached  Teku'a  at  6.35.  It  lies  on  an  elevated  hill,  not
steep,  but  broad  on  the  top,  and  covered  with  ruins  to  the  extent
of  four  or  five  acres.  These  consist  chiefly  in  the  foundations  of
houses  built  of  squared  stones,  some  of  which  are  bevelled.  At
the  northeast  part  are  the  remains  of  a  large  square  tower  or
castle,  still  the  highest  point  of  all.  Near  the  middle  of  the  site
are  the  ruins  of  a  Greek  church  ;  among  which  are  several  frag-
ments of  columns,  and  a  baptismal  font  of  rose-coloured  hme-
stone  verging  into  marble.  The  font  is  octagonal,  five  feet  in
diameter  on  the  outside,  four  feet  on  the  inside,  and  three  feet
nine  inches  deep.  There  are  many  cisterns  excavated  in  the
rocks  ;  and  not  far  ofi"  is  a  living  spring  from  which  our  Arabs
brought  us  fine  water.  The  ruins  of  a  church  lying  a  mile  farther
south,  as  mentioned  by  Pococke,  we  did  not  see.'

The  high  position  of  Teku'a  gives  it  a  wide  prospect.  Toward
the  northeast  the  land  slopes  down  towards  Wady  Khureitun  ;
on  the  other  sides  the  hill  is  surrounded  by  a  bolt  of  level  table
land  ;  beyond  which  are  valleys  and  then  other  higher  hills.  This
belt  is  tilled  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  there  were  now  several
fields  of  grain  upon  it.  On  the  south  at  some  distance,  another
deep  valley  runs  off  southeast  towards  the  Dead  Sea.  The  view
in  this  direction  is  bounded  only  by  the  level  mountains  of  Moab,
with  frequent  bursts  of  the  Dead  Sea,  seen  through  openings
among  the  rugged  and  desolate  intervening  mountains.  In  the
E.  S.  E.  were  seen  also  two  small  isolated  towers,  KOsr  'Antar
and  Kusr  Um  el-Leimon,  between  Tekii'a  and  the  continuation
of  Wady  Khureitun  ;  but  there  seemed  to  be  nothing  remarkable
about  them.'

Here  then  are  the  remains  of  the  Tekoa  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment ;  whence  Joab  called  the  "wise  woman"  to  plead  in  behalf
of  Absalom  ;  and  which,  fortified  by  Rehoboam,  was  afterwards

'  Probably  the  f.mntain  is  that  mention-  village  towards  Jenisalem,  N.  13°  E.  Mftr

ed  by  Pococke,  as  being;  in  a  grotto  towards  ElyAs  N.  !>''  E.  Bethlehem  N.  Neby  Sam-

tbe  northwest.    Vol.  II.  i.  p.  41.  wil  N.  2'  W.    Abu  Nnjeim  N.  "l5' W.

"  At  Teku'a  we  obtained  the  following  Beit  Feyar  S.  Sri"  W.    esh-Shiyukh,  a

bearings:    Frank  mountain  N.   50"  E.  well-built  village,  S.  51°  W.
Mount  of  Olives  N.  15°  E.    Sur  BAhil,  a
ii.  181-183

Mat  9.]

TEKOA.

487

the  birthplace  of  the  prophet  Amos,  and  gave  its  name  also  to  the
adjacent  desert  on  the  east.'  Not  only  is  the  present  name  de-
cisive ;  but  the  ancient  specifications  as  to  its  site  are  equally
distinct.  Eusebius  and  Jerome  describe  Tekoa  as  lying  twelve
vniles  from  Jerusalem  and  six  miles  from  Bethlehem  towards  the
-  uth  ;  and  the  latter  farther  remarks,  that  fi-om  Bethlehem  he
had  Tekoa  daily  before  his  eyes.*  "We  did  not  indeed  travel  the
direct  route  between  these  two  places  ;  but  the  distance  is  still
reckoned  at  two  hours.'  In  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,
the  holy  Sabas  established  in  this  vicinity  a  new  laura,  in  con-
nection with  the  greater  one  which  still  bears  his  own  name  ;  and
this  became  afterwards  a  seat  of  strife  and  controversy,  as  has
already  been  related.^  About  A.  D.  765,  Tekoa  was  visited  by
St.  Willibald  ;  it  was  then  a  Christian  place  and  had  a  church.^
In  the  time  of  the  crusades  it  was  still  inhabited  by  Christians,
who  afforded  aid  to  the  crusaders  during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  ;
and  the  place  was  afterwards  assigned  by  king  Fulco  to  the
canons  of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  in  exchange  for
Bethany.'  In  A.  D.  1138,  Tekoa  was  sacked  by  a  party  of
Turks  from  beyond  the  J ordan  ;  but  the  inhabitants  had  mostly
taken  refuge  in  the  cavern  above  described  at  Khureitun,  which
was  held  to  be  that  of  Adullam.'

Whether  Tekoa  ever  recovered  from  this  blow,  we  are  not
informed  ;  nor  do  we  know  anything  further  as  to  the  time  of  its
abandonment.*  In  the  days  of  Quaresmius  it  was,  as  now,  deso-
late, and  was  not  ■visited  for  fear  of  the  Arabs  ;  though  Morone
in  the  same  century  mentions  the  baptismal  font  among  the
ruins.'  A  few  years  later  (A.  D.  16GG)  Ton  Troilo  visited  the
spot ;  and  describes  its  appearance  much  as  it  exists  at  present.'"
Since  that  time  travellers  have  not  unfrequently  passed  this
way  ;  sometimes  on  their  route  between  Bethlehem  and  Hebron."

We  had  been  hesitating,  whether  to  go  from  Tekoa  to  He-
bron, about  four  hours  distant  ;  or  to  keep  upon  the  hdls  more
towards  the  left,  and  thus  explore  the  coimtry  between  us  and

'  2  Sam.  14,  2.  2  Chr.  11,  6.  Am.  1, 1.
2  Chr.  20,  20.   1  Mace.  9,  33.

*  Onomast.  art.  Elthei,  'EK^exve.  Hi-
eron.  Comm.  in  Amos  Prooem.  Comm.  in
Jerem.  vi  1,  "  Thecuam  qnoqne  vicnlom

in  monte  situm  quotidie  oonlis  cer-

nimus."  See  the  authorities  collected  in
Reland  Palaest  p.  1028. — Jerome  in  the
Onomasticoa  gives  the  distance  of  Tekoa
from  Jerusalem  at  nine  miles;  T»hich  is
inconsistent  with  Ensebius  and  with  him-
self, and  is  probably  a  corruption.

^  Comp.  Turner's  Tour,  II.  p.  240.

*  See  above,  p.  383.

*  Hodoeporicon,  p.  377,  ed.  Mabillon.

•  Will.  Tyr.  8.  7.  ib.  15.  26.  See  p.  432,

•  Wni.  Tvr.  15.  6.  Wilken  Gesch.  der
Kr.  IL  p.  682.    See  above,  p.  481  sq.

•  Brocardus  and  Marinas  Sanutiis  men-
tion Tekoa ;  bat  merely  as  an  ancient
place.  Broc.  c.  9.  p.  184.  Marin.  Sanut.
p  247.  So  too  Breydenbach,  Reissb.  p.
132.  Rauwolf  mistaJtes  the  Frank  moun-
tain for  it ;  ibid.  p.  645.

'  Quaresmius  U.  p.  687.  Morone,  p.  298.

Reisebeschr.  p.  314.    Dresd  1676.
"  E.g.  leBrun,p.  279.  Morison,  p.  487.
Pococke  n.  L  p.  41.    Turner  EL  p.  240.
Irby  and  Mangles  and  party,  p.  341.  [104.]
^         ii.  183,  184

488

EXCURSION  TO  *AIN  JIDT.

[Sec.  X.

'Ain  Jidy  more  thoroughly.  Adopting  the  latter  pourse,  as  pre-
senting a  route  hitherto  untrodden  by  travellers,  we  proceeded  on
our  way  at  7.40,  descending  towards  the  southwest.  We  soon
struck  upon  a  small  Wady,  and  followed  it  down  in  the  same
direction  until  ten  minutes  past  eight.  Here  the  larger  Wady
'An-ub  comes  in  from  the  southwest,  and  the  united  valley,  under
the  name  of  Wady  J ehar,  now  runs  off  towards  the  southeast  to
join  the  great  Wady  el-Ghar,  which  empties  into  the  Dead  Sea
a  short  distance  south  of  'Ain  Jidy.  Following  up  the  Wady
'Arrub,  we  took  the  branch  that  leads  to  a  small  village  called
Sa'ir,*  being  also  the  usual  road  to  Hebron.  At  9  o'clock,  be-
fore reaching  this  village,  (which  lies  half  an  hour  beyond,  or  two
hours  from  Tekoa,)  we  turned  to  the  left  into  a  side  valley ;  and
following  it  upwards  to  its  head,  we  then  passed  up  a  steep  as-
cent. The  valleys  along  which  we  thus  travelled,  and  the  sides
of  the  hills  around,  were  sprinkled  and  sometimes  covered  with
arbutus,  dwarf  oaks,  small  firs,  and  other  bushes,  with  an  abun-
dance of  the  Za'ter  ;  presenting  the  same  general  features  as  the
country  around  Hebron.

At  the  top  of  the  ascent,  which  we  reached  at  9.20,  is  a  cis-
tern marked  by  two  or  three  trees.  The  spot  is  called  Bir  ez-
Za'feraneh.'^  The  country  before  us  was  now  a  high  rocky  tract,
exhibiting  on  our  left  no  appearance  of  cultivation,  though  there
are  occasional  traces  of  its  having  been  formerly  inhabited.  A
few  villages  appeared  at  a  distance  on  our  right.  Fifteen  min-
utes from  Bir  ez-Za'feraneh  (at  9.40),  while  this  place  bore  N.
50°  E.  and  Shiytikh  S.  86°  W.  the  next  point  of  our  route,  Beni
Na'im,  came  in  sight,  bearing  S.  9°  W.  But  instead  of  proceed-
ing directly  towards  it,  we  were  compelled  to  make  a  great  detour
towards  the  west,  in  order  to  pass  around  the  heads  of  several
branches  of  the  Wady  el-Ghar,  which  lay  between  us  and  Beni
Na'im,  and  were  said  to  be  so  deep  and  rugged  as  to  be  nearly
impassable  for  horses. — At  the  point  where  we  now  were,  we  saw
traces  of  former  foundations  ;  and  at  ten  o'clock  there  were  ruins
of  small  square  towers  on  our  left.  At  half  past  ten,  we  crossed
a  low  sharp  ridge,  from  which  Bir  ez-Za'fcraneh  bore  about  N.
70°  E.  and  at  10.40  we  halted  for  ten  minutes  in  the  shallow
valley  beyond.  From  hence  our  Mukariyeh  went  with  one  horse
to  Hebron  to  purchase  barley  ;  to  rejoin  us  again  at  Beni  Na'im.
They  had  neglected  to  bring  a  supply,  thinking  they  could  so
manage  as  to  induce  us  to  go  to  Hebron.

Starting  again  at  ten  minutes  before  eleven  o'clock,  we  began
from  this  point  to  take  a  more  direct  course  towards  Beni  Na'im,

'  Probably  the  same  which  Irby  and  N.  Beit  Fejjar  N.  25"  W.  Shiyfikh  S.
Mangles  call  Sipheer  ;  p.  342.  [104.]  81°  W.

'  From  this  spot  Tekoa  bore  N.  E.  by

ii.  184-186

May  9.]

BENI  NA'iM,

489

proceeding  first  for  half  an  hour  in  a  direction  nearly  south.  We
soon  came  upon  the  brow  of  a  very  deep  valley  on  our  right  ;
■wliich,  commencing  further  to  the  north,  here  runs  towards,  the
south,  and  passing  to  the  eastward  of  Dhoheriyeh  goes  to  join
Wady  es-Seba'.  After  receiving  the  Wady  in  which  Hebron
lies,  it  takes  the  name  of  Wady  el-Khulil ;  and  is  the  great  drain
of  all  the  region  aroimd.  At  ,1-1.20  we  saw  Nebi  Yiinas,  or
Hulhul,  on  the  high  ridge  beyond  this  valley,  bearing  N.  35°  W.
We  had  formerly  seen  it  from  the  other  side.*  Nearby  us  was  a
"broken  cistern"  in  the  rocks,  well  covered  on  the  inside  with
cement.  A  ruin  called  Beit  'Ainun  was  pointed  out,  bearing  N.
40°  W.  Hebron,  as  near  as  we  could  judge,  bore  al3out  S.  50°
W.  and  was  not  far  from  an  hour  distant.  The  direction  of
Eeni  Na'im  was  here  S.  50°  E.  towards  which  we  now  shaped
our  course.

We  were  thus  travelling  along  the  dividing  line  between  the
waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Mediterranean  ;  and  although
we  now  diverged  from  the  great  valley  on  our  right,  yet  it  con-
tinued to  be  the  drain  of  all  the  countiy  on  that  side  during  the
whole  day.  As  we  approached  Beni  Na'im,  the  traces  of  culti-
vation increased  ;  and  the  level  spots  of  any  size  were  sown  with
barley  or  millet.  Towards  the  west,  olive  trees  and  small  vine-
yards appeared  occasionally.  All  the  tillage  belongs  to  the  few
scattered  villages  which  we  saw.

The  whole  slope  towards  the  Dead  Sea  on  this  side  of  Jeru-
salem, resembles  in  its  general  features  the  same  slope  on  the
north  of  that  city.  But  it  has  even  less  of  fertility  ;  the  desert
region  extending  further  up  from  the  Dead  Sea  towards  the
water-summit.  StUl,  even  in  those  parts  where  all  is  now  deso-
late, there  are  everj-where  traces  of  the  hand  of  the  men  of  other
days,  as  we  saw  both  yesterday  and  to-day  ;  terraces,  walls,
stones  gathered  along  the  paths,  frequent  cisterns,  and  the  like.
Most  of  the  hills  indeed  exhibit  the  remains  of  terraces  built  up
around  them,  the  undoubted  signs  of  former  cultivation.

After  a  long  ride  we  reached  Beni  Na'im  at  twentj'  minutes
past  noon,  where  we  made  a  halt  of  several  hours.  This  is  a  vil-
lage with  a  mosk,  lying  on  very  high  ground,  to  which  the  ascent
is  gradual  on  every  side,  foiming  a  conspicuous  object  to  all  the
region  far  and  near.  It  overlooks  the  country  around  Hebron  ;
and  is  therefore  not  improbably  the  very  highest  point  in  all  the
hill  country  of  Judah.  According  to  the  Muslims  this  is  the
burial-place  of  Lot ;  and  the  mosk  professedly  covers  his  tomb.'
It  is  a  well  built  structure,  much  in  the  shape  of  an  ordinary
Khan,  surrounding  a  court  with  chambers  and  porticos  around

'  See  p.  216,  above.  tomb  of  Lot  as  showu  in  his  day  two  miles

'  Sir  John  Maundeville  mentions  the    from  Hebron ;  Travels,  p.  68.  Lond.  1839.

ii.  186.  187

490

EXCURSION  TO  'AIK  JIBY.

[Sec.  X.

tte  inside.  The  flat  roof  over  these  forms  a  terrace  along  the
wall,  which  is  furnished  with  loop-holes  for  muskets  ;  and  thus
the  .building  answers  also  the  purpose  of  a  fortress.  Some  of  the
houses  of  the  village  are  built  of  large  hewn  stones,  indicating
antiquity.  Most  of  them  were  in  good  repair,  but  none  of  them
now  inhabited  ;  all  the  people  being  abroad,  dwelling  in  tents  or
caves,  in  order  to  watch  their  ^ocks  and  fields  of  grain.  This  is
the  custom  of  the  peasants  in  this  part  of  Palestine,  during  the
months  of  pasturage  in  spring  and  until  the  crops  are  gathered  ;
while  in  autumn  and  winter  they  inhabit  their  villages.*  Cis-
terns excavated  in  the  solid  rock  testify  also  to  the  antiquity  of
the  site  ;  and  the  exterior  of  the  rocks  is  in  many  places  hewn
smooth  or  scarped.  Over  most  of  the  cisterns  is  laid  a  broad  and
thick  flat  stone,  with  a  round  hole  cut  in  the  middle,  forming  the
mouth  of  the  cistern.  This  hole  we  found  in  many  cases  covered
with  a  heavy  stone,  which  it  would  require  two  or  three  men  to
roll  away.^

From  the  roof  of  the  mosk  at  Beni  Na'im  we  had  an  exten-
sive view  on  every  side,  and  especially  towards  the  east  and  south.
The  prospect  towards  the  north  was  limited  by  the  high  tract
over  which  we  had  just  passed  ;  and  towards  the  west  and  south-
west by  the  hills  around  Hebron.  The  mountains  beyond  the
Dead  Sea  were  very  distinct ;  but  the  sea  itself  was  not  visible
except  through  gaps  in  the  western  mountains,  by  which  the  eye
could  penetrate  into  its  deep  bosom.  One  of  these  was  said  to
be  near  the  pass  of  'Ain  Jidy  ;  and  through  another,  further
south,  we  could  perceive  what  appeared  to  be  a  large  sand-bank
in  the  sea.  Towards  the  south  the  land  sinks  down  gradually  to
an  extensive  basin  or  plain,  having  many  villages  and  ancient
sites,  with  which  we  afterwards  became  better  acquainted.  We
now  remarked  the  ancient  fortress  of  Kurmul  (Carmel),  and  be-
yond it  a  dark  mountain  ridge  beginning  pot  far  to  the  left  and
running  off  W.  S.  W.^

In  respect  to  the  place  which  anciently  stood  here,  we  can
be  guided  only  by  conjecture.  Jerome  relates  of  Paixla,  that,
departing  from  Hebron,  she  stopped  upon  the  height  of  Cophar
Barucha,  '  Village  of  Benediction ;'  to  which  place  Abraham
accompanied  the  Lord,  and  where  of  course  he  afterwards  looked

'  See  above,  p.  212.  We  afterwards  thus  covered  with  a  stone,  which  is  re-
met  with  other  like  instances.  moved  only  at  particular  times.

^  Gen.  2J),  2.  .3,  "  a  ptreat  stone  was  upon  '  From  tlie  mosk  we  took  bearings :  esh-

tho  well's  mouth  ;  and  thither  were  all  the  Shiyukh  N.  5°  W.    Pass  of  'Ain  Jidy  S.

flocks  gathered  ;  and  they  rolled  the  stone  65"  K.    Wady  el-Mojib  beyond  the  sea,

from  the  well's  mouth,  and  watered  the  N.  80°  K.    Kurmul  S.  23"  W. — Hebron

sheep,  and  put  the  stone  again  upon  the  bears  S.  82°  W.  distant  about  an  hour  and

well's  mouth  in  his  place."    W'c  at'terwarils  a  half.    This  we  wore  able  afterwards  to

Baw  many  illustrations  of  this  passage  in  ascertain  from  the  hill  west  of  Hebron.  See

Iho  fields ;  the  cistonis  being  very  often  Hebron,  May  25th.

ii.  188,  189

Mat  9.J

BENI  Na'iM.

491

Towards  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  beheld  the  smoke  of  their
'  irning.'  Here  Paula  looked  out  upon  the  wide  desert,  the  land
i'  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  regions  of  Engaddi  and  Zoar  ;
and  here  she  remembered  Lot  and  his  sin.'  She  then  returned
to  Jerusalem  by  way  of  Tekoa.  All  these  circumstances  accord
exactly  with  the  situation  of  Beni  Na'im,  and  with  no  other
spot  ;  and  the  mention  of  Lot  in  this  connection,  may  help  to
account  for  \h.e  origin  of  the  present  Muhammedan  tradition. —
This  of  course  was  a  diflerent  place  from  the  Valley  of  Berachah
(benediction)  in  the  direction  of  Tekoa,  where  Jehoshaphat  cele-
brated the  miraculous  overfhrow  of  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites.^
Yet  even  of  this  perhaps  a  trace  remains  in  the  name  BereikiUy
■which  stands  on  Seetzen's  ma-p,  and  is  found  also  in  our  lists.^

On  arriving  at  Beni  Xa'im  we  quietly  took  possession  of  the
court  of  the  mosk  ;  spread  our  carpets  in  the  northern  portico  ;
and  our  servants  having  kneaded  and  baked  imleavened  bread
for  the  first  time,  we  enjoyed  our  repast  and  made  ourselves  very
comfortable.  The  weather  was  bright  and  pleasant,  with  a
mid-day  temperature  of  67^  F.  After  two  hours  the  Mukariyeh
arrived  from  Hebron  ;  bringing  with  them  their  barley,  and  also
oranges  and  other  fruit  for  us.

"We  had  before  been  undecided  what  rovAe  to  take  from  Beni
Na'im  ;  but  the  sight  of  Kurmul,  and  a  report  of  names  like
Zif,  Ma'in,  and  Yutta,  in  that  region,  induced  us  to  bend  our
steps  that  way.  Xear  Tekoa  we  had  fallen  in  with  two  of  the
Arabs  Rashaideh,  who  dwell  arotmd  'Ain  Jidy  ;  and  as  this
point  lay  out  of  the  territories  of  our  guides  of  the  Ta'amirah,
we  had  taken  up  one  of  these  Arabs,  both  as  a  farther  guide  for
that  portion  of  the  western  coast  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  likewise
in  order  to  insure  a  good  reception  from  such  Arabs  of  his  tribe,
as  we  might  happen  to  fall  in  with.  In  going  to  Kurmul  we
entered  also  the  territory  of  the  Jehalin.

"We  left  Beni  Na'im  at  half  past  3  o'clock,  descending  gra-
dually ;  and  in  twenty  minutes  came  in  sight  of  Yutta  on  the
distant  hills,  bearing  S.  55'  "W.  This  is  doubtless  the  Juttah
of  the  Old  Testament ;  we  afterwards  saw  it  much  nearer,  and
I  shall  again  recur  to  it.'    At  the  same  time  Beni  Xa'im  bore

40=  E.  and  Yukin  S.  5°  W.  The  latter  is  a  Muhammedan
Makam  (station),  where  they  say  Lot  stopped  after  his  flight
from  Sodom,    At  4.10  we  passed  close  by  it ;  and  continued  to

'  Gen.  18,  3a  19, 27.  28.  86.  ad  Enstoch,  Epitaph.  Panlie,  T.  IV.  iL

*  ••  Altermdiestetitin  snpercnio  Crt  of  Kadesh ;
but  this  is  only  because  they  are  so  con-
nected in  Gen.  14,  7;  and  implies  nothing
more  than  a  general  pro.ximity.  Onomast.
art  Hazazon  Thamar.  The  "  wilderness
of  Judah"  in  which  En-gedi  was  -.ituated,
was  doubtless  the  desert  along  the  western
side  of  the  Dead  Sea,  extending  from  the
north  end  of  the  sea  to  the  desert  of  Ka-
desh on  the  south  :  Josh.  1.5, 61.  C2  ;  comp.
vs.  6.  18,  18.  All  this  goes  to  show,  that
there  was  only  one  En-gedL  See  gciieral-
Iv  Re'and  Pahest.  p.  763.  Ratmier  Pal  p.
170,  ed.  3.

Mat  10.]

509

seems  to  place  above  upon  the  mountains.*  Since  that  day  no
traveller  appears  to  have  visited  the  region  until  the  present
century.  Succeeding  writers  copied  Brocardus  ;  and  the  imagi-
nation of  the  monks  drew  En-gedi  nearer  and  nearer  towards
Bethlehem,  until  Quaresmius  places  it  at  six  miles  from  Bethle-
hem and  seven  from  the  Dead  Sea,  apparently  on  the  way  to
Mar  Saba.*  He  srpeaks  also  of  its  \-ineyards  as  formerly  con-
nected with  Bethlehem  ;  and  these  are  probably  the  same  which
Hasselquist  regarded  as  the  vineyards  of  Solomon  at  En-gedi.'
The  present  name  and  site  of  'Ain  Jidy  were  first  found  out  by
Seetzen  m  A.  D.  1806,  and  are  given  upon  his  map  ;  but  whether
he  actually  visited  the  spot,  or  only  obtained  his  information  from
the  Arabs,  we  were  then  nowhere  told.*  At  any  rate,  the  pre-
ceding pages  contain,  I  believe,  the  first  account  of  this  place
from  personal  observation,  which  has  been  given  to  the  public
for  many  centuries.^

THE  DEAD  SEA.

A  few  general  remarks  upon  the  character  and  phenomena  of
the  Dead  Sea,  arising  out  of  our  observations  at  'Ain  Jidy,  and
during  the  two  following  days,  may  here  find  their  proper  place.
In  our  later  excursion  from  Hebron  to  Wady  Miisa,  we  visited
the  south  end  of  the  sea  ;  and  I  shall  there  have  occasion  to
make  some  farther  remarks  upon  that  portion  of  it,  as  well  as
upon  the  geological  structure  of  the  whole  region,  and  the  de-
Btruction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain.

Length  and  Breadth  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  general  breadth
of  the  sea  is  very  uniform  ;  except  where  it  is  contracted  near
the  extremities,  by  Usdum  on  the  south  and  by  Ras  el-Feshk-hah
on  the  north.  According  to  Lieut.  Lynch  the  north  end  of  the
Dead  Sea  is  in  Lat.  31°  46 '  20 ' ;  and  the  south  end  in  Lat.  31"
5  20

In  constructing  a  new  map  of  this  region,  a  minute  and  very
carefiil  comparison  of  all  the  bearings  taken  by  us  at  various
points  along  the  whole  western  coast  of  the  Dead  Sea,  as  well  as
of  the  distances  travelled  upon  our  several  routes,  resulted  in
fixing  the  breadth  of  the  sea  at  'Ain  Jidy  at  about  mne  geogra-

'  Brocardns,  c  7.  pp.  179,  180.  ia  folly  described;  IL  p.  226  sq.— 'jUn

'  Ehicid.  IL  pp.  692,  693.    Compare  Jidy  was  likewise  for  a  considerable  time

Von  Troilo,  p.  327.    Pococke  XL  L  p.  38.  the  camping-grotmd  of  Lieut.  Lynch  and

'  Elncid.  DL  p.  620.  Haaselqniafs  Reiae,  his  exploring  party  in  1848.

p.  156,  '  'Ain  Jidy  is  mentioned  by  the  Arabian

*  No  mention  is  made  of  'Ain  Jidy  in  writer  Mejr  ed-Din  abont  A.  D.  1495,  as

my  of  Seetzen'a  papers,  formerly  printed,  on  the  eastern  border  of  the  district  of  Ile-

Bnt  in  the  recent  edition  of  his  travels,  bron.  Fundgr.  dea  Or.  II.  p.  142.
(Beisen,  Berlin  1854,)  his  visit  to  'Ain  Jidy

Tql.  I.-4a*  iL  216,  217

510

THE  DEAD  SEA.

[Sec.  X.

phical  miles.  The  same  minute  comparison  and  cautious  con-
struction, gave  likewise  for  the  length  of  the  Dead  Sea  ahout
thirfy-7iine  of  the  like  miles  ;  'Ain  Jidy  heing  situated  nearly  at
the  middle  point  of  the  western  coast.'

There  will  therefore  be  no  very  essential  error  in  estimating
the  whole  length  of  the  Dead  Sea  at  Thirty-eight  or  Forty
geographical  mUes.  The  length  appears  to  vary  not  less  than
two  or  three  miles  in  different  years  or  seasons  of  the  year,  ac-
cording as  the  water  extends  uj)  more  or  less  upon  the  flats
towards  the  south.'

From  the  same  point  on  the  shore,  we  estimated  the  height
of  the  western  cliffs  at  1500  feet,  as  above  mentioned  ;  and  that
of  the  highest  ridges  of  the  eastern  mountains  lying  back  from
the  shore,  at  from  2000  to  2500  feet  above  the  water.

Form  and  Character  of  the  Sho7'es.  Burckhardt  relates,
that  "  the  mountains  which  enclose  the  Ghor,  or  valley  of  the
Jordan,  open  considerably  at  the  northern  extremity  of  the  Dead
Sea,  and  encompassing  it  on  the  west  and  east  sides,  approach
again  at  its  southern  extremity,  leaving  [afterwards]  only  a  nar-
row plain  between  them."^  This  account  is  not  correct ;  that
intelligent  traveller  did  not  himself  visit  the  sea,  and  was  pro-
bably misled  by  the  information  of  the  Arabs.  The  bed  of  the
Dead  Sea  is  only  a  portion  of  the  Ghor  or  great  valley,  which
here  retains  its  usual  breadth,  and  does  not  spread  out  into  an
oval  form  or  to  a  larger  compass,  as  is  the  case  around  the  lake
of  Tiberias.  Its  breadth  at  'Ain  Jidy  is  much  the  same  as  op-
posite to  Wady  Musa  ;  certainly  not  greater.  Around  Jericho
indeed,  the  mountains  do  thus  retire  on  both  sides  ;  so  that  the
valley  at  that  point  is  not  less  than  eleven  or  twelve  miles
wide  ;  but  they  again  approach  each  other  before  they  enclose
the  sea.  So  far  as  we  could  perceive,  the  eastern  mountains  run
in  nearly  a  straight  course  along  the  whole  lengtli  of  the  sea.
From  the  western  mountains,  Ras  el-Feshkhah  and  the  adjacent
cliffs  project  obliquely  towards  the  northeast  near  the  northern
end  of  the  sea,  giving  to  the  shore  in  that  part  the  same  direc-

'  Mr  Lc'gh,  and  also  Irby  and  Mangles,
who  R^w  the  whole  extent  of  the  Dead
Sea  several  times  from  the  eastern  monn-
tains,  give  their  judgment  of  its  length,  the
former  at  not  over  forty  miles,  and  the  two
latter  at  thirty.  But  the  transparency  of
the  at  nosphcre  in  these  regions,  and  the
want  of  any  known  fixed  points  as  a  stan-
dard, render  any  mere  judgment  of  this
kind  liable  to  great  uncertainty.  Sec  Lcgli
in  Macmichae'i's  Journey,  Chap.  IV.  Irby
and  Mangles' Travels,  p.  4r>'.).  [Ul.] — lo-
sephus  gives  the  length  of  the  Dead  Sea
at  r>SO  stadia  or  7"ii  Roman  miles ;  and  the

ii.  :217-2i9

breadth  at  150  stadia  or  18}  Roman  miles ;
B.  J.  4.  8.  4.  This  is  another  specimen  of  the
inexactness  of  that  writer's  estimates.

'  See  under  May  29th ;  also  Anderson's
Geol.  Rep.  p.  182. — According  to  the  Map  of
Lieut.  Lynch,  the  length  of  the  Dead  Sea,
is  40  geogr.  miles ;  and  the  breadth  9  to  91-
geogr  miles.  Several  circum.stances  indi-
cate, that  at  the  time  of  his  visit  (1848)
the  sea  was  fuller  and  extended  further
south,  than  when  we  saw  it  ten  years  ear-
lier. See  also  Note  XXX,  end  of  the  vol-
ume.

'  Travels  in  Syria,  p.  390.

Sec.  X.]

CHARACTER  OF  THE  SHORES.

511

tion,  and  contracting  the  breadth  both  of  the  sea  and  valley.
At  the  southern  end  a  hke  contraction  is  occasioned  by  Hajr  Us-
dura,  as  above  described.  Between  el-Feshkhah  and  Usdum,  the
western  cliflfs  run  in  a  tolerably  direct  course,  about  S.  15^  W.

The  phenomena  around  the  Dead  Sea  are  such  as  might
naturally  be  expected  from  the  character  of  its  waters  and  of  the
region  round  about,  a  naked  solitary  desert.  It  lies  in  its  deep
caldron,  surrounded  by  lofty  cliffs  of  naked  limestone  rock,  and
exposed  for  seven  or  eight  months  in  each  year  to  the  unclouded
beams  of  a  burning  sun.  Nothing  therefore  but  sterility  and
deathlike  solitude  can  be  looked  for  upon  its  shores  ;  and  nothing
else  is  actually  found,  except  in  those  parts  where  there  are  foun-
tains or  streams  of  fresh  water.  Such  is  the  case  at  'Ain  Jidy,
in  the  Ghor  near  the  southeast  comer  of  the  sea,  and  on  the  isth-
mus of  the  peninsula  ;  to  say  nothing  of  the  Jordan  and  the
fountains  around  Jericho  on  the  north.  In  all  these  places  there
is  a  fertile  sod  and  abundant  vegetation  ;  nor  have  I  ever  seen  a
more  luxuriant  growth  than  at  'Ain  Jidy.  Here  too  were  birds
in  great  numbers  in  the  thicket ;  and  we  saw  them  frequently
flying  over  the  sea.  The  fountain  of  'Ain  Jidy  appears  to  be
the  main  source  of  sweet  water  upon  the  western  coast  ;^  but
further  towards  the  north  are  the  brackish  fountains  'Ain  Tera-
beh,  el-Ghuweir,  and  el-Feshkhah,  (the  last  very  copious,)  in  the
midst  of  marshy  ground  along  the  shore  covered  with  canes  and
reeds,  and  furnishing  a  retreat  to  an  abundance  of  frogs.  The
coasts  of  the  sea  have  also  been  inhabited  from  time  immemorial,
and  are  yet  so  in  a  degree  ;  Jericho,  '  A.in  Jidy,  and  the  southern
Ghor  are  still  the  abodes  of  men  ;  and  if  this  is  now  less  the
case  than  formerly,  the  cause  is  to  be  sought  rather  in  the  al-
tered circumstances  and  relations  of  social  life,  than  in  the  nature
of  the  country  or  the  sea.

I  have  adduced  all  these  particulars  in  order  to  show,  that
the  stories  so  long  current  of  the  pestiferous  nature  of  the  Dead
Sea  and  its  waters,  are  a  mere  fable. ^  We  were  for  five  days  in
the  vicinity  of  its  shores  ;  and  nowhere  perceived  either  noisome
smell  or  noxious  vapour  arising  from  its  bosom.  ^  Our  Arabs  too
had  never  seen  or  heard  of  any  such  appearance.   Smoke  we  had

'  There  is  a  fountain  near  the  mouth  of  foetidissimum,  infernalis  nigredinis,  tetrum

the  Wady  el-Ghar,  already  mentioned ;  and  habens  odorem  ;  "   Willeb.  ab  Oldenborg

another  in  Wady  Sudeir  just  north  of  'Ain  sub  fine.    Even  Quaresmius  liad  good  sense

Jidy,  running  into  the  sea.    The  water  of  enough  to  deny  all  this  on  the  testimony

both  w.as  said  to  be  sweet.  of  his  own  senses  ;  Tom.  II.  p.  TfiO.

^  "  5Iare  illud  semper  fumum  reddere,  ^  Seetzen  perceived  in  some  places  a

et  nebulam  in  modum  camini  infernalis. —  bad  smell ;   arising,  however,  from  de-

Quoeumque  vapor  a  mari  illo  ascendens  cayed  plants  which  had   been  brought

iinpellitur,  ibi  terrie  nascentia  non  secus  down  from  the  Jordan  or  by  other  streams

quam  si  a  pruina  fuissent  tacta  emoriun-  into  the  sea,  and  then  cast  upon  the  shore  ;

tur;  "  Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  179.    "  Staguum  Reison  IL  p.  241.

ii.  219,  220

512

THE  DEAD  SEA.

[Sec.  X.

indeed  often  seen  on  the  Mgli  ground  above,  proceeding  from
Arab  encampments  or  the  preparation  of  charcoal.  There  must
also  naturally  be  an  immense  evaporation  from  the  sea  itself,  in
consequence  of  its  depressed  position  and  exposure  to  the  sum-
mer heats  ;  and  this  again  cannot  but  occasionally  affect  the
clearness  of  the  atmosphere  around.  But  the  character  of  this
evaporation  cannot  well  be  different  from  that  of  any  other  lake
in  similar  circumstances.^

The  Eg}-ptian  heat  of  the  climate,  "which  is  found  throughout
the  whole  Ghor,  is  in  itself  unhealthy  ;  and,  in  connection  with
the  marshes,  gives  rise  in  summer  to  frequent  intermittent  fevers ;
so  that  the  Ghawarineh,  or  proper  inhabitants  of  the  G-hor,  in-
cluding the  people  of  Jericho,  are  a  feeble  and  sickly  race.  But
this  has  no  necessary  connection  with  the  Dead  Sea,  as  such ;
and  the  same  phenomena  might  probably  exist,  in  at  least  an
equal  degree,  were  the  waters  of  the  lake  fresh  and  limpid,  or
even  were  there  here  no  lake  at  all.

The  mineral  productions  around  the  sea  have  often  been  de-
scribed. The  body  of  the  mountains  is  everywhere  limestone  ;
excepting  Usdum,  which  is  of  rock-salt  and  wiU  be  hereafter  de-
scribed.'' I  am  not  aware  that  the  dark  basaltic  stones,  so  fre-
quent around  the  lake  of  Tiberias,  have  ever  been  discovered  ia
this  \-icinity.  There  is  however  a  black  shining  stone,  found  at
the  northern  extremity  of  the  sea,  which  partially  ignites  in  the
fire  and  emits  a  bituminous  smell.  We  saw  some  of  this  in  de-
scending from  Ras  el-Feshkhah  to  the  plain.  It  is  used  in  Je-
rusalem for  the  manufacture  of  rosaries  and  other  little  articles.'
Sulphur  is  found  in  various  parts  ;  we  picked  up  pieces  of  it  as
large  as  a  walnut  near  the  northern  shore  ;  and  the  Arabs  said
it  was  found  in  the  sea  near  'Ain  el-Feshkhah  in  lumps  as  large
as  a  man's  fist.  They  find  it  in  sufficient  quantities  to  make
from  it  their  own  gunpowder.     Near  Usdum  we  afterwards

'  "  As  soon  as  we  came  to  the  pass,  fallen ;  YoL  II.  p.  240. — According  to
which  commands  an  extensive  prospect  of  Seetzen,  the  mountain  near  the  southeast
the  Dead  Sea,  we  could  observe  the  efifect  comer  of  the  sea,  not  farn  orth  of  AVady
of  the  evaporation  arising  from  it,  in  broad  el-Ahsy,  consists  of  brownish  sand-stone  ;
transparent  columns  of  vapour,  not  unlike  Zach's  Monti.  Corr.  X\'in.  p.  435.  See-
waterspouts  in  appearance,  but  very  much  tzen  found  here  large  blocks  of  most  beau-
larger;  "  Irby  and  Mangles,  p.  447,  [137.]  tiful  breccia  and  conglomerate  of  various

"  Irby  and  Mangles  mention  "  frag-  colours ;  also  blocks  of  dark  olive  green
ments  of  red  and  gray  granite ;  gray,  red,  jasper,  etc.  These  blocks  he  supposes  were
and  black  porphyry,"  and  many  other  brought  down  from  the  ravines  by  the  tor-
kinds  of  stone  scattered  along  the  shore  at  rents.  Reisen.  II.  p.  3.")4.
the  southeast  comer  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  '  The  "  stink-stone  "  of  Burckhardt,  p.
they  supposed  to  be  fragments  from  the  394.  MaundreU,  March  30.  Pococke  II
mountain  above;  Travels,  p.  358,  [109.]  i.  p.  37.  Hasselquist  describes  it  as  "  qnarti
But  in  the  Life  of  Giov.  Finati,  edited  by  in  the  form  of  slate,  one  of  the  rarest  min-
Mr.  Bankes,  it  is  said,  that  there  were  erals  he  met  with  in  his  travels."  Reise,
no  rocks  of  the  same  nature  discernible,  p.  153.  [Engl.  p.  131.]
from  which  these  fragments  could  have

ii.  220-222

Sac  X.

MINERALS.  DEPRESSION.

513

picked  up  small  lumps  of  nitre.'  AU  these  circumstances  testify
to  the  volcanic  nature  of  the  whole  region  ;  and  this  is  also  con-
firmed by  the  warm  fountains  of  'Ain  Jidy  and  el-Feshkhah  on
the  west,  and  the  hot  sulphur  springs  of  the  ancient  CaUirrhoe
on  the  eastern  coast."  Three  weeks  before,  one  of  our  friends,
the  Rev.  Mr  Hebard,  had  picked  up  a  large  piece  of  pumice-stone
on  a  small  knoU  near  the  mouth  of  the  Jordan.

One  of  the  most  singular  circumstances  in  the  character  of
the  Dead  Sea,  is  the  deep  depression  of  its  level  below  that  of
the  Mediterranean.    This  has  been  detected  only  within  the
last  few  years.    Messrs  Moore  and  Beke  were  the  first  to  notice
I  it  in  March,  1837,  by  means  of  the  boiling  point  of  water ;  in
I  this  way  they  tbund  the  depression  to  be  about  500  English  feet.'
i  A  month  or  two  later  the  barometrical  measurements  of  Schu-
I  bert  gave  the  depression  of  the  sea  at  598.5  Paris  feet ;  that  of
Jericho  beinsc  527.7  feet.*    The  verv  jrreat  descent  which  we
found  from  Carmel  to  the  cliffs  over  'Ain  Jidy,  and  the  immense
depth  of  the  sea  below,  point  to  a  like  result.    But  so  great  is
the  uncertainty  in  all  such  partial  measurements  and  observa-
tions, (as  evinced  in  the  like  case  of  the  Caspian  Sea,)  that  the
question  can  never  be  decided  with  exactness,  until  the  inter-
vening country  shall  have  been  surveyed  and  the  relative  level
of  the  two  seas  trigonometricaUy  ascertained.'    To  such  an  un-
dertaking no  great  obstacle  would  probably  exist.'

CJtaracter  of  the  Waters.  The  buoyancy  of  the  waters  of
the  Dead  Sea,  according  to  our  experience,  has  already  been
described  :  and  this  shown  to  accord  with  the  testimony  of  an-
cient writers."  It  is  occasioned  by  the  great  specific  gravity  of
the  water,  arising  from  the  heavv  solution  of  various  salts  con-
tamed  in  it,  chiefly  those  of  magnesia  and  soda.  But  the  weight
and  proportions  of  this  solution,  and  of  course  the  specific  gravity,
would  seem  to  vary  somewhat  in  different  parts  of  the  sea,  and

'  Irby  and  Mangles  found  also  "  lumps  *  The  case  of  the  Caspian  Sea  fiimishea

of  nitre  and  fine  snlphnr  from  the  size  of  a  a  striking  instance  of  the  uncertainty  of

nutmeg  np  to  that  of  a  small  hen's  egg,"  snch  barometrical  measurements.  Eleven

upon  the  western  shore  of  the  long  penin-  different  series  of  rbservations  between  A.

snla;  Travels,  p.  453,  [139.]    See  also  D.  1732  and  A.  D.  1836,  gave  for  the  de-

Seetzen.  Eeisen,  IL  p.  352.  pression  of  that  sea  below  the  sea  of  Azof

'  Ibid,  p,  467-469.  [143—145  "|    Legh  different  results,  varying  from  about  100

in  Macmichael's  Journey.  Chap.  I\'.  See-  Paris  feet  as  the  least,  to  about  366  Paris

zen,  Reisen  IL  p.  336  sq.  feet  as  the  greatest.    The  true  depression

'  Journal  of  the  Royal  Geogr.  Soc.  VoL  as  determined  bv  geometrical  stirvev  in

Vn.   1S37.  p.  456.  "  VoL  IX.  1839.  p.  A.  D.  1836,  is  76  Paris  feet.    See  Monats-

Isiv.  bericht  der  Berliner  Gesellsch.  fur  Erd-

*  Beise.  Vol.  IIL  p.  87.    Berghaus"  Al-  kunde,  Bd.  I.  pp.  16",  168.
manach  far  1840,  p.  481.    Russegger  and  •     *  lliis  was  .iccomplished  in  1848  by  the

BertoQ  in  1838  first  make  the  depression  U.  S.  Expedition,  under  Lieut.  Lvnch.

of  the  sea  amount  to  more  than  1,300  Pa-  See  the  results  in  Note  XXX,  end  of  the

ria  feet.    See  Berghau*'  Annalen,  etc.  Feb.  voluire.

and  M^rz  1^*39.  p.  432.    Bulletin  de  la  '  See  p.  506.  above.
Societe  de  Gcogr.  Octobre,  1839.  p.  161.

ii.  222  223

1

514

THE  DEAD  SEA.

[Sec.  X.

at  different  seasons  of  the  year.  A  portion  of  -water  taken
from  near  the  mouth  of  the  J ordan,  might  he  expected  to  he  at
all  times  less  strongly  saturated,  than  another  from  the  vicinity
of  'Ain  Jidy  ;  and  during  the  winter  season,  when  the  sea  is  filled
by  the  rains  and  its  level  raised  several  feet,  its  waters  are  natu-
rally more  diluted  than  in  autumn,  after  having  been  for  months
subjected  to  the  process  of  evaporation  under  a  burning  sun.'
These  considerations  may  serve  to  account  in  part  for  the  dif-
ferent results,  which  have  been  obtained  by  chemical  analysis.

Of  the  seven  analyses  of  the  water  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which
have  hitherto  been  pubhshed,  the  four  following  seem  to  deserve
the  preference,  both  for  their  greater  exactness  and  coincidence,
and  as  marking  in  some  measure  the  progress  of  chemical  disco-
verv ;  viz.  that  of  Dr  Marcet  of  London,  1807 ;  Gay-Lussac
of  Paris,  about  1818  ;  Prof  C.  G.  Gmelin  of  Tubingen,  1826  ;
and  Dr  Apjohn  of  Dublin,  1839. It  will  be  seen  that  the  amount
of  salts  is  in  general  nearly  equal ;  wliile  the  relative  proportions
assigned  to  the  different  salts,  are  exceedingly  diverse.  The
standard  of  comparison  for  the  specific  gra\'ity,  is  distilled  water
at  1000  ;  and  the  density  of  the  water  of  the  Dead  Sea  is  sup-
posed to  be  greater  than  that  of  any  other  natural  water  known.

Specific  gravity

Dr  Marcet.  Gay-Lutsac.

Muriate  of  Lime
"   of  magnesia
"    of  soda

Sulphate  of  lime'

Water

(Chloride  of  calcium)
(  "  of  magnesium)
(  "  of  sodium)

1211

1228

3.920

3.98

10.246

15.31

10.360

6.95

0.054

24.580

2C.24

75.420

73.76

100

100

'  Galen  also  remarks,  that  the  water
was  more  bitter  in  summer  than  in  winter ;
De  Simpl.  Med.  fac.  4.  19.  Reland  Pal.  p.
242.

'  These  seven  analyses  are  as  follows :
I.  By  Maequer,  Lavoisier,  and  Le  Sage  in
Paris,  Memoirs  de  I'Acad.  des  Sciences,
1778. — II.  By  Dr  Marcet,  with  a  small
qiiantitv  of  the  water,  Philosoph.  Trans-
act. 1807.  p.  29C  sq.— III.  By  Kl:iproth
of  Berlin,  with  water  brouuht  to  Europe
by  Miiriti  fifty  rears  before  ;  Beitriige,  Vol.
V.  p.  139.  "Berliner  Magazin,  1S09.  p.
]39. — IV.  By  Gay-Lussac,  with  a  large
quantity  of  the  water  brought  home  by
Count  Forbin  ;  see  Forbin's  Voyage,  etc.
Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Phy«.  T.  -\I.  p.
197. — V.  Bv  Hermstiidt  of  Berlin  about
1822  ;  Schweigger's  Journal,  Vol.  XX.XIV.
ii.  223,  224

p.  153.— \^.  By  Prof.  Gmelin  of  TObin-
gen,  who  first  discovered  the  existence  of
bromium  in  the  water ;  Wiirtemb.  natur-
wissens"h.  Abliandl.  Vol.  I.  iii.  p.  1.  Pog-
gendorfiTs  Journal,  1 827,  Vol.  IX.  p.  1 77  sq.
— VII.  By  Dr  Apjohn,  in  a  paper  read
(1839)  before  the  Royal  Irish  Academy.
A  report  of  this  paper  was  published  in
the  London  Athenseum  for  June  1.5th,
1839. — One  of  the  specimens  of  fossil  salt
brought  away  by  me  from  the  mountain
of  I '.■^dum,  at  the  south  end  of  the  sea,  was
analyzed  by  Prof  Rose  of  Berlin.  It  con-
tained a  small  mixture  of  lime  and  mag-
'nesia,  but  no  trace  of  bromium.

"  (ia.v-Luss!ic  remarks,  that  ho  found
also  a  small  quantity  of  chloride  of  potas-
sium, and  traces  of  a  sulphate  probably  of
lime.

Skc.  X.]

CHARACTER  OP  THE  WATERS.

515

Prof.  Qmelin.  Dr.  Apjohn.

Specific  gravity

1212  1153

Boiling  point

221°  F.

Chloride  of  calcium

"     of  magnesium
Bromide  of  magnesium
Chloride  of  potassium
"     of  sodium
"     of  manganese

3.2141
11.7734
0.4393
1.6738
7.0777
0.2117
0.0896
0.0075
0.0527

2.438
9.370
0.201
0.852
9.830
0.005

of  aluminum
of  ammonium

Sulphate  of  lime

0.075

Water

24.5398
75.4602

18.780
81.320

100

100

The  water  analyzed  by  Dr.  Apjohn  was  taken  half  a  mile
from  the  mouth  of  the  Jordan,  near  the  close  of  the  rainy  season  ;
and  exhibits  a  less  amount  of  salts,  and  a  less  specific  gravity,
than  occurs  in  either  of  the  other  analyses.  He  could  detect  no
trace  of  either  alumina  or  ammonia.'

I  have  already  alluded  to  the  fact,  that  the  level  of  the  waters
of  the  Dead  Sea  is  higher  during  and  after  the  rainy  season,  than
in  the  summer  and  autumn,  after  they  have  been  for  months
evaporated  under  the  burning  heat  of  an  unclouded  sun.  The
high  bank  of  pebbles  and  gravel  at  'Ain  Jidy  has  been  mentioned;
and  we  afterwards  saw  at  the  southern  end  of  the  sea  traces  of
its  high-water  mark,  more  than  an  hour  south  of  its  limit  at  the
time  ;  indicating  that  its  level  must  bo  sometimes  ten  or  fifteen
feet  liigher  than  when  we  now  saw  it  in  May.*  This  is  readily  ac-
counted for  by  the  vast  quantity  of  water  brought  into  it  during
the  rainy  season,  not  only  from  the  north,  but  also  from  the
south  and  from  the  mountains  along  its  sides.  The  quantity  of
rain  which  falls  in  Palestine  varies  greatly  in  different  years  ;
and  according  to  this  the  basin  of  the  Dead  Sea  becoming  more
or  less  full,  is  subjected  to  great  variation  in  a  course  of  years.
When  the  rainy  season  is  at  an  end,  the  evaporation  is  suffi-
ciently powerful  to  more  than  counterbalance  the  influx  from
the  Jordan,  and  thus  again  reduce  the  level  of  the  sea.  During
the  preceding  winter,  less  rain  had  fallen  than  is  usual.

The  strong  evaporation  from  the  sea  also  causes  it  to  deposit

'  See  another  later  analysis  in  Note  sea  over  its  lower  banks,  and  such  as  had

XXX,  end  of  the  volume.  not  happened  hi  many  years  before."  He  saw

'  Irby  and  Mangles  noticed  the  high-  trees  that  had  been  killed  by  its  overflowing,

water  mark,  on  some  parts  of  the  Penin-  and  says  the  water  seemed  of  late  years  to

sulii,  a  mile  or  more  above  the  water's  have  gained  on  the  land.    This  was  at  tho

edge;  p.  455.  [140.]    Pococke  also  re-  northwest  part.  Vol.  II.  i.  p.  35.  See  further

marks,  that  in  his  day  (1738)  "  there  had  on,  Tfie  Peninsula  and  Ford.
been  very  extraordinary  inundations  of  this

ii.  225.  22$

516

THE  DEAD  SEA.

[Sec.  X.

its  salts,  particularly  in  summer,  on  various  parts  of  the  shore  ;
from  which  the  Arabs  obtain  their  chief  supply  for  their  families
and  tiocks.  That  obtained  in  the  Birket  el-Khuhl  south  of  'Ain
Jidy  has  already  been  mentioned  ;  *  and  a  place  was  afterwards
pointed  out  to  us  at  the  northwest  corner  of  the  sea,  where  it  is
also  gathered.  Irby  and  Mangles  found  Arabs  on  the  north  side
of  the  isthmus  of  the  peninsula,  "  peeling  off  a  sohd  surface  of
salt  several  inches  in  thickness,  and  loading  it  on  asses."'^  The
same  deposit  is  doubtless  found  on  other  parts  of  the  coast.

According  to  the  testimony  of  all  antiquity  and  of  most
modern  travellers,  there  exists  within  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea
no  living  thing  ;  no  trace  indeed  of  animal  or  vegetable  life.^
Our  own  experience,  so  far  as  we  had  an  opportimity  to  observe,
goes  to  confirm  the  truth  of  this  testimony.  We  perceived  no
sign  of  life  within  the  waters.  Yet  occasionally,  travellers  have
seen  shells  upon  the  shore  ;  which  has  led  to  the  supposition,
that  small  muscles  or  periwinkles  may  after  aU  exist  in  the  sea.
Maundrell  "  observed  among  the  pebbles  on  the  shore  two  or
three  shells  of  fish,  resembling  oyster-shells,  at  two  hours  dis-
tance from  the  mouth  of  the  Jordan."*  Hasselquist  notes  also
cochlece  and  conchce  as  common  on  the  banks  near  the  Jordan  ;
and  Mr  Legh  saw  on  the  northern  shore  "  in  the  water  several
small  shell-fish,  not  unlike  periwinkles."^  Irby  and  Mangles  on
the  peninsula  "  searched  for  shells,  but  found  none  excepting
snail-sheUs,  and  a  small  spiral  species,  invariably  without  any
fish,  or  the  appearance  of  having  had  any  for  a  long  time.*

These  testirponies  seem  at  first  view  strongly  to  favour  the
hypothesis,  that  at  least  some  species  of  shell-fish  may  exist  in
the  sea.  But  the  shells  seen  by  Maundrell  may  after  aU  have
come  from  the  Jordan,  or  have  been  dropped  here  by  some  Arab
or  pilgrim  ;  and  the  accounts  of  Hasselquist  and  Legh,  I  appre-
hend, are  explained  and  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  more
exact  and  cautious  testimony  of  Seetzen.  "I  dismounted,"  he
says,  "and  followed  for  a  time  the  shore  of  the  sea,  to  look  for
conchylia  and  sea-plants  ;  but  found  none  of  either.  And  as
fish  live  upon  these,  it  might  naturally  be  expected  that  no  ten-
ants of  the  waters  would  exist  here  ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by

'  The   salt  pools  are  found  for  two  spirat  et  possit  incedere,  prK  amaritudine

miles  south  of  Birket  el-Khulil ;  Ander-  nimia  in  Iioc  mari  rcpcriri  potest.  Abulfe-

Bon's  Geol.  Report,  p.  177.  da  Tab.  Sjt.  ed.  Kohler,  pp.  12,  1.56. —

'  Travels,  p.  4.51.  [1.39.]  The  absence  of  all  water-fowl  is  readily  ac-

'  Tacit.  Hist.  5.  6,  "  neque  pisces  aut  counted  for,  by  the  absence  of  fish  and

Buetas  aquis  volucres  patitur."    Galen,  de  other  animals  which  constitute  their  food.
Simpl.  Med.  IV.  c.  1!),  tpa'tyerat  iv  iKelv
vr6v.    Ilieron.  ad  Ezech.  47,8  "Mare  Macmichael's  Journey,  Chap.  IV.
mortuum,  in  quo  nihil  poterat  esse  vitale.       "  Travels,  p.  454.  [140.^
Re  vera,  juxta  litcram  hue  usque  nihil  quod
ii.  226.  227

Sec.  X.]

ITS  WATERS.  ASPHxiLTUM.

517

the  experience  of  all  wliom  I  have  inquired  of,  and  who  could
know  about  it. — Snails  and  muscles  I  have  not  found  in  the
lake  ;  some  snails  that  I  picked  up  on  the  shore,  were  land-snails.
I  was  particularly  attentive  to  this  point ;  hut  must  remark,  that
I  was  able  to  examine  only  a  part  of  the  lake."' — The  shells
which  other  travellers  have  met  with,  were  probably  in  like  man-
ner those  of  land  animals.  Or,  if  they  actually  belonged  to  the
lake,  they  probably  have  existed  in  it  only  near  the  mouth  of  the
Jordan,  where  there  is  a  large  intermixture  of  fresh  water,  or  in
the  vicinity  of  the  various  fountains  which  enter  the  sea.

As  we  were  leaving  Palestine,  we  saw  in  the  possession  of
two  EngHsh  travellers,  a  small  flat  fish,  about  the  length  of  a
man's  httle  finger,  which  was  put  into  their  hands  as  having  been
taken  in  the  Dead  Sea,  and  as  proving  that  the  sea  was  actually
inhabited  by  fish.  But  the  report  added  further,  that  the  fish
was  found  on  the  northern  shore  at  some  distance  from  the  mouth
of  the  Jordan ;  and,  when  caught,  was  in  an  exhausted  and
dying  state.  It  would  seem  therefore  much  more  probable,  that
this  was  a  wanderer  from  the  J ordan,  who  paid  for  his  temerity
with  his  life ;  furnishing  a  further  example  of  the  truth  of  J e-
rome's  remark,  that  "when  the  Jordan  swollen  by  the  rains  some-
times carries  down  fish  into  the  Dead  Sea,  they  die  immediately  '
and  float  upon  the  sluggish  waters."'^

Asphaltum.  Our  Arabs  picked  up  along  the  shore  small
pieces  of  bitumen,  asphaltum,  (Arabic  el-Hummar,)  which  we
brought  away.  Our  Sheikh  of  the  Ta'amirah  told  (as  a  report)
the  same  story  of  its  origin,  which  was  heard  by  Seetzen  and
Burckhardt,  viz.  that  it  flows  down  the  face  of  a  precipice  upon
the  eastern  shore,  until  a  large  mass  is  collected,  when  from  its
weight  or  some  shock  it  breaks  off  and  falls  into  the  sea.'  The
Sheikh  of  the  J ehahn,  who  afterwards  accompanied  us  to  Wady
Mtisa,  related  the  same  report ;  assigning  the  place  on  the  north
of  the  peninsula.  It  cannot  of  course  be  south  of  the  isthmus ;
for  the  road  travelled  by  Irby  and  Mangles  and  their  party  passes
aU  the  way  at  the  foot  of  the  rocks  along  the  shore.  Nor  is  it
probable  that  any  such  spot  exists  further  north  ;  we  had  the

'  Seetzen  in  Zach'sMonatl.  Corr.  XVm.  the  naturalist  Schubert.   "  Fish  or  snails,"

pp.  437,  441.    So  too  in  Reisen,  II.  pp.  he  says,  "  do  not  indeed  live  in  tliis  super-

241,  242.  salt  sea  ;  the  melastmia  which  we  found

'  Hieron.  in  Ezech.  slviL  8,  "  Denique  on  the  shore,  as  well  as  the  small  dead

si  Jordanes  anctus  imbribus  pisces  illuc  fishes,  of  which  we  saw  and  picked  up

inflnens  rapuerit,  statim  moriuntur  et  pin-  several  thrown  cut  by  the  waves  upon  the

gnibus  aquis  supernatant."     Galen  also  strand,  are  brought  down  by  the  Jordan  or

affirms,  that  fish  caught  in  the  river  and  accompany  voluntarily  his  flood  ;  but  they

thrown  into  the  lake,  die  immediately  ;  de  soon  pay  for  this  love  of  wandering  with

SimpL  rV.  Id.    Reland  Falsest,  p.  2"43.—  their  lives."    Reise  III.  p.  86.

Since  the  above  remarks  were  written,  I  '  Seetzen  in  Zach's  Monatl.  Corr.  XVIIL

am  happy  to  find  my  views  confirmed  lay  p.  441.    Burckhardt,  p.  394.

Vol.  I.— 44  ii.  227-229

518

THE  DEAD  SEA.

[Sec.  X.

eastern  coast  very  distinctly  in  sight  for  two  days,  as  we  travelled
along  the  western  shore,  and  examined  it  continually  with  our
glasses ;  so  that  any  such  marked  point  upon  the  rocks  would
hardly  have  escaped  our  notice.  All  agreed,  that  there  was
nothing  of  the  kind  upon  the  western  coast.

More  definite  and  trustworthy  was  the  account  which  the
Arabs  gave  us  of  the  appearance  of  the  bitumen  in  the  sea.
They  believe  that  it  thus  appears  only  after  earthquakes.  The
Sheikhs  above  mentioned,  both  of  the  Ta'amirah  and  Jehahn,
related  that  after  the  earthquake  of  1834,  a  large  quantity  of
asphaltum  was  cast  upon  the  shore  near  the  southwest  part  of  the
sea,  of  which  the  Jehahn  brought  about  sixty  Kuntdrs  into
market.^  My  companion  also  remembered,  that  in  that  year  a
large  amount  had  been  purchased  by  the  Frank  merchants  at
Beirut.  During  the  last  year  also,  after  the  earthquake  of  Jan.
1st,  1837,  a  large  mass  of  bitumen  (one  said  like  an  island,  an-
other like  a  house)  was  discovered  floating  on  the  sea,  and  was
driven  aground  on  the  west  side,  not  far  to  the  north  of  Usdum.
The  Jehahn  and  the  inhabitants  of  Yutta  swam  off  to  it ;  and
cut  it  up  with  axes,  so  as  to  bring  it  ashore.  The  Ta'amirah
heard  of  it,  and  went  to  get  a  share.  They  found  seventy  men
...already  upon  and  around  it.  It  was  carried  off  by  camel-loads,
partly  up  the  pass  of  'Ain  Jidy ;  and  sold  by  the  Arabs  for  four
piastres  the  Butl  or  pound.  The  share  of  the  Ta'iimirah  brought
them  more  than  five  hundred  dollars ;  wliile  others  sold  to  the
amount  of  two  or  three  thousand  dollars. — Except  in  those  two
years,  the  Sheikh  of  the  Jehalin,  a  man  fifty  years  old,  had
never  known  of  bitumen  appearing  in  the  sea,  nor  heard  of  it
from  his  fathers.

The  above  information  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  account  of
Josephus,  that  "the  sea  in  many  places  sends  up  black  masses
of  asphaltum,  which  float  on  the  surface,  having  the  form  and
size  of  headless  oxen."'^  Diodorus  Siculus  also  relates,  that  the
bitumen  is  thrown  up  in  masses,  covering  sometimes  two  or
three  plethra,  and  having  the  appearance  of  islands.^

The  Peninsula.  Seetzen,  in  his  first  journey  around  the
Dead  Sea,  took  a  direct  course  from  Kerak  to  the  southern  ex-
tremity, descending  there  from  the  mountain  by  a  very  diflicult
pass.  He  seems  to  have  observed  the  peninsula  only  from  the
western  mountain  ;  and  mistook  it  for  an  island.*  In  a  later
journey,  he  visited  the  peninsula  ;  and  it  is  laid  down  upon  his

'  The  Kuntdr  is  about  98  lbs.  English,  connection  with  the  destruction  of  the

Lane's  Mod.  Egypt.  II.  p.  372.  cities  of  the  plain,  see  near  the  end  of

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  4.  8.  4.  Sect.  XII.

'  Died.  Sic.  2.  48.— Some  further  re-       *  Zach's  Monatl.  Corr.  XVIII.  p.  438.

marks  on  the  probable  source  of  the  as-  Rcison  I.  p.  429.
phaltum  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  its  apparent
ii.229  230

'  Sec  X.]

THE  PENINSULA.

519

map,  though  not  in  its  true  form.' — In  the  year  1818,  Irhy  and
Mangles  traveUed  with  Messrs  Bankes  and  Legh  from  Hebron
to  Kcrak  by  the  usual  road ;  descending  to  the  south  end  of  the
eea  by  the  pass  of  ez-Zuweirah,  then  keeping  along  upon  the
shore  as  far  as  to  the  isthmus,  and  ascending  to  Kerak  along  the
Wady  which  comes  down  upon  the  isthmus  from  near  that  place.

From  the  cliff  over  'Ain  Jidy,  we  could  look  across  the  isth-
mus and  up  this  Wady  to  Kerak ;  the  direction  being  about  B.
E.  by  S.  Irby  and  Mangles  caU  it  the  Dara,  properly  Wady
ed-Dera'ah  ;  we  heard  for  it  only  the  name  of  Wady  Kerak.
Burckhardt  has  both  names.^  The  same  travellers,  after  their
return  from  Wady  Musa,  descended  agaia  from  Kerak  to  the
peninsula,  and  traversed  the  whole  of  it  ;  and  to  them  we  are
indebted  for  the  first  published  account  of  this  remarkable  feature
of  the  Dead  Sea.  They  have  added  a  plan  of  the  peninsula  and
of  the  part  of  the  sea  farther  south,  which  they  call  the  "  back-
water ; "  but  it  seems  to  have  been  drawn  only  from  recollection,
and  does  not,  according  to  my  impressions,  exhibit  the  present
form  either  of  the  sea  or  of  the  peninsula.^

We  had  the  opportunity  of  looking  down  upon  the  peninsula
and  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the  sea  from  two  different  high
points  ;  first,  from  the  cliff  over  'Ain  Jidy  looking  towards  the
southeast  and  again  from  a  cUff  near  the  pass  ez-Zuweirah  look-
ins:  towards  the  east  and  northeast.  As  we  saw  it,  the  isthmus
was  comparatively  much  narrower  than  is  represented  ou  the  plan
of  Irby  and  Mangles  ;  and  not  only  did  the  peninsula  extend  in
a  long  horn  towards  the  north,  leaving  a  bay  behind  it  ;  but  also
in  a  shorter  horn  towards  the  soulh,  forming  likewise  a  smaller
bay  behind.  Nor  was  the  narrow  part  or  strait  of  the  sea,  be-
tween the  peninsula  and  the  western  shoal,  so  very  narrow  as
they  represent  it  ;  although  they  judge  it  to  be  only  about  a
mile  in  width.*  These  discrepancies  may  be  accounted  for  partly
from  the  difficulty  of  sketching  such  a  plan  from  recollection
after  so  long  an  interval ;  and  stiU.  more  by  the  supposition,  that
the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  in  1818  were  much  lower  than  in
1838.  That  this  was  actually  the  case,  I  am  inclined  to  believe,
not  only  from  the  representation  of  the  plan  in  question  ;  but
also  from  the  accounts  of  the  Arabs,  which  will  be  given  further
on  ia  speaking  of  the  ford.

'  Reisen  11.  p.  350  sq.  Seetzen's  map
is  found  in  Zach's  Monatl  Corr.  VoL  XXII ;
also  reduced  in  Klbden's  Palaestina,  Berl.
1817.

'  Travel*,  p.  390.

*  Since  the  above  was  written,  I  have
had  the  pleasure  of  a  personal  acquaint-
ance with  Capt.  Mangles,  who  informs  me,

that  the  supposition  in  the  text  is  quite
correct;  the  plan  in  question  not  having
been  sketched  until  after  an  interval  of
several  months,  when  the  travellers  had
already  left  Palestine  ;  and  then  only  from
recollection.  This  note  is  added  at  the
suggestion  of  Oapt.  Mangles  himself.
*  Travels,  p.  454.  [140.]

ii.  231,  232

520

THE  DEAD  SEA,

[Sec.  X.

From  the  "Wady  Kerak  a  never  failing  stream  issues  upon
the  isthmus,  and  enters  the  hay  on  its  northern  side  ;  fertilizing
here  a  tract  of  level  ground,  which  is  scattered  over  vrith  thickets
of  acacia  (Seyal)  and  the  Dom  (Niibk)  with  other  trees  ;  among
which  is  found  the  'Osher.  Further  north,  nearer  the  bay,  are
tamarisks  and  a  cane  brake  or  jungle.  In  the  thicket,  according
to  Irby  and  Mangles,'  the  hare  and  the  partridge  of  the  desert
abound  ;  and  portions  of  it  are  cleared  and  cultivated.  In  the
very  heart  of  it,  not  visible  in  any  direction  beyond  a  few  yards,
unless  by  the  smoke  arising  from  it,  is  the  village  of  the  Ghawa-
rineh,  who  cultivate  this  tract.  Their  abode  has  much  the  ap-
pearance of  a  village  in  India  or  the  South  Seas.  This  tract,  as
we  were  told,  is  called  Ghor  el-Mezra'ah ;  it  is  so  marked  on
Seetzen's  map,  and  is  said  by  Burckhardt  to  be  much  frequented
by  the  people  of  Kerak,  who  buy  here  the  tobacco  which  they
smoke.'^

The  peninsula  itself,  as  seen  from  the  western  side  of  the  sea,
appears  much  like  a  long  low  sand-bank.  But  according  to  the
same  travellers,  who  passed  quite  around  its  northern  horn,  and
then  along  its  western  edge  nearly  or  quite  to  its  southern  ex-
tremity, such  is  not  its  general  character.  Its  middle  part  con-
sists of  "  a  steep  white  ridge  running  like  a  spine  down  the
centre.  This  ridge  presents  steep  sloping  sides,  seamed  and
furrowed  into  deep  hoUows  by  the  rains,  and  tenninating  at  the
summit  in  sharp  triangular  points,  standing  up  hke  rows  of  tents
ranged  one  above  another.  The  whole  is  of  a  substance  appa-
rently partaking  of  the  mixture  of  soft  and  broken  chalk  and
slate,  and  is  wholly  unproductive  of  vegetation.  The  height
of  the  eminence  varies  from  ten  to  about  thirty  feet,  becoming
gradually  lower  towards  its  northern  extremity."^  The  opposite
sides  of  this  cliff  present  faces  of  similar  appearance  and  equal
height ;  while  adjacent  to  the  isthmus  it  spreads  out  into  broader
table  land.*

The  length  of  the  peninsula  on  the  eastern  side,  from  the
head  of  the  northern  bay  to  the  northern  extremity,  they  found
to  be  one  hour  and  twelve  minutes  ;  and  on  the  western  side,
from  the  north  end  to  the  strait,  or  the  point  overagainst  the
western  shoal,  two  hours  and  forty  minutes.  The  breadth  of  the
peninsula  and  isthmus,  from  the  strait  to  the  stream  of  the
Dera'ah,  was  also  two  hours.  The  breadth  of  the  strait  they
estimated  at  one  mile  ;  which,  I  apprehend,  is  much  too  small.
— At  the  foot  of  the  high  ground,  or  cliff,  aU  around,  "  is  a  con-

'  Traveb,  p.  449.  [138.]    See  generally  3.50  sq. — See  more  further  on,  under  May

ibid.  pp.  448-45.5.  [138-140.]  29th.

'  Burckhiirdt,  p.  391.    Irby  and  Man-       '  Irby  and  Mangles,  p.  452.  [139.]
gles,  p.  449.  [138.]    Seeteen,  Reison  II.  p.       •  Ibid.  pp.  453,  455.  [139,  140.]

ii.  202.  233

Sec.  X.]

THE  FORD.

521

siderable  margin  of  sand,  which  varies  in  length  and  hreadth  ac-
cording to  the  season  ;  being  much  wider  in  summer  than  in
winter,  when  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  the  waves  almost
wash  the  base  of  the  cliff."  '  This  becomes  broader  towards  the
strait,  and  here  "  a  very  considerable  level  is  left,  which  is  en-
crusted with  a  salt  that  is  but  half  dried  and  consolidated,  ap-
pearing like  ice  in  the  commencement  of  a  thaw.  All  this  space
is  soft,  and  gives  way  nearly  as  deep  as  the  ankle,  when  it  is
trod  on."*

Along  the  shore  of  the  northern  bay  also,  the  travellers  found
(leposites  of  salt,  and  persons  gathering  it ;  and  near  the  north-
ern point  of  the  peninsula  they  collected  lumps  of  nitre  and  fine
sulphur,  apparently  brought  down  by  the  rains  from  the  low  cliff
above.' — Around  the  southern  end  of  the  peninsula,  where  we
saw  a  short  horn  and  a  bay  beyond,  *'  the  high-water  mark  was
at  this  season  a  mile  distant  from  the  water's  edge."  *  This  was
on  the  2d  of  June.*

The  Ford.  The  first  notice  of  a  ford  near  the  south  end  of
the  Dead  Sea  is  also  from  Seetzen.  He  describes  it  from  the  in-
formation of  the  Arabs,  as  practicable  only  in  summer,  and  as
requiring  five  hours  for  the  passage.*  In  his  map,  it  is  laid  down
as  leading  from  the  peninsula  to  the  northern  part  of  Usdiim,
south  of  the  pass  of  Zuweirah.  Burckhardt  heard  the  same  re-
port of  a  ford,  which  might  be  crossed  in  three  hours  and  a  half.^
As  however  the  Arabs  have  no  notion  of  hours,  both  these  spe-
cifications are  of  Uttle  value.  In  the  plan  of  Irby  and  Mangles
the  ford  is  laid  down  across  the  narrowest  part  or  strait,  between
the  peninsula  and  the  western  shoal  or  tongue  of  land  ;  where
indeed  we  should  naturally  look  for  it.

So  remarkable  a  feature  of  the  sea  of  course  engaged  our  at-
tention ;  and  we  made  all  the  inquiries  in  our  power  respecting
it.  The  Arabs  who  were  with  us  at  'Ain  Jidy,  both  of  the  Ta'-
amirah  and  the  Rashaideh,  who  dwell  chiefly  towards  Tekoa  and
Bethlehem,  knew  nothing  of  any  ford.  Our  Sheikh  of  the  Je-
hahn,  who  was  with  us  at  the  south  end  of  the  sea,  affirmed  that
the  water  in  the  strait,  between  the  peninsula  and  the  opposite
tongue  of  land,  was  very  deep,  and  never  fordable.  But  from  the
southwest  part  of  the  sea,  he  said,  (apparently  from  near  the
pass  of  Zuweirah,)  to  the  south  side  of  the  peninsula,  he  himself
had  forded  the  lake  many  years  ago  ;  although  now,  and  since
several  years,  the  water  was  too  deep  to  be  forded.   This  account

'  Irby  and  Mangles,  p.  452.  [139.]
"  Ibid.  p.  453.  [140.]
'  Ibid.  pp.  451,  45.3.  [139.]
♦  Ibid.  p.  455.  [140.]
'  For  a  geological  description  of  the
peninsula,  see  Anderson's  Geol.  Report,  p.
Vol.  I.— 44*

184  sq.  Its  extreme  length  according  to
Lynch's  map,  is  nearly  eleven  miles.

"  Zach's  Monatl.  Corr.  XVIII.  p.  437
Reisen.  II.  p.  358.

'  Travels,  p.  394.

ii.  233-235

522

THE  DEAD  SEA.

[Sec.  X.

corresponds  to  tlie  ford  as  laid  down  on  Seetzen's  map  ;  and  at
the  time,  we  had  no  reason  to  distrust  its  accuracy.  But  Irby
and  Mangles  relate  that  in  descending  from  Kerak  to  the  penin-
sula, they  fell  in  with  a  small  caravan  going  to  Hebron  by  way
of  the  ford  ;  and  while  the  travellers  were  examining  the  north-
ern part  of  the  peninsiila,  this  caravan  crossed  it  to  the  strait,
which  they  forded.  The  travellers  soon  after  arrived  at  the  same
point;  saw  the  ford  "indicated  by  boughs  of  trees;"  and  ob-
served the  caravan  just  landed  on  the  opposite  side.  They  could
discern  the  species  of  animal,  as  well  as  the  people  on  their  backs;
and  as  there  were  asses  of  the  party,  the  depth  could  not  be
great. '

These  varying  accounts  I  am  not  able  to  reconcile ;  except
by  supposing,  as  above,  that  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea,  as  seen
by  those  travellers  in  the  year  1818,  were  at  their  very  lowest
ebb.  In  this  way,  perhaps,  they  might  admit  here  for  the  time
a  ford  not  known  or  not  remembered  by  the  Arabs  of  the  west-
ern coast ;  and  give  to  the  peninsula  and  the  adjacent  shoals  a
different  form.

ApjjJes  of  Sodom.  One  of  the  first  objects  which  attracted
our  notice  on  arriving  at  'Ain  Jidy,  was  a  tree  with  singular
fruit ;  which,  without  knowing  at  the  moment,  whether  it  had
been  observed  by  former  travellers  or  not,  instantly  suggested  to
our  minds  the  far-famed  fruits

"which  grew
Near  that  bitnininoTis  lake  where  Sodom  stood."

This  was  the  'Osher  of  the  Arabs,  the  Asdepias  gigoniea  v.
procera  of  botanists,''  which  is  found  in  abundance  in  Upper
Egypt  and  Nubia,  and  also  in  Arabia  Fehx ;  but  seems  to  be
confined  in  Palestine  to  the  borders  of  the  Dead  Sea.  We  saw
it  only  at  'Ain  Jidy ;  Hasselquist  found  it  in  the  desert  between
Jericho  and  the  northern  shore ;  and  Irby  and  Mangles  met  with
it  of  large  size  at  the  south  end  of  the  sea,  and  on  the  isthmus
of  the  peninsula.^

We  saw  here  several  trees  of  the  kind,  the  trunks  of  which
were  six  or  eight  inches  in  diameter  ;  and  the  whole  height  from
ten  to  fifteen  feet,^  It  has  a  grayish  cork-Uke  bark,  with  long
oval  leaves ;  and  in  its  general  appearance  and  character,  it
might  be  taken  for  a  gigantic  perennial  species  of  the  milk-weed

'  Irby  and  Mangles,  p.  4.'')4.  [140.]  *  Irby  and  Mangles  found  them  "  mea-

'  Sprengel  Hist.  Rei  Herbar.  I.  p.  252.  suring,  in  many  instances,  two  feet  or

'  Hasselquist  Reise,  p.  151.    Irby  and  more  in  cireuratorence,  and  the  boughs  at

Mangles' Travels,  pp.  3.')4,  450.  [108,  138.]  least  fifteen  feet  in  height;  a  size  which

Comp.  Seetzen  in  Zach's  Monatl.  Corr.  far  exceeded  anv  they  saw  in  ivubia."  P.

XVIII.  p.  442.    Reisen,  I  p.  422.    II.  p.  4.50.  [138  ]

231.    Burekbardt,  p.  392.
ii.  235.  2  !6

Sec.  X.]

APPLES  OF  SODOM,

523

I  f  silk-weed  found  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  American  States.
It3  leaves  and  flowers  are  verj-  similar  to  those  of  the  latter  plant ;
and  when  broken  oflF,  it  in  like  manner  discharges  copiously  a
:nilky  fluid.    The  fruit  greatly  resembles  externally  a  large
-mooth  apple  or  orange,  hanging  in  clusters  of  three  or  four  to-
jether ;  and  when  ripe  is  of  a  yellow  colour.    It  was  now  fair
nd  delicious  to  the  eye,  and  soft  to  the  touch ;  but  on  being
ressed  or  struck,  it  explodes  with  a  puff,  like  a  bladder  or  puff-
ill,  leaving  in  the  hand  only  the  shreds  of  the  thin  rind  and  a
.  w  fibres.    It  is  indeed  filled  chiefly  with  air,  like  a  bladder,
which  gives  it  the  roimd  form ;  while  in  the  centre  a  small  slen-
l-r  pocl  runs  through  it  from  the  stem,  and  is  connected  by  thin
laments  with  the  rind.    The  pod  contains  a  smaU  quantity  of
nne  silk  with  seeds ;  precisely  like  the  pod  of  the  silk-weed,
though  very  much  smaller ;  being  indeed  scarcely  the  tenth  part
as  large.    The  Arabs  collect  the  silk  and  twist  it  into  matches
for  their  guns  ;  preferring  it  to  the  common  match,  because  it
requires  no  sulphur  to  render  it  combustible.'

The  most  definite  accoimt  we  have  of  the  apples  of  Sodom,
-  ?  called,  is  in  Josephus  ;  who,  as  a  native  of  the  country,  is  a
rtter  authority  than  Tacitus  or  other  foreign  writers.*  After
r  eaking  of  the  conflagration  of  the  plain,  and  the  yet  remaining
:  'kens  of  the  divine  fire,  he  remarks,  that  "  there  are  still  to  be
en  ashes  reproduced  in  the  fruits  ;  which  indeed  resemble  edi-
le  fruits  in  colour,  but  on  being  plucked  with  the  hands,  are
dissolved  into  smoke  and  ashes."'    In  this  account,  after  a  due
allowance  for  the  marvellous  in  all  popular  reports,  I  find  nothing
which  does  not  apply  almost  hteraUy  to  the  fruit  of  the  'Osher,  as
we  saw  it.    It  must  be  plucked  and  handled  with  great  care,  in
o  rder  to  preserve  it  from  bursting.    We  attempted  to  carry  some
of  the  boughs  and  fiiiit  with  us  to  Jerusalem  ;  but  without  suc-
cess.*

'  Gregory  of  Tours  wonld  seem  to  have  sponte  edita,  ant  maDu  sata,  sive  herbs
heard  rf  this  tree :  "  Prope  Jericho  haben-  tennea  ant  flores,  ut  solitam  in  speciem
tnr  arbores,  qn3i  lanas  gignnnt ;  exhibent  adolevere,  atra  et  inania  velat  in  cinerem
eoim  poma  in  modo  cucnrbitarmn,  testas  vanescunt."

in  circnitu  habentia  dnras,  intrinsecns  an-  Seetzen  was  the  first,  I  believe,  to  sng-

tem  plena  stmt  lanae."  Of  this  wool,  he  gest  the  'Osher  (which  he  writes  Aoschar)
aavs,  fine  garments  were  made.  Gregor.  as  producing  the  apples  of  Sodom ;  Zach's
Tnioo.  Mirac  lib.  L  c.  18.  Monatl  Corr.  XYIII.  p.  442.    He  describes

'  The  Bible  speaks  only  of  the  "  vine  the  plant :  Reisen.  11.  p.  231  sq.  Accord-
of  Sodom ; "  and  that  metaphorically,  ing  to  Irby  and  Mangles  '•  there  is  very
Dent.  32,  32.  little  doubt' of  this  being  the  fruit  of  the

'  Joseph.  B.  J.  4.  8.  'E  '  W.    Point  of  western

shore,  N.  E.  by  E.    Mouth  of  the  .Jordan  slioal  S.  15°  W.    R;i8  el-Mersed  S.  19"  W.

E.  N.  E.    Ki'isr  Hajla,  a  ruin  in  the  phiin  I  am  not  sure  whether  this  was  the

of  Jericho,  N.  28°  E.    .lohcl  JilTid  or  .J.  route  taken  by  Pocockc  from  M.ir  Saba;

es-Salt  N.  44°  E.    Mouth  of  Zerk:i  Ma'in  Vol.  U.  i.  p.  34.
S.  42*  E.    Do.  of  el-M()jib  S.  2r  E.
ii.  2  jO.  251

Mat  12]

'ain  EL-FESHKHAH.

533

We  fomnd  here  specimens  of  tlie  well-known  black  bitumi-
nous stone,  '  stink-stone/  which  has  been  already  mentioned.^
In  one  instance  it  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  casing  or  crust,  en-
closing other  stones  like  a  sort  of  conglomerate  ;  looking  much
as  if  it  had  once  flowed  down  the  path  in  a  liquid  state,  and
there  become  soHd  among  the  stones  as  it  cooled. — -The  lower
part  of  the  mountain  consists  here  wholly  of  conglomerate,  con-
taining stones  of  aU  sizes  ;  some  of  which  indeed  are  large  rocks.

We  reached  the  bottom  of  the  descent  and  the  fountain
'Ain  el-Feshkhah  at  9|  o'clock.  The  fountain  boils  up  here
near  the  shore,  a  very  copious  stream,  or  rather  streams,  of  lim-
pid water,  beautiful  to  the  eye,  but  brackish  and  having  a  slight
taste  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  Its  temperature  is  80°  F.
The  wet  and  marshy  ground  around  the  fountain,  is  covered  by
a  dense  thicket  of  canes,  extending  for  half  an  hour  or  more
along  the  shore,  showing  that  the  water  flows  out  along  this
whole  distance,  or  at  least  moistens  the  soil.  Near  the  fountain
are  the  foundations  of  a  small  square  tower  and  of  other  smaU
buildings  ;  whether  ancient  or  not,  we  could  not  tell.  We
stopped  here  for  thirty-flve  minutes,  and  found  the  heat  almost
intolerable.  The  cane  brake  intercepted  the  sea  breeze,  while
the  beams  of  the  burning  sun  were  reflected  down  upon  us  from
the  cUfis  above,  rendering  the  spot  like  an  oven.  The  ther-
mometer stood  at  84°  F.  The  clifis  here  and  further  north  we
estimated  at  from  one  thousand  to  twelve  hundred  feet  in
height.*

This  fountain  and  those  of  the  Ghuweir  and  Terabeh  are
within  the  territories  of  the  Ta'amirah.  Besides  these  and  the
waters  of  Wady  Sudeir,  'Ain  Jidy,  and  Wady  'Areijeh  or  the
Ghar,  our  guides  knew  of  no  fountain  on  the  western  coast  of
the  Dead  Sea  ;  nor  did  we  anywhere  hear  of  any  other.

Leaving  'Ain  el-Feshkhah  at  twenty  minutes  past  ten,  we
rode  between  the  cane  brake  and  the  mountain,  passing  many
masses  of  conglomerate  rocks  fallen  down  from  above  ;  indeed
the  whole  precipice  on  our  left  appeared  to  be  of  this  character.
Beyond  the  brake,  the  shrubs  of  the  desert  again  appeared,  as
also  the  tamarisk  or  Turfa,  and  the  Ghurkud,  but  all  of  a  large

'  See  p.  512,  above,  for  this  and  other  larger  city  than  Jerusalem  ever  was.  We

minerals  on  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea.  saw  there  only  "  masses  of  conglomerate

'  At 'Ain  el-Feshkhah,  and  further  north  rocks  fallen  down  from  above,"  as  also

along  the  base  of  the  mountain,  M.  De  many  "  small  precipitous  hiils  apparently

Sanlcy  finds  the  site  of  Gomorrah,  on  the  of  marl ;  "  as  in  the  text.    Besides,  if

strength  of  the  name  of  a  Wady,  which  he  Sodom  was  at  Usdum,  as  M.  De  S.  holds,

cmlls  Oumran  or  Goumran,  probably  for  it  seems  hardly  natural  to  place  Gomorrah

'Amran ;  Narrat.  I.  pp.  56-60,  62-68.    He  at  'Ain  el-Feshkhah,  25  or  30  miles  distant,

describes  these  "  enormous  ruins,"  (p.  68)  with  Hazezon-Tamar  ('Ain  Jidy)  between,

that  cover  a  space  about  four  English  miles  which  too  was  not  destroyed ;  Gen.  14,  7.
in  extent ;  p.  66.    This  would  be  a  much

Vol.  I.— 45*  ii.  251-253

534

WESTERN  COAST  OF  THE  DEAD  SEA.

[Sec.  X.

size.  The  red  berry  of  the  latter  was  just  beginning  to  ripen.'
In  one  of  the  bushes,  at  11|  o'clock,  the  guides  killed  an  im-
mense lizard,  which  we  at  first  had  taken  for  a  serpent  ;  it
measured  three  feet  eight  inches  from  the  head  to  the  tip  of  the
tail.  The  Arabs  did  not  know  it  ;  but  our  Egyptian  servants
instantly  recognised  it  as  the  Waran  of  Egyi)t,  the  Lacerta
Nilotica  of  Hasselquist  and  Forskal.''

Our  course  was  about  northeast,  inasmuch  as  we  thought,  at
first,  of  proceeding  directly  to  Jericho.  The  plain  continued  to
widen  as  the  mountains  and  sea  diverged  ;  and  on  our  left,
towards  the  cliffs,  the  whole  region  was  broken  up  into  small
precipitous  hiUs,  apparently  of  marl,  of  singular  shapes,  as  if
the  intervening  earth  had  been  washed  away  •  by  torrents.
Maundrell  not  inaptly  compares  the  appearance  of  this  tract  to
that  of  "  places  where  there  have  been  anciently  limekilns."'
At  12  o'clock  the  northwest  corner  of  the  Dead  Sea,  forming
its  northern  extremity,  bore  due  east,  less  than  half  an  hour  dis-
tant. From  it  the  coast  curves  off  in  a  general  direction  south-
east quite  to  the  base  of  the  eastern  mountains.  At  the  mouth
of  the  Jordan,  on  its  western  side,  a  small  tongue  of  land  or
low  promontory  runs  out  into  the  sea,  forming  a  bay  towards  the
west.  This  point  now  bore  east  by  south.  This  portion  of  the
sea,  as  we  have  seen,  is  much  narrower  than  the  part  beyond
Ras  el-Feshkhah. — At  its  northernmost  part  a  smaU  peninsula
juts  out  into  the  sea  ;  a  gravelly  point  with  large  stones  upon
it,  connected  with  the  main  shore  by  a  low  narrow  neck.  When
the  sea  is  fuU,  it  overflows  this  isthmus  ;  and  then  the  penin-
sula must  present  the  appearance  of  an  island.*

The  earth,  as  we  advanced,  was  in  many  places  white  with
a  nitrous  crust  ;  and  we  picked  up  occasionally  small  lumps  of
pure  sulphur,  of  the  size  of  a  nutmeg  or  walnut.  In  some
parts  the  surface  was  damp,  so  that  the  horses  slipped  ;  in
others  it  was  more  like  ashes,  and  they  sunk  in  at  every  step.

We  now  found,  that  we  still  had  enough  of  the  day  left  to
pay  a  visit  to  the  Jordan  before  going  to  Jericho  ;  and  as  this
would  be  a  great  saving  of  time,  and  we  should  thereby  avoid
the  inconvenience  of  an  escort  from  the  garrison,  we  determined
to  take  this  course.  On  proposing  it  to  our  guides,  some  of  the
younger  ones  hesitated  for  fear  of  robbers  ;  but  the  Khatib  as-
sented at  once.  We  therefore  turned  more  to  the  right  for  a
time  ;  and  then  proceeded  about  N.  E.  by  E.     This  brought

'  See  above,  p.  66.  '  See  Ljnich's  Narrative  p.  270.  Lands

"  Hassclquist's  Reise  p.  361.    Forskal  of  the  Moslem,  p.  280     Tliis  is  doubtless

Descript.  Animalium  p.  13.  the  island  seen  by  Warburton,  Crescent

'  Jounml  Irom  Aleppo  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  Cross,  II.  p.  280;  and  also  by

March  30th.  Dr  Wilson,  Lands  of  the  Bible,  IL  p.  21.

ii,  2>3,  254

Mat  12.]

EXCURSION  TO  THE  JORDAN.

535

us  in  half  an  hour  into  the  midst  of  a  second  thicket  of  shrubs
and  canes  around  the  northernmost  point  of  the  sea,  watered  by
another  brackish  fountain  called  'Ain  Jehair.  On  the  flats  and
shoals  along  the  shore  in  this  part,  there  is  in  summer  a  deposit
of  salt,  as  at  Birket  el-Khuhl  beyond  'Ain  Jidy.  We  were  soon
clear  of  the  thicket ;  and  at  a  quarter  before  one,  crossed  a
small  sluggish  stream  of  salt  water  running  through  marshy
ground  towards  the  sea.

Beyond  this  point  the  plain  assimaed  a  new  character.  All
traces  of  vegetation  ceased,  except  occasionally  a  lone  sprig  of
the  Huboibeh  or  alkahne  plant,  which  we  had  seen  at  'Ain  Jidy.
The  surface  was  almost  a  dead  level,  covered  with  a  thin  smooth
nitrous  crust,  through  which  the  feet  of  men  and  horses  broke
and  sunk  as  in  ashes,  up  to  the  ankles.  The  tract  continued  of
this  character,  with  a  few  gentle  swells,  until  we  reached  the
banks  of  the  Jordan  at  1.40,  at  a  ford  or  crossing  place  called  el-
Helu,  considerably  below  the  spot  usually  visited  by  the  pilgrims
and  travellers.  It  is  indeed  the  lowest  point  where  the  river  is
ordinarily  crossed.  •

The  upper  or  outer  banks  of  the  Jordan,  where  we  thus
came  upon  it,  are  not  more  than  one  hundred  rods  apart ;  with
a  descent  of  fifty  or  sixty  feet  to  the  level  of  the.  lower  valley  in
which  the  river  flows.  There  was  here  no  sign  of  vegetation
along  the  upper  banks,  and  little,  if  any,  in  the  valley  below  ;
except  a  narrow  strip  of  canes,  here  occupying  a  still  lower  tract
along  the  brink  of  the  channel  on  each  side.  With  these  were
intermingled  occasionally  tamarisks,  and  the  species  of  willow
called  by  the  Arabs  Btshrdsh,  the  Agnus  castus  of  botanists,
from  which  the  pUgrims  usually  carry  away  branches  for  staves,
after  dipping  them  in  the  Jordan.  Looking  down  upon  the  river
from  the  high  upper  bank,  it  seemed  a  deep,  sluggish,  discol-
oured stream,  winding  its  way  slowly  through  a  cane  brake.
Further  up  the  river,  we  could  see  that  the  high  upper  banks
were  wider  apart,  and  the  border  of  vegetation  much  broader,
with  many  trees.  •

We  descended  the  high  outer  banks  some  rods  above  the  cross-
ing place  ;  but  found  it  impossible  to  reach  the  channel  at  that
point,  partly  on  account  of  the  thickness  of  the  cane  brake,  and
partly  because  the  stream  was  now  apparently  swollen,  filling
its  immediate  banks  to  the  brim,  and  in  some  places  slightly
overflowing  them  so  as  to  cover  the  bottom  of  the  brake.  At
this  point,  and  as  far  as  we  could  see,  this  strip  of  vegetation

Among  the  trees  and  shrubs  higher  up  for  building  huts ;  they  are  so  used  at  the

are  said  to  be  the  rhamnus  (Ni'ibk)  and  present  day.    "  Et  ripas  idoneas  ad  anin-

oleander.    Hasselq.  p.  152.    Buckingham  dines  seu  cannas  procreandas,  ex  quibus

p.  315.    Ja?ob  de  Vitry  speaks  of  the  tecta  domorum  teguht,  et  parietes  contex-

canes  growing  along  the  Jordan  as  used  unt ;  c.  53.  p.  1076.

'  ii.  254,  255

.536

THE  JORDAN  AND  ITS  VALLEY,

[SecX.

was  itself  sldrted  by  offsets  or  banks  five  or  six  feet  high.  So
that  here  the  river  might  strictly  be  said  to  have  three  sets  of
banks,  viz.  the  upper  or  outer  ones,  forming  the  first  descent
from  the  level  of  the  great  valley  ;  the  lower  or  middle  ones  en-
closing the  tract  of  canes  and  other  vegetation  ;  and  the  actual
banks  of  the  channel.  Further  up  the  river,  it  is  said,  the
lower  tract  of  cane  brake  disappears  ;  and  the  stream  flows  be-
tween the  middle  or  second  banks  just  described  which  are  there
covered  with  trees  and  bushes.

We  proceeded  therefore  to  the  place  of  crossing,  where  there
was  an  opening  through  the  canes  and  trees.  Here  the  low
banks  of  the  channel  were  broken  or  worn  away  for  the  conve-
nience of  passing,  and  were  now  covered  by  the  water.  There
was  a  still  though  very  rapid  current ;  the  water  was  of  a
clayey  colour,  but  sweet  and  delightfully  refreshing,  after  the
water  to  which  we  had  been  confined  for  the  last  two  days  since
leaving  'Ain  Jidy  ;  either  rain  water  standing  in  holes  in  the
Wadys  and  fuU  of  animalculfe,  or  the  brackish  waters  of  'Ain
el-Feshkhah.  We  estimatedl  the  breadth  of  the  stream  to  be
from  eighty  to  one  hundred  feet.  The  guides  supposed  it  to  be
now  ten  or  twelve  feet  deep.  I  bathed  in  the  river,  without
going  out  into  the  deep  channel  ;  the  bottom  here  (a  hollow
place  in  the  bank)  was  clayey  mud  with  also  blue  clay.  I
waded  out  ten  or  twelve  feet,  and  thus  far  the  water  was  not
over  the  hips  ;  but  a  httle  further,  several  of  the  party  who  swam
across,  found  it  suddenly  beyond  their  depth.  The  current  was
BO  strong,  that  even  Komeh,  a  stout  swimmer  of  the  Nile,  was
carried  down  several  yards  in  crossing.  This  place  is  strictly
not  a  ford  ;  we  understood  that  the  river  coiild  never  be  crossed
here  by  animals  without  swimming  ;  and  the  Aga  of  Jericho
afterwards  told  us,  that  he  was  accustomed  to  swim  his  horse
in  crossing  higher  up.

The  sand-hills  which  here  form  the  upper  banks,  are  of  the
same  naked  character  as  the  desert  we  had  passed  over  in
coming  to  this  spot.  From  them  we  could  distinguish,  some
mUes  higher  up  the  river,  the  ruined  convent  of  St.  John  the
Baptist,  standing  upon  the  brow  of  the  upper  bark,  or  first  de-
scent from  the  plain,  near  the  place  where  the  Latin  pilgrims
bathe  in  the  Jordan.  The  Arabs  caU  it  Kusr  e]-Yehild,  '  Jews'
Castle.'  The  bathing  place  of  the  Greek  pilgrims  is  two  or  three
miles  below  the  convent  ;  yet  each  party  claims  to  bathe  at  the
spot  where  our  Lord  was  baptized  by  John.  Far  in  the  north,
a  sharp  conical  peak  was  seen  standing  out  hke  a  bastion  from
the  western  mountains  ;  our  Arabs  called  it  KQrn  SOrtabeh.
Opposite  to  us  across  the  river  lay  the  plains  of  Moab.  The
eastern  mountains  here  retire  in  a  small  arc  of  a  circle,  forming
ii.  255-257

May  12]

FORDING-PLACES.

537

a  sort  of  recess,  and  leaving  the  eastern  plain  much  broader
than  in  any  other  part.  It  is  apparently  covered  with  shrubs  ;
especially  towards  the  mountains,  which  seemed  to  be  two  or
three  miles  distant.  Just  below  the  crossing  place,  the  Wady
Hesban  comes  in  from  the  same  mountains,  descending  through
a  verdant  region  at  their  foot^  which  indeed  owes  its  fertility  to
the  Wady.  Further  north,  the  similar  Wady  Sha'ib  comes
down  from  the  vicinity  of  es-Salt,  and  enters  the  Jordan  nearly
east  of  Jericho.    At  its  mouth  is  tlie  ordinary  ford  of  the  river.'

THE  JORDAN  AND  ITS  VALLEY.

The  present  Arabic  name  for  the  Jordan  is  esh-Sheri'ah,
*  the  watering-place  ; '  to  which  the  epithet  el-Kebir,  '  the  great,'
is  sometimes  annexed.*  The  form  el-Urdun,  however,  is  not
unknown  among  Arabian  writers.^  The  common  name  of  the
great  valley  through  which  it  thus  flows  below  the  lake  of  Ti-
berias, is  el-Ghor,  signifying  a  depressed  tract  or  plain,  usually
between  two  mountains  ;  and  the  same  name  continues  to  be
applied  to  the  vaUey  quite  across  the  whole  length  of  the  Dead
Sea,  and  for  some  distance  beyond.''

It  has  so  happened,  that  until  the  present  century,  most  pU-
grims  and  travellers  have  visited  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  only  at
Jericho  ;  so  that  we  have  had  no  account  of  the  features  of  its
upper  part  in  the  vicinity  of  the  lake  of  Tiberias.  Of  the
earlier  pUgrims  indeed,  Antoninus  Martyr  at  the  close  of  the
sixth  century,  and  St.  Wilhbald  in  the  eighth,  passed  down
through  the  whole  length  of  the  valley  from  Tiberias  to  Jericho  ;
and  in  the  year  1100  king  Baldwin  I.  accompanied  a  train  of
pilgrims  from  Jericho  to  Tiberias  f  but  we  have  nothing  more
than  a  mere  notice  of  these  journeys.  In  hke  manner,  the
various  excursions  of  the  crusaders  across  the  Ghor  throw  no
light  upon  its  character.  In  the  year  1799  the  French  pene-
trated to  the  south  end  of  the  lake  of  Tiberias,  but  no  further.
In  1806,  Seetzen  crossed  the  valley  just  south  of  the  same  lake  ;

'  From  the  high  bank  near  el-Helu,  Je-  Index  in  Vit.  Saladin.  art.  Fluvius  Jor-

bel  es-Salt  or  Gilead  bore  N.  30°  E.    Kusr  danes.

el-Yehiid  N.    Kurn  Surtabeh  N.  8°  W.  *  It  thus  corresponds  to  the  Anion  of

Ain  es-Sultan  beyond  Jericho,  about  N.  Eusebius  and  Jerome ;  see  Onomasticon. —

60"  W.    Kusr  Hajla  N.  70°  W.  On  the  GhOr,  see  Edrsi  par  Jiuibert  pp.

'  To  distinguish  it  from  the  Sheri'at  el-  337,  338.    Abnlfeda;  Tab.  Syr.  ed.  Kohler

Mandhur  or  Yarmuk,  the  ancient  Hiero-  pp.  8,  9.    Schulten's  Index  in  Vit.  Salad,

mux,  which  joins  it  from  the  east  about  two  art.  Alf/aurum.  Reland  Paliiest.  p.  365.

hours  below  the  lake  of  Tiberias.    Burck-  Abulfeda  says  correctly  that  the  same  val-

hardt  pp.  273,  274.    Edrisi  ed.  Jaubert  ley  extends  "to  Ailah.

p.  338.    Abulfedse  Tab.  Syr.  p.  148.  "'  Fulcher.  Camot.  21.  p.  402.

»  Abulfedae  Tab.  Syr.  p.  14  7  Schultens

iL  257,  258

538

THE  JOEDAN  AND  ITS  VALLEY.

[Sec.  X.

but  describes  it  only  in  very  general  terms.'  Burckhardt  in
1812  was  twice  in  its  northern  part  ;  and  travelled  along  it  from
Beisan  to  a  point  several  hours  below,  on  his  way  to  es-Salt.*
Six  years  later,  in  the  winter  of  1818,  Irby  and  Mangles  passed
down  from  Tiberias  to  Beisan  ;  thence  crossed  over  into  the
country  around  Jerash  ;  and  returned  from  es-Salt  to  Nabulus,
fording  the  Jordan  several  miles  above  Jericho.'  About  the
same  time  Mr  Bankes,  accompanied  by  Buckingham,  crossed
the  valley  obliquely  from  Jericho,  passing  the  river  apparently
at  the  same  ford  (or  very  near  it)  as  Irby  and  Mangles.^

According  to  Burckhardt,  the  Ghor  at  the  upper  end  runs
in  a  course  from  N.  by  E.  to  S.  by  W.  and  is  about  two  hours
broad.^  Opposite  Jericho  we  found  its  general  course  to  be  the
same  ;  but  in  consequence  of  the  retiring  of  the  mountains  on
both  sides,  to  which  I  have  already  alluded,  its  breadth  is  here
much  greater,  being  not  less  than  three  and  a  half  or  four  hours.
The  Jordan  issues  from  the  lake  of  Tiberias  near  its  southwest
corner,  where  are  stiU  traces  of  the  site  and  walls  of  the  ancient
Tarichaea.^  The  river  at  first  winds  very  much,  and  flows  for
three  hours  near  the  western  hUls  ;  then  turns  to  the  eastern,
on  which  side  it  continues  its  course  for  several  hours,  to  the
district  called  Kurn  el-Hemar,  '  Horn  of  the  Ass,'  two  hours
below  Beisan  ;  where  it  again  returns  more  to  the  western  side  of
the  valley. Lower  down,  the  Jordan  follows  more  the  middle
of  the  great  valley ;  though  opposite  Jericho  and  towards  the
Dead  Sea,  its  course  is  nearer  to  the  eastern  mountains  ;  about
two  thirds  or  three  quarters  of  the  valley  lying  here  upon  its
western  side.

A  few  hundred  yards  below  the  point  where  the  Jordan  issues
from  the  lake  of  Tiberias,  is  a  ford,  close  by  the  ruins  of  a  Ro-
man bridge  of  ten  arches.*  About  two  hours  further  down  is
another  old  bridge,  called  Jisr  el-Mejami'a,  consisting  of  one
arch  in  the  centre,  with  small  arches  upon  arches  at  the  sides  ;
and  also  a  Khan  upon  the  western  bank.'  Somewhat  higher
up,  but  in  sight  of  this  bridge,  is  another  ford.'°  That  near  Bei-
san lies  in  a  direction  S.  S.  E.  from  the  town."    Indeed,  "the

'  Zach's  Monatl.  Corr.  XVIII.  p.  350.  '  Irby  and  Mangles  pp.  29G,  SOL  [90,

Reisen  L  p.  350  sq.  9L]

=  Travels,  pp.  274,  344  sq.  '  Irbv  and  Mangles,  p.  301.  [01.]  See-

'  Travels  pp.  300-305,  326.  [91  sq.  99.]  tzen  1.  c.  p.  351.   Reisen  I.  p.  351.  Messrs

*  Buckingliam's  Travels  in  Palest,  p.  Smith  and  Dodge,  in  connection  with  their
sq.  travels  beyond  the  Jordan,  cro.ssed  the

'  Piige  344.  river  by  tliis  bridge  in  1834.    Tlie  Khsm

•  Seetzen  1.  c.  p.  350.   Irby  and  Mangles    was  tlien  in  use.

p.  300.  [91.]    See  Reland's  Fairest,  p.  Buckingham  1.  c.  p.  448.  Burck-

1026.    Comp.  Pococke  II.  i.  p.  70.  hardt  p.  275.

'  Burckhardt  pp.  344,  345.    Irby  and       "  Burckhardt  p.  844.
Mangles  1.  c.
ii.  258-2G0

May  12.]

GENERAL  CHARACTER.

539

river  is  fordable  in  many  places  during  summer  ;  but  the  few  spots
where  it  may  be  crossed  in  the  rainy  season,  are  known  only  to
the  Arabs.'"

The  banks  of  the  Jordan  appear  to  preserve  everywhere  a
tolerably  uniform  character,  such  as  we  have  described  them
above.  The  river  flows  in  a  valley  of  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour
in  breadth,  [sometimes  more  and  sometimes  less,]  which  is  con-
siderably lower  than  the  rest  of  the  Ghor  ;  "  in  the  northern  part
about  forty  feet.*  This  lower  valley,  where  Burckhardt  saw  it,
was  "  covered  with  high  trees  and  a  luxuriant  verdure,  affording
a  striking  contrast  with  the  sandy  slopes  that  border  it  on  both
sides."  Further  down,  the  verdure  occupies  in  some  parts  a
still  lower  strip  along  the  river's  brink.  So  we  saw  it ;  and  so
also  it  seems  to  be  described  by  Pococke  near  the  convent  of
St.  John.'

The  channel  of  the  river  varies  in  different  places  ;  being  in
some  wider  and  more  shallow,  and  in  others  narrower  and  deeper.
At  the  ford  near  Beisan  on  the  12th  of  March,  Irby  and  Mangles
found  the  breadth  to  be  one  hundred  and  forty  feet  by  measure  ;
the  stream  was  swift  and  reached  above  the  belUes  of  the  horses.
When  Burckhardt  passed  there  in  July,  it  was  about  three  feet
deep.*  On  the  return  of  the  former  travellers  twelve  days  later
(March  25th),  they  found  the  river  at  a  lower  ford  extremely
rapid,  and  were  obliged  to  swim  their  horses.'  On  the  29th  of
January  in  the  same  year,  as  Mr  Bankes  crossed  at  or  near  the
same  lower  ford,  the  stream  is  described  as  flowing  rapidly  over
a  bed  of  pebbles,  but  as  easily  fordable  for  the  horses.*  Near
the  convent  of  St.  John,  the  stream  at  the  annual  visit  of  the
pilgrims  at  Easter  is  sometimes  said  to  be  narrow,  and  flowing  six
feet  below  the  banks  of  its  channel.''  At  the  Greek  bathing
place  lower  down,  it  is  described  in  1815,  on  the  3d  of  May,  as
rather  more  than  fifty  feet  wide  and  five  feet  deep,  running  with
a  violent  current ;  in  some  other  parts  it  was  very  deep.*  In
1835,  on  the  23d  of  April,  my  companion  was  upon  the  banks
higher  up,  nearly  opposite  Jericho,  and  found  the  water  consider-
ably below  them.  The  lower  tract  of  cane  brake  did  not  exist
in  that  part.'

'  Burckhardt  p.  345.  this  lower  ford  the  Kul'at  er-Rubud  bore

"  Ibid.  pp.  344,  345.  N.  E.  i  N.

"  "  From  the  high  bank  indeed  of  the       ^  Buckingham  1.  c.  p.  315.
river,  [meaning  the  usual  level  of  the  low-       '  Maundrell,  March  30th.  Hasselquist
er  valley,]  there  is  a  descent  in  many    Reise  p.  152.
places  to  a  lower  ground,  which  is  four  or       *  Turner's  Tour,  II.  p.  224.
five  feet  above  the  water,  and  is  frequently       '  For  the  course  and  character  of  the
covered  with  wood ;  "  Pococke  II.  i.  p.  33.    Jordan  and  its  valley,  see  more  fully,

*  IrbyandManglesp.  304.  [92.]  Burck-  Lyncli's  OtGcial  Report,  and  Map.  See
hardt  p.  345.  also  in  Note  XXX,  end  of  the  volume.

*  Travels  pp.  304,  326.  [92,  99.]  From

ii.  260.  261

540

THE  JORDAN  AND  ITS  VALLEY.

[Sec.  X.

These  are  the  most  definite  notices  which  I  have  been  able
to  find  respecting  the  Jordan  and  its  channel  ;  and  I  have  col-
lected them  here,  because  they  have  a  bearing  on  another  ques-
tion of  some  interest,  viz.  the  annual  rise  and  supposed  regular
overflow  of  the  waters  of  the  river.  It  is  indeed  generally  as-
sumed that  the  Jordan  of  old,  somewhat  Hke  the  Nile,  regularly
overflowed  its  banks  in  the  spring,  covering  with  its  waters  the
whole  of  its  lower  valley,  and  perhaps  sometimes  large  tracts  of
the  broad  Ghor  itself.'

It  seems  however  to  be  generally  admitted,  that  no  such  ex-
tensive inundation  takes  place  at  the  present  day  ;  and  all  the
testimony  above  adduced  goes  to  establish  the  same  fact.  It  is
therefore  supposed  that  some  change  must  have  taken  place,
either  because  the  channel  has  been  worn  deeper  than  formerly,
or  because  the  waters  have  been  diminished  or  diverted.''  But
although  at  present  a  smaller  quantity  of  rain  may  fall  in  Pales-
tine than  anciently,  in  consequence  perhaps  of  the  destruction
of  the  woods  and  forests,  yet  I  apprehend  that  even  the  ancient
rise  of  the  river  has  been  greatly  exaggerated.  The  sole  ac-
counts we  have  of  the  annual  increase  of  its  waters,  are  found
in  the  earlier  scriptural  history  of  the  Israelites  ;  where  accord-
ing to  the  English  version  the  Jordan  is  said  to  "  overflow  all  its
banks"  in  the  first  month,  or  all  the  time  of  harvest.'  But  the
original  Hebrew  expresses  in  these  passages  nothing  more,  than
that  the  Jordan  "  was  fiiU  (or  filled)  up  to  all  its  banks,"  mean-
ing the  banks  of  its  channel ;  it  ran  with  fuU  banks,  or  was
brim-fuU.  The  same  sense  is  given  by  the  Septuagint  and
Vulgate.^

Thus  understood,  the  biblical  account  corresponds  entirely  to
what  we  find  to  be  the  case  at  the  present  day.  The  Israelites
crossed  the  Jordan  four  days  before  the  passover  (Easter),  which
they  afterwards  celebrated  at  Gilgal  on  the  fourteenth  day  of
the  first  month.'  Then,  as  now,  the  harvest  occurred  during
April  and  early  in  May,  the  barley  preceding  the  wheat  harvest
by  two  or  three  weeks.  Then,  as  now,  there  was  a  slight  an-
nual rise  of  the  river,  which  caused  it  to  flow  at  this  season  with
full  banks,  and  sometimes  to  spread  its  waters  even  over  the  im-

"  Reland  Falsest,  p.  273.  Bachiene  I.
p.  140  sq.    Raumer  Pal.  p.  61.  Ed.  2.

'  Mauiidrell,  March  30th.

'  Josh.  3,  15.  1  Chr.  12,  1.5.  The  on-
ly other  allusion  to  a  rise  of  the  Jordan  in
harvest  is  in  Sirac.  24,  2G  or  36 ;  where
however  an  inundation  is  not  necessa-
rily implied. — The  plirase  "  swelling  of
Jordan,"  English  version  Jer.  12,  f).  49,
19.  50,  44,  should  he  rendered  "  pride  of
Jordan,"  as  in  Zech.  11,  3,  where  the  ori-
201-2C3

ginal  word  is  the  same.    It  refers  to  the
verdure  and  thickets  along  the  banks,  but
has  no  allusion  to  a  rise  of  the  waters.
*  Hub.  Tipni-bs-bs  [k^ct:]  Hh/o.

Sept.  iv\i]pov  Kod'  oATjf  Tijy  KprfirlSa  av-
Tov.  Vulg.  "  Jordanis  autem  ripas  alvci
8ui  tempore  messis  impleverat."  Luther
also  gives  the  same  sense  correctly :  "  Der
Jordan  uber  war  voll  an  alien  seinen  Ufern."
'  Josh.  4,  19.    5,  10.

Mat  12.]

ANNUAL  niSE.

541

mediate  banks  of  its  channel,  where  they  are  lowest,  so  as  in
some  places  to  fill  the  low  tract  covered  with  trees  and  vegeta-
tion along  its  sides.*  Further  than  this  there  is  no  evidence,
that  its  inundations  have  ever  extended  ;  indeed  the  very  fact
of  their  having  done  so,  would  in  this  soil  and  chmate  necessa-
rily have  carried  back  the  line  of  vegetation  to  a  greater  dis-
tance from  the  channel.  Did  the  Jordan,  like  the  Nile,  spread
out  its  waters  over  a  wide  region,  they  would  no  doubt  every-
where produce  the  same  lavish  fertility.

Although  therefore  the  Jordan  probably  never  pours  its  floods,
in  any  case,  beyond  the  limits  of  its  green  border,  yet  it  is  natu-
ral to  suppose,  that  the  amount  of  its  rise  must  vary  in  different
years,  according  to  the  variable  quantity  of  rain  which  may  an-
nually fall.  This  consideration  will  account  in  a  great  measure
for  the  various  reports  and  estimates  of  travellers.  It  may  also
appear  singular,  that  this  annual  increase  should  (so  far  as  we
yet  know)  take  place  near  the  close  of  the  rainy  season,  or  even
after  it,  rather  than  at  an  earlier  period,  when  the  rains  are
heaviest.  This  is  sometimes  referred  to  the  late  melting  of  the
snows  on  Jebel  esh-Sheikh  or  Hermon  but  at  this  season
these  snows  have  usually  long  been  melted,  and  only  the  mighty
head  of  Hermon  is  decked  with  an  icy  crown.  The  fact  how-
ever may  be  easily  explained,  I  apprehend,  upon  ordinary  prin-
ciples.

In  the  first  place,  the  heavy  rains  of  November  and  Decem-
ber find  the  earth  in  a  parched  and  thirsty  state  ;  and  among
the  loose  limestone  rocks  and  caverns  of  Palestine,  a  far  greater
proportion  of  the  water  is  under  the  circumstances  absorbed,
than  is  usual  in  occidental  countries,  where  rains  are  frequent.
Then  too  the  course  of  the  Jordan  below  the  lake  of  Tiberias  is
comparatively  short  ;  no  living  streams  enter  it  from  the  moun-
tains, except  the  Yarmuk  and  the  Zerka  from  the  east  ;  and
the  smaller  torrents  from  the  hills  would  naturally,  at  the  most,
produce  but  a  sudden  and  temporary  rise.  Whether  such  an
effect  does  actually  take  place,  we  are  not  informed  ;  as  no  trav-
eller has  yet  seen  the  Jordan  during  the  months  of  November
and  December.  Late  in  January  and  early  in  March  1818,  as
we  have  seen,  nothing  of  the  kind  was  perceptible.^

But  a  more  important,  and  perhaps  the  chief  cause  of  the
phenomenon,  lies  (I  apprehend)  in  the  general  conformation  of
the  region  through  which  the  Jordan  flows.  The  rains  which
descend  upon  Anti-Lebanon  and  the  mountains  around  the

'  Bnrckhardt  says  loosely  that  the  Jor-  "  covered  with  high  trees  and  siJuxuriant

dan  in  winter,  (meaning  generally  the  verdure."    Travels,  pp.  3ii,  345.
rainy  season,)  "inundates  the  plain  in  the       '  Bachiene  I.  p.  111.
bottom  of  the  narrow  valley."    But  this       '  See  p.  539,  above,
whole  lower  plain,  where  he  saw  it,  was

Vol.  I.— 46  ii.  203,  264

542

THE  JORDAN  AND  ITS  VALLEY.

[Sec.  X.

upper  part  of  the  J ordan,  and  wliich  might  be  expected  to  pro-
duce sudden  and  violent  inundations,  are  received  into  the
basins  of  the  Huleh  and  the  lake  of  Tiberias,  and  there  spread
out  over  a  broad  surface  ;  so  that  all  violence  is  destroyed  ;  and
the  stream  that  issues  from  them,  can  only  flow  with  a  regulated
current,  varying  in  depth  according  to  the  elevation  of  the  lower
lake.  These  lakes  indeed  may  be  compared  to  great  regulators,
which  control  the  violence  of  the  Jordan,  and  prevent  its  inun-
dations. The  princiijle  is  precisely  the  same,  (though  on  a  far
inferior  scale,)  as  that  which  prevents  the  sudden  rise  and  over-
flow of  the  magnificent  streams  connecting  the  great  lakes  of
North  America. — As  now  the  lake  of  Tiberias  reaches  its
highest  level  at  the  close  of  the  rainy  season,  the  Jordan  natu-
rally flows  with  its  fullest  current  for  some  time  after  that
period  ;  and  as  the  rise  of  the  lake  naturally  varies  (like  that  of
the  Dead  Sea)  in  different  years,  so  also  the  fulness  of  the
Jordan.

All  these  circumstances,  the  low  bed  of  the  river,  the  ab-
sence of  inundation  and  of  tributary  streams,  combine  to  leave
the  lower  and  greater  portion  of  the  Ghor  a  solitary  desert.
Such  it  is  described  in  antiquity,  and  such  we  find  it  at
the  present  day.  Josephus  speaks  of  the  Jordan  as  flowing
"  through  a  desert  and  of  this  plain  as  in  summer  scorched
by  heat,  insalubrious,  and  watered  by  no  stream  except  the  Jor-
dan.' The  portion  of  it  which  we  had  thus  far  crossed  has
already  been  described  ;  and  we  afterwards  had  opportunity  to
overlook  it  for  a  great  distance  towards  the  north,  where  it  re-
tained the  same  character.  Near  the  ford  five  or  six  miles
above  Jericho,  the  plain  is  described  as  "  generally  unfertile,  the
soil  being  in  many  places  encrusted  with  salt,  and  having  small
heaps  of  a  white  powder,  like  sulphur,  scattered  at  short  inter-
vals over  its  surface  ; "  here  too  the  bottom  of  the  lower  valley
is  generally  barren.'^  In  the  northern  jjart  of  the  Ghor,  accord-
ing to  Burckhardt,  "  the  great  number  of  rivulets  which  descend
from  the  mountains  on  both  sides,  and  form  numerous  pools  of
stagnant  water,  produce  in  many  places  a  pleasing  verdure,  and
a  luxuriant  growth  of  wild  herbage  and  grass  ;  but  the  greater
part  of  the  ground  is  a  parched  desert,  of  which  a  few  spots
only  are  cultivated  by  the  Bedawin."^  So  too  in  the  southern
part,  where  similar  rivulets  or  fountains  exist,  as  around  Jericho,

■  Joseph.  B.  J.  3.  10.  7,  t-itKriixvei  tV  sense  Jerome,  Comm.  in  Zech.  xi.  3,  "  Sic

Tfvvriaa.p  ixiar\v,  ttreira  iroWijy  iva/ierfov-  Jordani  fluvio  .  .  .  fremitum  junxit  leonum

fifvos  i  p  nji  lav ,  fls  tV  'A ;

"  Mellis  antem  ex  calamellis  maximam  in
partibus  iUis  vidimus  abundanti.ini.  Sunt
autem  calamelli  calami  pleni  nielle,  id
est,  succo  dulcissimo,  ex  quo  quasi  in  tor-
culari  compresso,  et  ad  ignem  coiuleusato
prius  quasi  rael,  posthrec  quasi  ziiccara  ef-
ficitur."  See  generally  Ritter's  essay
"  Ueber  die  geographische  Verlireitung  des
Zuckerrohrs,"  in  the  Transactions  of  the
Berlin  Academy,  Hist.  Phil.  Class,  18:!9.

'  Buckingham,  who  saw  the  northern
aqueduct  at  the  mouth  of  Wady  NawA'imeU
from  a  distance,  says  it  is  of  Roman  archi-
ii.  292-294

562

JERICHO  AND  ITS  ENVIRONS.

[Sec.  X.

dance  of  water  over  every  part  of  the  plain  ;  as  also  the  sugar
mills  already  mentioned,  situated  upon  the  acclivity  west  of  'Ain
es-Sultan.  At  least  all  writers  and  travellers  subsequent  to  the
times  of  the  crusades,  are  silent  as  to  the  existence  of  the  sugar
cane  in  this  region  in  their  day  ;  and  other  circumstances  which
they  relate,  are  at  variance  with  the  sujiposition  of  its  further
general  culture,  and  the  later  construction  of  the  aqueducts.
That  is  to  say,  there  seems  to  he  no  later  period,  when  irrigation
and  cidtivation  were  in  hke  manner  and  to  such  an  extent,
spread  out  over  the  plain.'

In  that  age  indeed  the  plain  of  Jericho  would  seem  to  have
recovered  in  part  its  ancient  renown,  and  to  have  been  consid-
ered as  the  garden  of  Palestine.  "When  the  crasaders  took  pos-
session of  the  country,  this  region  was  assigned  to  the  church  of
the  Holy  Sepulchre  as  a  portion  of  its  possessions  ;  and  it  is  one
of  the  reproaches  brought  against  Arnulphus,  the  third  Latin
patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  that  he  gave  away  this  district  from  the
endowment  of  the  church,  as  a  portion  to  his  niece  on  her  mar-
riage with  Eustache  Grenier  in  A.  D.  1111.  At  that  time,  the
annual  revenue  arisinof  from  this  district  is  said  to  have  been
five  thousand  pieces  of  gold  f  a  proof  at  least  of  its  lavish  fer-
tility. It  seems  soon  to  have  reverted  into  the  power  of  the
church  or  of  the  government  ;  for  in  A.  D.  1138^  we  find  Jeri-
cho with  its  rich  fields  assigned  to  the  convent  of  nuns  erected
by  queen  Mehsinda  at  Bethany.^

To  the  same  period  of  renovated  cultivation  I  am  inchned  to
refer  the  origin  of  the  present  castle  ;  which  may  not  improbably
have  been  erected  for  the  protection  of  the  fields  and  gardens
that  covered  the  plain,  and  was  therefore  placed  in  the  midst  of
them,  at  a  distance  from  the  fountain  and  the  former  site  of
Jericho.  It  is  first  mentioned  by  Willebrand  of  Oldenborg,
A.  D.  1211  ;  it  was  already  in  a  ruinous  state  and  inliabited
by  Saracens.^  A  village  would  naturally  spring  up  around  it ;
and  such  an  one  is  mentioned  by  Brocardus  near  the  close  of  the
same  century,  which  he  regarded  as  the  remains  of  ancient  J eri-
cho,  consisting  only  of  eight  houses  and  scarcely  deserving  the
name  of  a  village.^    Subsequent  travellers  continue  to  speak  of

tecture.    This  is  possible;  but  the  proba-  '  Will.  T.\t.  15.  26.    See  above  p.  432.

bility  is  against  it.    Travels  in  Pal.  p.  Quaresmius  snys,  there  was  a  siiflragan

310.'  bishop  here  ;  but  the  authorities  he  quotes

'  Sugar  cane  is  still  cultivated  around  do  not  bear  him  out ;  II.  p.  755.

Beiriit,  and  at  other  places  along  the  coast ;  *  Willebr.  ab.  Oldenb.in  L.  Allatii  Sym-

but  no  sugar  is  manufactured  from  it.  mikta  p.  151,  Col.  Agr.  1653,  "  ^'enimus

'■'  Will.  Tyr.  11.  15,  "cujushodie  reddi-  Hiericho,  quod  est  castelhim  pnr\um,  de-

tus  annualis  quinque  millium  dicitur  esse  structos  habens  muros,  a  Saraceuis  iubabi-

aureonun."    Probably  the  gold  bvzant  is  tatum."

here  intended,  equal  to  about  five  Spanish  '  Chap.  7.  p.  178.
dollars ;  see  above,  p.  397.  n.  2.
ii.  294.  2'.)5

Mav  U.]

THE  CASTLE.  RESERVOIKS.

563

it  only  as  a  small  Arab  village  ;  in  Pococke's  day  there  were
here  only  two  or  three  houses.'  In  the  fifteenth  century  appa-
rently, the  square  tower  or  castle  began  to  pass  among  the
monks  and  pilgrims  as  the  house  of  Zaccheus,  an  honour  which
it  retains  among  them  to  the  present  day.'^  The  house  of  Ea-
hab,  which  they  also  found,  seems  to  have  been  nearer  the  foun-
tain and  has  since  disappeared  ;  imless  indeed  it  be  the  founda-
tions and  broken  arches  which  are  stiU  seen  in  that  vicinity.'

Ha\'ing  now  nothing  further  to  detain  us  at  the  castle  and
^^lla2;e,  and  not  having  vet  satisfied  ourselves  as  to  the  site  of
ancient  Jericho,  we  determined  to  make  a  further  search  along  the
base  of  the  mountains  near  the  opening  of  Wady  Kelt.  Leav-
ing therefore  the  castle  at  5.50  we  proceeded  along  the  Wady,
and  passed  the  cemeteiy  of  the  village  on  the  north  bank.  The
graves  are  bmlt  over  ia  the  Muhammedan  fashion  with  hewn  stones
taken  from  former  structures.  Crossing  the  Wady  and  still  fol-
lowing it  up,  we  came  in  fifteen  minutes  from  the  castle  to  the
first  aqueduct,  carrying  a  fine  full  stream  of  water  from  'Ain  es-
Sultan  across  to  the  southern  plain.  Ten  minutes  more  brought
us  to  the  second  aqueduct,  now  in  ruins  ;  but  which  once  con-
veyed in  like  manner  a  stream,  apparently  from  the  foimtain  of
Duk,  to  a  higher  portion  of  the  plain.  Both  these  aqueducts
are  well  and  solidly  buUt  of  hewn  stones  with  pointed  arches.
The  Wady  itself,  both  here  and  below,  was  full  of  the  Xubk  or
Dora.

We  now  turned  somewhat  more  to  the  left,  and  crossing  the
Jerusalem  track,  came  at  6.25  to  an  immense  open  shallow  res-
ervoir, situated  near  the  base  of  the  western  mountain,  thirty-
five  minutes  from  the  castle.  It  measured  657  feet  from  east  to
west  by  490  feet  from  north  to  south.  The  direction  of  the
eastern  or  lower  wall  is  S.  10°  W.  about  six  feet  high  and  niae
feet  thick ;  all  the  walls  being  built  of  small  stones  cemented.
This  reservoir  was  probably  intended  to  be  filled  from  the  waters
of  Wady  Kelt,  in  order  to  irrigate  this  part  of  the  plain  in  sum-
mer ;  and  it  may  perhaps  have  been  connected  with  the  aque-
duct mentioned  by  travellers,  half  an  hour  up  that  valley  on  the
Jerusalem  road.*  On  the  east  at  a  short  distance  are  founda-
tions, apparently  of  a  large  square  building  or  block  of  build-
ings ;  and  on  the  west  also  are  scattered  substructions,  extend-
ing for  ten  minutes  up  the  gentle  slope.    At  this  point  are  the

'  Lui  de  Suchem  p.  88.    Reissb.  p.  Manndeville  in  the  14th  century,  make  no

848.    Cotovicus  p.  311.    Quaresmius  II.  such  aEusion  to  Zaccheas.

p.  755.  Maundrell,  March  29.  Pococke  11.  '  See  above,  p.  555.

L  p.  31.  '  Monro  I.  p.  134.     Buckingham  p.

'  First  mentioned  as  such  apparently  by  293. — From  the  reservoir  the  castle  at

Tucher  1479,  and  F.  Fabri  1483,  Reissb.  R:ha  bore  N.  73=  E.    'Ain  es-Sultin  N.

pp.  670,  268.    Quaresm.  U.  p.  752.— L.  15'  E.    Kakon  X.  75'  W.
de  Suchem,  W.  de  Baldensol,  and  Sir  J.

ii.  295-297

564

JERICHO  AND  ITS  ENVIRONS.

[Sec.  X.

remains  of  several  buildings  apparently  not  veiy  ancient  ;  there
is  among  them  no  trace  of  columns,  nor  hardly  of  hewn  stones.
Indeed,  in  all  the  foundations  in  this  vicinity,  the  stones  are  un-
hewn and  mostly  small.

All  these  remains  lie  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  just  south
of  the  J erusalem  road  ;  and  I  do  not  find  that  the  reservoir  has
ever  been  noticed  by  former  travellers.- — We  now  proceeded
northwards,  and  found  similar  substractions  extending  all  the
way  to  Wady  Kelt  (about  ten  minutes),  and  also  for  some  dis-
tance on  its  northern  side.  Near  the  southern  bank  of  this
Wady  is  a  hill  or  mound,  like  a  sepulchral  tumulus,  which  one
might  suppose  to  be  artificial,  were  there  not  so  many  similar
ones  scattered  over  the  plain  below.  On  its  top  are  traces  of
former  walls  ;  and  a  wall  seems  to  have  run  from  it  to  the  Wady.
Directly  on  the  bank  of  the  latter  are  a  few  remains  of  some  an-
cient building,  faced  over  with  small  stones  about  four  inches
square,  cemented  together  diagonally,  forming  a  sort  of  Mosaic.
Among  the  scattered  foundations  north  of  the  Wady,  we  noticed
the  fragment  of  a  column  ;  the  only  trace  of  an  architectural  or-
nament we  anywhere  saw. — This  site  is  not  quite  five  hours  from
Jerusalem.'

About  fifteen  minutes  from  Wady  Kelt,  or  half-way  towards
'Ain  es-Sultan,  is  another  larger  tumulus-hke  hill  ;  the  southern
side  of  which  at  the  top  is  excavated,  either  artificially  or  from
natural  causes,  somewhat  in  the  form  of  an  amjihitheatre.  If
artificial,  one  might  be  disposed  to  regard  it  as  a  theatre  of
Herod  ;  but  as  there  are  others  Like  it  in  the  vicinity,  the  appear-
ance is  more  probably  natural.  Here  begin  again  the  traces  of
similar  foundations,  apparently  connected  with  those  mentioned
yesterday  around  'Ain  cs-Sultan.  We  came  to  the  fountain  in
half  an  hour  from  Wady  Kelt,  or  in  about  forty  minutes  from  the
reservoir  further  south.  All  the  foundations  here  described  are
of  unhewn  stones,  often  small  and  straggling.*

After  all  our  search  we  were  disappointed  in  finding  so  few
traces  of  work  in  hewn  stones  ;  nothing  indeed,  which  of  itself
could  at  once  be  referred  to  any  large  or  important  building  ;  in
short,  nothing  which  looks  like  the  ruins  of  a  city  of  twenty
stadia  in  circumference,^  with  a  large  hippodrome  and  palaces.
It  is  true,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  materials  of  these  structures
may  have  been  swallowed  up  in  the  later  convents,  the  many
aqueducts,  and  the  renovations  of  the  modern  village  ;  yet
nevertheless,  one  would  naturally  expect  to  find  some  traces
of  the  solidity  and  splendour  of  the  ancient  city.    It  seems  not

'  Comp.  Maundrell,  March  29.  tion  is,  as  usual,  very  greatly  exaggerated;

'  These  remains  and  hillocks  arc  men-  p.  295.
tioned  by  Buckingham ;  but  his  descrip-       '  Epiphanius  adv.  Huer.  lib.  U.  p.  702.
ii.  207,  298

*

Mat  14.]  ANCIENT  SITE.  565

improbable,  that  with  the  exception  of  the  royal  edifices,  the
houses  of  ancient  Jericho  were  small,  and  built  of  loose  unhewn
stones  or  other  perishable  materials.

According  to  the  Bourdeaux  pilgrim,  A.  D.  333,  the  Jericho
of  that  day  was  at  the  descent  of  the  moimtains,  one  and  a  half
Boman  mUes  distant  from  the  fountain  ;  while  he  places  the
more  ancient  city  at  the  foimtain  itself.'  I  am  inclined  to
adopt  this  suggestion  ;  and  to  regard  the  remains  around  the
opening  of  the  Wady  Kelt,  half  an  hour  south  of  'Ain  es-Sultan,
as  marking  the  site  of  the  Jericho  of  Herod  and  the  New  Tes-
tament ;  while  those  around  the  fountain  may  have  belonged  to
single  edifices  scattered  among  the  gardens,  and  to  the  walls  by
which  the  latter  were  enclosed.  The  earliest  city  of  all  would
naturally  have  been  adjacent  to  the  fountain  ;  and  the  site  of  the
later  Jericho  may  have  been  changed  in  order  to  evade  the  curse.'
But  any  distinct  traces  of  the  former  city  are  now  hardly  to  be
looked  for. — The  site,  both  at  the  fountain  and  at  the  opening
of  Wady  Kelt,  accords  entirely  with  the  account  of  Josephus,
that  Jericho  was  sixty  stadia  distant  from  the  Jordan.^

Jericho  is  often  mentioned  ;  but  its  varying  fortunes  are
not  very  definitely  described.  It  was  early  rebuilt,  notwithstand-
ing the  curse  ;  and  became  a  school  of  the  prophets.*  After  the
exile  its  inhabitants  returned  ;  and  it  was  later  fortified  by  the
Syrian  Bacchides.'  Pompey  marched  from  Scythopolis  along
the  Ghor  to  Jericho,  and  thence  to  Jerusalem ;  and  Strabo
speaks  of  the  castles  Thrax  and  Taurus,  in  or  near  Jericho,  as
having  been  destroyed  by  him.*  Herod,  the  Great  in  the  begin-
ning of  his  career  captured  and  sacked  Jericho  ;  but  afterwards
adorned  and  strengthened  it,  after  he  had  redeemed  its  revenues
from  Cleopatra.^  He  appears  to  have  not  unfrequently  resided
here.  He  built  over  the  city  the  fortress  Cypres  ;  and  between
the  castle  and  the  former  palace,  erected  other  palaces -and  called
them  by  the  names  of  his  friends.^  There  was  also  here  a  hippo-
drome or  circus.'  The  cruel  tyrant  at  length  closed  his  career  and
life  at  Jericho.  It  was  here,  that,  the  '  ruling  passion  being  still
strong  in  death,'  he  summoned  around  him  the  nobles  of  the  land
ia  great  numbers,  and  having  shut  them  up  within  the  hippo-
drome, gave  a  strict  charge  to  his  sister  Salome  to  cause  them  to

'  Itin.  Hieros.  ed.  Wesseling  pp.  596,
597,  "  A  civitate  passns  mille  qaingentos
est  fons  Helisei  prophetas. — Ibi  fuit  ciWtas
Hiericho  ctijas  muros  gyraverunt  filii  Is-
rael," etc.

'  Josh.  6,  26.

'  Joseph.  Ant.  5.  1.  4.  See  above,  pp.
567,  .558.

«  Jndg.  3,  13.  1  K,  16,  34.  2  K.  2,
4.  5.

Yoh.  I.-48

'  Ezra  2,  84.  Neh.  3,  2.  1  Mace.  9
50.

'  Joseph.  Ant.  14.  4.  1.  Strabo  16.  2.
40.

'  Jos.  Ant,  15.  4.  1,  2.  See  above,  p,
559.  n.  8.

*  Joseph.  Ant.  16.  5.  2.  B.  J.  1.  21.
4,  9.

•  Jos.  Ant.  17.  6.  5.    B.  J.  1.  33.  6.

ii.  298-300

566

JERICHO  A^D  ITS  ENVIRONS.

[Sec.  X.

be  put  to  death  tlie  moment  lie  expired  ;  in  order,  as  lie  said,
that  his  own  decease  might  be  commemorated  throughout  the
land  by  an  appropriate  mourning.  A  worthy  consummation  of
an  atrocious  life  !  This  charge,  however,  his  sister  was  wise
enough  to  leave  unfulfilled.'  The  palace  at  Jericho  was  after-
wards rebuilt  with  greater  splendour  by  Archelaus.^

It  was  this  Jericho  which  our  Lord  visited,  lodging  with
Zaccheus  and  healing  the  blind  man.^  The  city  became  the
head  of  one  of  the  toparchies  ;  and  was  visited  by  Vespasian
just  before  he  left  the  country,  who  stationed  here  the  tenth
legion  in  garrison.*  Ko  further  mention  of  Jericho  occurs  imtil
the  time  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome  in  the  fourth  century  ;  who
relate,  that  it  was  destroyed  during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by
Titus,  on  account  of  the  perfidy  of  the  inhabitants,  and  had  been
again  rebuilt.'  From  A.  D.  325  onwards  five  bishops  of  Jericho
are  mentioned  ;  the  last  of  whom,  Grregorius,  appears  among  the
signers  at  the  synod  of  Jerusalem  in  A.  D.  536.'  About  the
same  time,  according  to  Procopius,  the  emperor  Justinian  ^
erected  here  a  Xenodochium  apparently  for  pilgrims  ;  and  also  g
a  church  consecrated  to  the  Virgin.  The  monastery  of  St.  John  1
near  the  Jordan  was  likewise  already  in  existence.'  This  Xeno-
dochium is  again  mentioned  by  Antoninus  Martyr,  before  the
Muhammedan  conquests.^

At  the  close  of  the  seventh  century,  Adamnanus  already  de-
scribes the  site  of  Jericho  as  wholly  deserted  of  Iniman  habita-
tions, (except  the  house  of  Eahab.)  and  covered  with  corn  and
vines.  Between  it  and  the  Jordan  palm  groves  still  existed  ;
among  which  were  interspersed  fields  and  the  dwellings  of
Canaanites,  probably  the  nomadic  inhabitants  of  the  Ghor.'  Of
this  destruction  there  is  no  historical  account  ;  as  there  is  none
of  that  of  Petra.  It  is  probably  to  be  ascribed  to  the  ravages
of  the  Muhammedan  conquerors.  In  the  next  century,  St.  WU-
libald  speaks  only  of  the  fountain  ;  though  near  the  close  of  the
century,  there  appears  to  have  been  a  church  in  the  vicinity,
perhaps  that  of  Galgala  already  mentioned.""     In  A.  D.  870,

'  Jos.  Ant.  17.  6.  5.  ib.  17.  7.  1.  2.  B.
J.  1.  S3.  6-8.

'  Jos.  Ant  17.  13.  1.

'  Luke  18,  35  sq.  19,  1-7.  Matt.  20,
29  sq.    Mark  10,  46  sq.

*  Joseph.  B.  J.  3.  3.  5.  ib.  4.  8.  1.  ib.
5.  2.  3.

'  Onomast  art.  Jericho.  As  however
Josephus,  the  cotemporary,  is  entirely  si-
lent as  to  any  such  destruction,  the  fact
must  be  regarded  as  doubtful  Still  more
so  the  modem  assertion,  that  it  was  rebuilt
by  Adrian ;  of  which  there  seems  to  be  no
trace  in  history.    Qoaresmitis  II.  p.  755.

ii.  300,  301

•  Labh.  ColL  ConciL  Tom.  V.  p.  283.
Le  Quien  Oriens  Chr.  IIL  p.  654  sq.-  See
above  p.  383

'  Procop.  de  JEdific.  Jnstiuiani,  5.  9.

'  Itinerur.  13.

'  "  Locus  vero  totios  orbis  ah  homana
desertns  babitatione,  nollam  domum  ha-
bens  commorationis,  segetes  et  vineta  rfr-
cepit,"  etc.  Adamnan.  de  Lo&  Sauct  2.
13.

"  See  above,  p.  547.  n.  2.  Basl,
bishop  of  Tiberias  about  the  close  of  the
eighth  or  beginning  of  the  ninth  century,
is  said  to  have  previoo^y  administered  tbft

May  14.]

MOUXT  QTTARAXTANA.

567

Bernard  relates  that  there  were  already  monasteries  in  the
vicinity.' — The  renovation  of  the  culture  of  the  plain,  and  the  in-
troduction of  the  sugar  cane,  which  took  place  apparently  about  or
■t  long  after  this  time,  have  already  been  sufficiently  alluded  to  ;
.  -  also  the  probable  origin  and  history  of  the  castle  and  the
modern  village.*

On  arri\'ing  at  the  fountain  'Ain  es-Sultan,  we  found  omi
rvants  and  the  rest  of  the  party  waiting ;  they  having  come
ither  directly  from  the  castle.    All  was  bright  and  sparkling
: '  )und,  under  the  refreshing  influence  of  the  limpid  waters  ;
and  the  niunerous  birds  in  the  groves  below  had  not  yet  finished
tlieir  morning  song.    The  old  Sheikh  Mustafa  here  joined  us
again,  and  afterwards  accompanied  us  for  some  distance.  We
were  glad  of  his  presence,  as  being  perfectly  acquainted  with  all
the  region  round  about.  ^

Leaving  the  fountain  at  ten  minutes  past  8  o'clock,  we  came
in  ten  minutes  to  the  sugar  mills,  on  the  declivity  of  the  low
ridge  which  runs  north  from  Quarantana.  They  appear  to  have
been  once  quite  extensive  and  solidly  built,  though  now  long  de-
serted. The  race  or  aqueduct  which  brought  the  water  to
them  from  above,  still  remains.  Five  minutes  more  brought  us
to  the  top  of  the  ridge,  where  we  halted  for  a  short  time.  The
water  from  the  foimtain  of  Duk  in  the  N.  N.  W.  after  being
conducted  along  the  base  of  the  high  mountain  in  an  artificial
channel,  is  here  carried  through  the  low  ridge  by  a  somewhat
deep  cut,  and  distributed  by  aqueducts  to  the  plain  below  as
already  described,  after  having  supphed  several  mills  now  in
ruins.*

We  were  now  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  Quarantana  ;  so
called,  as  the  supposed  place  of  our  Saviour's  forty  days'  temp-
tation. The  Arabs  have  adopted  the  name  under  the  form  of
Jebel  Kuruntiil.  The  moimtain  rises  precipitously,  an  almost
perpendicular  wall  of  rock,  twelve  or  fifteen  hundred  feet  above
the  plain,  crowned  with  a  chapel  on  its  highest  point.  The
astern  front  is  full  of  grots  and  caverns,  where  hermits  are  said
once  to  have  dwelt  in  great  numbers.  At  the  present  day,  some
three  or  four  Abyssinians  are  said  to  come  hither  annually  and
pass  the  time  of  Lent  upon  the  mountain,  h^^ng  only  upon
herbs.  There  is  nothing  else  remarkable  about  this  naked  clifi",
to  distinguish  it  from  the  other  similar  ones  along  the  Ghor  and

■priis  of  the  church  of  Jericho  ;  Leont.  we  took  the  following  bearings  :  Ca-stle  at

St.  Steph.  Sabaitse  5.5,  in  Acta  Sane-  Riha  S.  3.5'  E.    Kakon  S.  42'"  W.  Sugar

Jul.  Tom.  III.  p.  554.    Le  Quien  L  c.  mills  N.  00°  W.    Aqueduct  in  Wudy  Na-

'>6.  wi'imeh  N.  37°  E.    Mouth  of  ^\'ady  Slia'ib

'  Born.  Sap.  de  Loc.  Sanct.  16.  p.  525.  N.  85°  E.

e*3.  Mabillon.  *  Brocardns  mentions  mills  here  in  his

*  See  pp.  560-563,  above.  day,  probably  driven  by  the  same  waters ;

'  From  the  moimd  over  the  foontain,  c.  7.  p.  178.

ii.  301-303

568

JERICHO  AND  ITS  ENVIRONS.

[Sec.  X.

tlie  Dead  Sea  further  soutli. — The  tradition  which  regards  the
mountain  as  the  place  of  our  Lord's  temptation,  as  ■well  as  the
name  Quarantana,  appear  not  to  be  older  than  the  age  of  the
crusades.'

North  of  Quarantana  the  mountains  again  retreat,  sweeping
round  in  the  arc  of  a  circle.  They  thus  leave  here  a  broad  re-
cess of  higher  table  land,  behind  the  line  of  low  hills  which  runs
out  N.  N.  E.  from  the  foot  of  Quarantana,  and  extends  nearly
across  to  the  mountains  further  north.  The  southern  part  of  this
higher  recess  is  broken  land,  as  far  as  to  the  fountain  of  Duk
and  Wady  Nawa'imeh,  which  passes  down  through  it  ;  but
further  north  it  forms  a  fine  plain  or  basin,  extending  around  a
low  projecting  mountain,  called  'Esh  el-Ghurub,  and  watered
by  another  fountain  in  its  northern  part,  which  gives  verdure
and  beauty  to  the  whole  tract.  Here  too  in  the  northern  part  of
the  recess,  near  the  said  fountain,  is  a  conical  hill,  and  not  far
off  in  the  plain  are  the  ruins  of  a  town,  which  like  the  fountain,
now  bears  the  name  of  el-'Aujeh.  This  basin  seemed  to  open
out  directly  upon  the  plain  of  the  Jordan  ;  the  hne  of  hills  not
extending  across  its  front. — From  the  point  where  we  now  stood,
we  could  overlook  the  whole  of  this  inner  tract  between  the
mountains  and  the  line  of  hills.*

We  here  also  had  our  last  and  perhaps  most  #  splendid  view
of  the  plain  of  Jericho.    It  is  certainly  one  of  the  richest  in  the
world  ;  enjoying  all  the  rains  Hke  the  hill  country,  and  suscepti-
ble besides  of  unlimited  irrigation  from  copious  fountains,  as  the
numerous  aqueducts  testily.    Here  we  could  see  still  another
aqueduct  far  to  the  left  in  the  lower  plain,  which  once  perhaps
received  the  waters  of  the  fountain  el-'Aujeh.    Indeed  water  is
everywhere  abundant ;  the  climate  propitious  ;  the  nature  of  ,
the  soil  fertihty  itself ;  nothing  in  short  is  wanting  but  the  handj
of  man  to  till  the  ground.    But  the  present  race  of  Jericho  arej
only  the  personification  of  indolence,  misery,  and  filth.  {

The  principal  Wadys  and  fountains  flowing  into  the  Ghor  on
both  sides,  from  the  Dead  Sea  northwards  as  far  as  to  Beisan,
so  far  as  we  could  learn  from  Sheikh  Mustafa  and  other  Arabs,
are  the  following,  beginning  from  the  south.    On  the  west  side  :

'  The  first  mention  of  this  mountain  as  dinibus  Jordanis,  uhi  beatus  Joannes  Bap-

the  place  of  temptation,  seems  to  be  by  tista  fiigiens  hom'mim  turmas — ut  vive-

Sajwulf  about  A.  D.  1103 ;  Peregrinat.  p.  rent  Deo,  quietis  sibi  sepulchrum  elege-

268.    The  name  Quarantana  I  first  find  in  runt;"  c.  ."jS.  p.  1075.
William  of  Oldenborg  in  1211 ;  he  writes       "  From  this  ridge,  Jebel  es-Salt  bore  N.

it  Quai  ennia ;  Itin.  sub  fine.    Then  in  57°  E.    Kusr  el-Yehud  S.  64°  E.  North-

Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  178. — Jacob  dc  Vitry  east  corner  of  Dead  Sea  S.  E.    Castle  of

speaks  of  many  hermits  attracted  to  this  Riha  S.  40°  E.    Neby  Milsa  S.  15°  W.

re-ion  as  the  scene  of  John  the  Baptist's  Ki'ikon  S.  27°  W.    el-'Aiyeh,  ruin,  N.  16°

preaching  ;  but  says  nothing  of  our  Lord's  W.
temptation  :  "  Quam  pluros  vero,  in  solitu-

ii.  30;5,  304

May  14.]

•WADYS  AXD  EUIXS.

569

Wady  Kelt  ;  'Ain  es-Sultan  ;  'Ain  Diik  ;  Wady  Nawa'imeli,
coming  from  Deir  Duwan  ;  Wady  el-Abyad  ;  Wady  and  foun-
tain el-'Aujeh  ;  'Ain  el-Fusiiil  ;  Wady  el-Ahmar  under  Kfirn
Surtabeh  ;  Wady  el-Fari'a  north  of  the  Surtabeh  -with  a  stream
of  water  ;  Wady  el-Malih.' — On  the  east  side  ;  'Ain  es-Suwei-
meh ;  Wady  Hesban  ;  Wady  Sha'ib  ;  Wady  Zerka  with  a
stream  ;  Ghor  el-Wahadineh.

In  the  Ghor,  between  Jericho  and  Beisan,  the  only  ruins  vre
could  hear  of  on  the  west  side,  were  es-Siunrah  and  el-'Aujeh.
The  former  is  in  the  plain  half  an  hour  north  of  Wady  Na-
wa'imeh.'  On  the  east  side,  beginning  from  the  sea,  we  heard
of  ruins  at  er-Rameh,  in  or  near  Wady  Hesban  ;  el-Keferein  ; '
Nimrln  in  Wady  Sha'ib  ;  Amatah  ;  and  the  inhabited  village
el-Arba'in  nearly  opposite  Beisan.^

Josephus  informs  us,  that  Herod  not  only  erected  castles  and
palaces  in  and  aroimd  Jericho,  but  built  also  a  city  called  Pha-
saelus  in  the  AuJon  or  Ghor  north  of  Jericho  ;  by  which  means
a  tract  formerly  desert  was  rendered  fertile  and  productive.*
The  name  seems  still  to  have  existed  in  the  middle  ages  ;  at
least  Brocardus  speaks  of  a  village  PhaseUum  five  leagues  north
of  Gilgal ;  and  this  name  is  still  to  be  recognized  in  'Ain  el-
Fusail.'  Archelaus,  the  son  of  Herod,  built  also  a  \allage  in
the  plain,  named  from  himself  Archelais.'  This  is  placed  in
the  Peutinger  Tables  at  twenty-four  Roman  miles  north  of  Jeri-
cho towards  Beisan  ;  and  stood  probably  in  or  near  the  opening
of  Wady  el-Fari'a  above  mentioned.^

During  the  whole  time  we  were  m  the  coast  of  the  Dead
Sea,  on  the  Jordan,  and  in  or  near  the  plains  of  Jericho,
we  were  much  interested  in  looking  out  among  the  eastern
mountains  for  Mount  Nebo.  so  celebrated  in  the  history  of  the
great  Hebrew  legislator,  where  he  was  permitted  to  behold  with
his  eyes  the  land  of  promise,  and  then  yielded  up  the  ghost.'
But  QMi  search  was  in  vain  :  for  although  we  passed  in  such  a
direction  as  to  see  the  mountains  overagainst  J ericho  from  every
quarter,  yet  there  seems  to  be  none  standing  so  out  from  the  rest,
or  so  marked,  as  to  be  recognised  as  the  Nebo  of  the  Scriptures,

The  Wadys  FarTa  and  Malih  are  men-  the  similar  lists  given      Burckhardt  of

tioned  by  Berggren,  who  saw  them  higher  Wadys  and  places  in  the  Ghor ;  p.  344.
np  in  the  western  hills;  the  former  has  a       '  Joseph.  Ant.  IG.  ,5.  2.  ib.  17.  11.  5.  ib.

mill  stream,  the  latter  a  brackish  fountain.  18.  2.  2.    B.  J.  1.  21.  9.    Reland  Ealasst.

Reisen,  etc.  IL  p.  267.  p.  95.3.

-  It  was  visited  by  Rev.  E.  Smith,  in       *  Brocardus  c.  7.  p.  178.
April  1844.    Ms.  Jonmal.  '  Jos.  Ant.  17.  13.  1.  ib.  18.  2.  2.  Re-

'  RAmeh  and  el-Keferein  are  mentioned  land  Palsst  p.  576  ;  comp.  p.  421,  Plate,
by  Burckhardt ;  p.  391.  '  See  more  on  these  places  in  Vol.  IH

*  For  el-Arba'in  and  Amatah,  see  Bnrck-  Sec.  VII,  under  May  11th,  1852.
hardt  pp.  345,  346.    For  Amatah  (Ama-       »  Dent.  32,  48  sq.    34,  1  sq.
thus)  see  also  Reland  Falsest,  p.  559.  Comp.

Vol.  1,-48*  iL  304-306

.570

JERICHO  AND  ITS  ENVIRONS.

[SecX.

There  is  no  peak  or  point  perceptibly  higher  than  the  rest  ;  but
all  is  apparently  one  level  line  of  summit  without  peaks  or  gaps.
The  highest  point  in  all  the  eastern  mountains,  is  Jebel  el-Jil'ad
or  es-Salt,  near  the  city  of  that  name,  rising  about  three  thou-
sand feet  above  the  Ghor  ;  •  but  this  is  much  too  far  north  to  be
Mount  Nebo,  to  which  Moses  ascended  from  the  plains  of  Moab
overagainst  Jericho.  Possibly  on  travelhng  into  these  moun-
tains, some  isolated  point  or  summit  might  be  found  answering
to  the  position  and  character  of  Nebo.  Indeed,  Seetzen,  Burck-
hardt,  and  also  Irby  and  Mangles,  have  all  found  Mount  Nebo
in  Jebel  'Attar^s,  a  high  mountain  which  runs  southwestward
from  the  bank  of  the  Zerka  Ma'in.''  This,  however,  as  the  latter
travellers  remark,  is  "far  from  opposite  Jericho  and  would  be
almost  as  distant,  and  as  little  convenient  to  the  plains  of  Moab
as  is  Jebel  es-Salt.  It  may  perhaps  be  sufficient  to  assume,
that  Moses  merely  went  up  from  these  plains  to  some  high  part
of  the  adjacent  mountains  ;  from  which  he  would  everywhere
have  an  extensive  view  over  the  Jordan  valley  and  the  moun-
tainous tract  of  Judah  and  Ephraim  towards  the  western  sea.
The  Mediterranean  itself  could  never  well  be  visible  from  any
point  east  of  the  Jordan.^

Our  former  inquiries  respecting  the  site  of  Ai,  in  the  vicinity
of  Deir  Duwan,  had  been  so  unsatisfactory,  that  we  had  now
determined  to  take  the  route  from  Jericho  to  the  latter  place  and
so  to  Bethel,  in  order  further  to  investigate  this  and  other
points,  and  to  trace  the  ancient  road  between  these  cities,  so
often  travelled  by  kings  and  prophets  of  old.*  Three  roads  now
lead  from  Jericho  to  Deir  Duwan.  The  first  and  shortest  passes
up  the  face  of  the  cliffs  between  Quarantana  and  Wady  Kelt,
and  then  follows  a  direct  course  over  a  tract  of  high  shelving
table  land.  Another  goes  to  Duk,  and  crossing  the  Nawa'imeh,
ascends  the  mountain  on  the  north  leading  strictly  to  Taijdbeh  ;
but  near  Kummon  a  branch  goes  off  and  recrosses  the  valley  to
Deir  Duwan.  The  third  leaves  the  preceding  road  just  beyond
Diik,  and  climbing  the  mountain  on  the  south  side  of  the  Na-
wa'imeh, faUs  into  the  first  road  some  distance  higher  up.  Of

'  See  more  on  this  mountain  above,  p.
627.  n.  2.

'  Seetzen  in  Zach's  Monatl.  Corr.  XVIII.
p.  431.  Reisen  II.  p.  342.  Buickhardt,
p.  370.  Irby  and  Mangles'  Travels,  p.
464.  [143.]— On  the  north  end  of  Jebel
AttArus,  high  above  the  southern  bank  of
the  Zerka  Ma'in,  Seetzen  heard  of  a  ruined
fortress  now  called  Mkauer ;  but  ho  did
not  himself  visit  it;  Reisen  II.  p.  330.  This
he  regards  as  the  ancient  Machwrua,  a
fortress  of  Herod  in  the  Arabian  moini-
tains,  where  according  to  Josephus  (Aut,

ii.  306,  307

1 8.  5.  2),  John  the  Baptist  was  beheaded.
See  the  description  in  Joseplius,  B.  J.  7.  6.
1  sq.  Comp.  Ritt«r  Erdk.  XV.  i.  p.  577
sq.  But  neitlier  Burckhardt  nor  Irby
and  Mangles  appear  to  have  heard  the
name.

^  In  onr  list  of  the  Belka  is  found  the
name  Nfba,  wliich  may  possibly  represent
the  ancient  Nebo.  It  occurs  next  to  Ma-
dcba,  apparently  some  distance  north  of
Jebel  'Attilrus.

*  I  Sam.  13,  15.    2  K.  2,  3.  4.  23.

Mat  14.]

ROADS  TO  BETHEL.

571

these  routes  the  first  is  the  most  direct,  easiest,  and  without
doubt  the  ancient  road  ;  but  we  chose  to  take  the  third  in  order
to  visit  the  fountain  of  Duk  and  obtain  a  more  extensive  knowl-
edge of  the  country.

Leaving  the  height  above  the  sugar  mills  at  8.40,  we  passed
along  the  water-course  near  the  base  of  Quarantana  into  the  re-
cess. We  came  in  a  few  minutes  to  the  encampment  of  Sheikh
Mustafa,  who  had  accompanied  us  from  the  fountain.  It  con-
sisted of  thirty  or  forty  mean  tents  arranged  in  a  square,  most
of  them  open,  the  sides  being  thrown  up.  These  people  are
much  darker  than  the  Arabs  in  general ;  and  seem  to  constitute
a  sort  of  gypsies  among  them.  Here  a  large  bowl  of  lehhen
(soured  milk)  was  already  prepared  for  our  breakfast  ;  but  as
we  were  neither  hungry  nor  thirsty,  we  left  it  to  our  attendants,
by  whom  it  was  greedily  devoured.    We  ourselves  passed  on.

This  old  Sheikh  and  his  tribe,  as  already  mentioned,  are  a
sort  of  Derwishes  or  sacred  characters,  respected  by  the  Arabs
and  peasants,  and  on  this  account  the  safest  guides  for  travel-
lers. .  His  full  name  was  Mustafa  Abu  Yamin,  and  his  encamp-
ment are  called  the  Arabs  of  Abu  Yamin.  Those  of  another
encampment  are  in  like  manner  called  from  their  Sheikh  the
Arabs  of  Abu  Nuseir.  These  two  encampments  together  make
out  the  tribe  Ehteim.

Besides  the  Ehteim,  who  have  gardens  at  Jericho  near  the
fountain,  the  following  tribes  of  Arabs  also  descend  more  or  less
into  the  Ghor,  beginning  from  the  south.  On  the  west  side  :
the  Ka'abineh,  the  Rashaideh,  the  Ta'amirah,  the  Mas'udy,  the
'Abbad,  the  Amir,  the  'Abbadin,  and  the  Mushahkhah.  On
the  east  side  :  the  'Adwan,  Ibn  Ghunum,  Beni  Hasan,  the  Ba-
harat,  the  'Ajarimeh,  Beni  Sukhr,  and  Beni  Hamideh.

The  hospitable  old  man  sent  one  of  his  men  to  guide  us  ovei
the  broken  ground  to  the  fountain  of  Duk.  At  9  o'clock  we
came  upon  Wady  Nawa'imeh,  which,  after  issuing  from  the
mountains  just  above  Duk,  runs  here  in  a  southeasterly  course,
and  breaking  through  the  line  of  lower  hills,  pursues  the  same
direction  to  the  Jordan.  It  is  the  continuation  of  the  Wadyel-
Matyah  between  Deir  Duwan  and  Rummon.  Water  was  here
flowing  in  it.  We  followed  it  up  ;  and  at  9^  o'clock  came  to
the  large  and  beautiful  fountain  or  rather  fountains  of  Duk,  on
the  southwestern  brink  of  the  same  Wady.  Here  are  two  very
copious  sources,  besides  other  smaller  ones,  aU  of  fine  limpid
water,  hke  that  of  'Ain  es-Sultan.  The  waters  naturally  all
flow  down  the  Wady  Nawa'imeh  ;  but  those  of  the  highest  and
largest  fountain,  which  springs  up  at  the  foot  of  a  large  Dom
tree,  are  carried  ofi"  by  the  artificial  channel^long  the  base  of
the  mountain,  for  nearly  an  hoiir,  to  the  vicinity  of  the  sugar

ii.  307-309.

572  FROM  JERICHO  TO  BETHEL.  [Sec.  X.  •

mills,  and  thence  distributed  to  the  plain.  This  stream  at  first
is  six  or  eight  feet  wide  and  a  foot  and  a  half  deep.  The  re-
maining waters  still  follow  their  natural  course  down  the  valley  ;
where  they  were  formerly  taken  up  by  the  aqueduct  at  its  en-
trance upon  the  plain.  ^

Above  the  fountain  are  traces  of  ancient  substructions,
though  not  very  distinct.  Here  or  in  the  vicinity  of  this  foun-
tain of  Duk,  we  are  doubtless  to  look  for  the  site  of  the  ancient
castle  of  Doch  near  Jericho,  in  which  Simon  Maccabaeus  was
treacherously  murdered  by  his  son-in-law  Ptolemy.*

Leaving  'Ain  Duk  at  9.35,  we  passed  still  along  the  base  of
the  mountain,  overlooking  on  our  right  the  higher  plain  or  basin
within  the  recess,  and  having  in  view  the  tract  of  el-'Aujeh,  and
the  smaller  Wadys,  which  descend  from  the  mountains  in  that
part.  The  plain  was  covered  with  verdure,  fed  by  the  waters  of
the  fountain  of  Aujeh.  In  fifteen  minutes  we  came  to  the
opening  of  Wady  Nawa'imeh,  as  it  issues  a  deep  ravine  from
the  cliffs ;  and  immediately  began  to  climb  the  angle  of  the
mountain  on  its  southern  side.  The  Taiyibeh  road  crosses  the
"Wady  and  goes  up  the  mountain  further  north.  The  ascent  is
steep,  rugged,  and  difficult,  consisting  of  two  parts.  We  reached
the  top  of  the  first  and  steepest  in  ten  minutes  ;  and  at  10.20
came  out  upon  the  head  of  the  pass  or  summit  of  the  cliff.
Here  we  had  our  last  view  back  upon  the  valley  of  the  Jordan.'

The  way  now  became  in  general  less  steep,  though  we  still
had  to  climb  occasionally  sharp  ascents  and  pass  along  the  brow
of  fearful  precipices.  On  our  right  the  Wady  Nawa'imeh  occu-
pied the  bottom  of  a  broad  sunken  tract,  composed  of  chalky
mountains  rising  on  each  side,  presenting  only  the  aspect  of  a
terrific  desert.  All  around  we  could  see  nought  but  waves  of
naked  desolate  pyramidal  and  conical  mountains,  -^-ith  deep
Wadys  between,  marked  only  by  the  narrow  tracks  of  goats,
which  climb  along  their  sides  to  crop  the  few  herbs  thinly
sprinkled  over  them.  It  was  one  of  the  most  trtdy  desert  spots
we  had  yet  visited.  The  path  led  us  along  the  tops  and  sides
of  declivities,  as  nearly  perpendicular  as  they  could  be'  without
being  composed  of  solid  rock.  Our  general  course  was  S.  E.  by
S.    At  11  o'clock  we  came  out  upon  one  of  the  highest  points  ;

'  From  Duk,  el-'Anjeh  bore  N.  13°  W.  ever,  places  it  too  far  north.  Miinter

Kum  Sdrtabeh,  N.  11°  E.    Jcbel  es-Salt  Statutenbuch  des  Ord.  des  Tenipelli.  I.  p.

N.  60°  E.  419.    Brocardus,  c.  7.  p.  178.

'  AdK,  I  Mace.  IG,  14.  15.    Josephns       '  We  took  here  the  follow-ing  bearings:

relates  the  same  circvmistances ;  but  mould-  Castle  of  Jericho,  S.  39°  E.    Mouth  of

ing  the  name  more  after  the  Greek  form,  Wady  Nawa'imeh  and  aqueduct,  S.  73°  E.

writes  it  Aaydiv,  Antiq.  13.  8.  1.    B.  J.  1.  Mouth  of  Wady  Sha'ib  S.  82°  E.  Duk,

2.  3. — Diik  is  mentioned  as  a  fortress  of  below,  E.    Kuni  Siirtabeh,  N.  17°  E.  el-

tlie  knights  Templars  bemeen  Jericho  and  'Aujeh,  in  the  recess,  N.  8°  \V.
Bethel,  and  also  by  Brocardus ;  who,  how-

iL  309  310

May  14.]

THE  DESERT.  CISTERNS.

573

where  we  stopped  for  a  time  to  breathe,  and  to  survey  the  sur-
rounding desolation.  Here  we  could  distinguish  several  places
already  known  to  us,  as  Rummon,  Taiyibeh,  and  the  Mount  of
Olives  ;  showing  that  we  were  approaching  a  region  of  more
promise. '

We  now,  after  fifteen  minutes,  descended  slightly  on  a  course
W.  S.  W.  The  land  became  less  broken,  a  tract  of  shelving
table  land.  As  we  advanced,  the  scattered  herbs  of  the  desert
were  more  and  more  interspersed  with  dried  grass  ;  untU  at  a
quarter  past  noon  we  reached  a  burying  place  of  the  Bedawin
in  this  lone  spot,  where  the  country  became  more  open  and  even.
Here  we  struck  the  southern  road  from  Jericho  to  Deir  Duwan,
coming  up  from  the  left  ;  it  having  passed,  so  far  as  we  could
see,  through  a  much  more  level  tract  than  ours,  along  the  water-
shed between  the  branches  of  Wady  Nawa'imeh  and  those
which  go  to  form  Wady  Kelt.  Our  course  was  now  W.  by  N.
We  soon  came  upon  small  ploughed  patches  here  and  there,  be-
longing probably  to  the  Bedawin.  They  had  been  sown  with
wheat  ;  but  the  grain,  which  was  now  nearly  ripe,  was  thin  and
scarcely  more  than  six  inches  high.  The  surface  became  gradu-
ally more  and  more  covered  with  limestone  rocks,  with  the  usual
red  soil  among  them  ;  while  vegetation  and  pasturage  increased.

In  one  place  we  saw  a  number  of  people  at  some  distance
before  us  ;  who  on  perceiving  us  became  alarmed  and  ran  off  in
all  haste.  Our  Arabs  called  after  them  to  reassure  them,  and
we  afterwards  overtook  them  ;  they  proved  to  be  several  men
and  four  women  from  Deir  Duwan.

At  fire  minutes  past  one,  we  noticed  a  cistern  by  the  way
side  as  we  ascended  a  hill ;  and  two  others  occurred  afterwards  ;
all  hewn  in  the  rock,  and  showing  this  to  be  an  ancient  and  im-
portant route  between  Gilgal  and  Bethel.  At  half  past  one  the
grass  and  vegetation  began  to  assume  a  shght  appearance  of
green  ;  and  the  fields  of  the  Fellahin  were  more  numerous.  At
2  o'clock  we  got  sight  of  Deir  Duwan,  bearing  northwest.  On
our  right  at  2.35  were  the  ruins  of  an  ordinary  village,  called  Abu
Subbah.  Shortly  before  coming  to  Deir  Duwan  we  sent  on  our
servants  and  luggage  to  that  place,  which  they  reached  at  3.20  ;
whUe  we  turned  off  to  the  left  to  visit  the  site  with  ruins  on  the
south  of  the  village,  which  had  been  pointed  out  to  us  on  our
former  visit.'*

The  place  is  on  a  low  hill  or  point  projecting  towards  the
south  between  two  shallow  Wadys.    In  the  eastern  valley  are

'  The  bearings  from  this  high  point  were    Dis,  S.  53°  W.    KhAn  Hudhrur,  S.  42*
no  follows :   Taivibeh,  N.  W.  Rfimmon,    W.    (See  under  Taiyibeh,  p.  445.  n.  3.)
N.  54^  W.    Tell  "beyond  Deir  Duwan,  N.    Neby  Musa,  S.  5°  K.
65°  W.    Mount  of  Olives,  S.  61°  W.    Abu      »  See  above,  p.  442.

ii.  310-312

574

FROM  JERICHO  TO  BETHEL.

[Sl5C.  X.

some  excavated  tombs.  The  western  valley  is  tlie  broadest ;  and
the  rocks  on  that  side  are  precipitous  for  a  few  feet.  Here  are
three  reservoirs  dug  mostly  out  of  the  rock,  and  bearing  marks
of  antiquity.    They  measured  as  follows :

Length.  Breadth.  Depth.

Upper  or  Northern  110  feet  32  feet  6  feet

Middle  37  26  12

Lower  88  22  15

On  the  Mil  itself  are  ruins,  or  foundations  of  large  hewn  stones,
in  no  great  number.  Many  stones  have  probably  been  taken
away  to  build  the  modern  village.  While  my  companions  were
measuring  the  reservoirs,  I  busied  myself  in  searching  for  the
small  tesseree  of  Mosaic  work,  such  as  are  often  found  around
Jerusalem  ;  and  picked  up  a  handful  within  the  space  of  a  few
feet.  All  these  circumstances  indicate  an  ancient  place  of  some
importance,  but  we  were  not  yet  satisfied  that  it  was  Ai.

We  passed  through  Deir  Duwan  without  stopping,  leaving  it
at  3.40.  The  direction  of  Bethel  is  about  N.  W.  by  W.,  and  the
road  leads  up  from  the  basin  by  a  hoUow  way,  between  a  conical
hill  or  Tell  on  the  right,  and  another  broader  hill  on  the  left.
Twenty  minutes  brought  us  to  the  summit  of  the  Tell,  from
which  we  looked  directly  down  into  the  deep  narrow  bed  of  Wady
el-Mutyah  on  the  north,  where  a  few  excavated  sepulchres  were
visible.  The  village  we  had  left  bore  S.  46°  E.  and  Taiyibeh  N.
45°  E.  We  had  expected  to  find  here  some  remains  of  an  ancient
site  ;  but  there  was  nothing  save  a  cistern,  and  immense  heaps  of
unwrought  stones,  merely  thrown  together  in  order  to  clear  the
ground  for  planting  olive  trees.  The  position  would  answer  well
to  that  of  Ai ;  and  had  there  been  traces  of  ruins,  I  should
not  hesitate  so  to  regard  it.  I  also  went  out  upon  the  more
southern  hill,  but  with  no  better  success  ;  it  was  wholly  covered
with  rocks  in  their  natural  state.

Ai  is  chiefly  celebrated  in  Scripture  histoiy  for  its  capture  and
destruction  by  Joshua.'  It  lay  on  the  east  of  Bethel ;  Abraham
on  his  arrival  in  Palestine  pitched  his  tent  between  the  two
cities  f  and  they  were  not  so  far  distant  from  each  other,  but
that  the  men  of  Bethel  mingled  in  the  pursuit  of  the  Israelites,
as  they  feigned  to  fly  before  the  king  of  Ai,  and  thus  both  cities
were  left  defenceless.^  Yet  they  were  not  so  near  but  that
Joshua  could  place  an  ambush  on  the  west  (or  southwest)  of  Ai,
without  its  being  obsciTcd  by  the  men  of  Bethel ;  while  he  him-
self remained  beliind  a  valley  on  the  north  of  Ai.*    At  a  later

'  Josh.  7,  2-5.    8,  1-29.  '  Josh.  8,  17.

'  Gen.  12,  8.    13,  3.  *  Josh.  8,  4. 12.    Verses  II.  13.

ii.  312,  313

Mat  15.]

SITE  OF  AI.

575

period  Ai  was  again  rebuilt,  and  is  mentioned  hj  Isaiah  and  also
after  the  exile.'  In  the  days  of  Eusebins  and  Jerome,  its  site
and  scanty  ruins  were  still  pointed  out,  not  far  distant  from
Bethel  towards  the  east.'^  ,

After  all  our  search,  we  could  come  to  no  other  result,  than
to  assign  as  the  probable  site  of  Ai  the  place  with  ruins  just
south  of  Deir  Duwan.  This  is  an  hour  distant  from  Bethel ;
having  near  by  on  the  north  the  deep  Wady  el-Mutyah  ;  and
towards  the  southwest  other  smaller  Wadys,  in  which  the  ambus-
cade of  the  IsraeUtes  might  easily  have  been  concealed.

After  remaining  for  twenty  minutes  on  and  around  the  Tell,
we  proceeded  across  the  high  and.  beautiful  plain,  on  which  Abra-
ham of  old  must  have  pitched  his  tent.  The  path  led  us  by  the
ruins  of  Burj  Beitin.  We  reached  Bethel  at  5  o'clock  ;  and
encamped  for  the  night  on  the  green  grass,  within  the  area  of  the
ancient  reservoir,  where  we  had  formerly  breakfasted.

Tiiesday,  May  loth.  The  Arabs  encamped  at  Bethel  brought
us  this  morning  a  young  gazelle,  which  we  purchased,  intend-
ing it  as  a  present  for  our  friend  Mr  Lanneau.  Our  servants
carried  the  little  animal  in  their  arms,  or  on  the  saddle  before
them,  all  the  way  to  Jerusalem  ;  but  it  seemed  to  have  been  in
some  way  injured,  and  lived  only  a  few  days.

We  left  Bethel  at  5.50,  and  reached  the  fountain  southwest
of  el-Bireh  in  just  an  hour,  passing  this  time  on  the  west  of  the
village,  without  entering  it.  ■  These  waters,  as  already  remarked,
flow  off"  in  a  valley  towards  the  east.  We  now  took  the  Jerusalem
road  ;  and  leaving  the  fountain  at  7  o'clock  passed  in  five  minutes
the  low  water-shed,  which  brought  us  to  the  beginning  of  another
Wady  running  south  ;  one  of  the  minor  heads  of  the  great  Wady
Beit  Hanina.  The  path  follows  down  this  Wady,  along  a  sort
of  hollow  way,  having  on  the  west  an  isolated  hill  of  considerable
height.  My  companion  ascended  this  hill  in  passing  ;  here  are
merely  the  foundations  apparently  of  a  tower,  with  heaps  of  un-
wrought  stones,  and  fragments  of  pottery  strowed  about.  To-
wards the  northwest  not  far  off,  are  a  few  foundations  called  Su-
weikeh  ;  but  we  coidd  learn  no  name  for  the  hill  itself  Beyond
the  hill,  in  the  plain  near  its  southern  base,  we  came  at  7.40  to
larger  ruins  containing  some  arches ;  above  them,  on  the  side  of
the  hUl,  are  two  ancient  reservoirs,  perhaps  one  hundred  feet  in
length  by  forty  feet  in  breadth.  These  ruins  are  called  'Atara,  a
name  which  answers  to  the  Hebrew  Ataroth.  Two  places  of
this  name  are  mentioned  in  Scripture,  on  the  border  between
Benjamin  and  Ephraim  ;^  but  the  site  in  question  cannot  well  be

•  Is.  10,  28.    Ezra  2,  28.    Neh.  7,  32.       »  Onomast.  art.  Agai.
11,  31.  '  Josh.  16,  5.  7.    18,  13.

ii.  313-315

676

FROM  BETHEL  TO  JERUSALEM.

[Sec.  X.

regarded  as  either  of  these,  since  it  lies  too  far  within  the  terri-
tory of  BenjanjiQ.'

We  soon  tumed  off  from  the  Jerusalem  road,  passing  ob-
liquely through  the  fields  towards  er-Kam,  which  we  reached  at
8.25.  It  lies  upon  a'  high  hill  about  ten  minutes  east  of  the  road
in  a  direct  line.  The  tract  upon  the  north,  as  well  as  upon  the
west  and  south,  declines  towards  Wady  Beit  Hanina ;  here  in-
deed begias  one  of  the  main  heads  of  that  great  valley.  Ram  is
a  miserable  village,  with  few  houses,  and  these  now  in  summer
mostly  deserted.  There  are  here  large  squared  stones,  and  also
columns  scattered  about  in  the  fields,  indicating  an  ancient  place
of  some  importance.  A  small  iposk  with  columns  seems  once  to
have  been  a  church.  The  situation  of  er-Ram  is  very  conspi-
cuous and  commands  a  wide  prospect.*

I  have  already  spoken  of  er-Ram,  as  without  doubt  marking
the  site  of  the  ancient  Ramah  of  Benjamin.^  Both  the  name
and  position  are  here  decisive.  Ramah  lay  near  Gibeah,  six
Roman  miles  from  J erusalem  towards  Bethel.'*  The  present  er-
Ram  is  a  short  hour  north  from  Gibeah,  and  two  hours  north  of
Jerusalem.  •  Ramah  was  again  inhabited  after  the  exile  ;  and  in
the  days  of  Jerome  was  a  small  village.^  In  the  thirteenth
century  Brocardus  speaks  of  it  correctly  as  a  village  south  of  el-
Bireh,  situated  on  a  hill  east  of  the  road  leading  to  Jerusalem.'
But  notwithstanding  this  distinct  notice,  the  place  seems  to  have
been  again  forgotten  in  monastic  tradition  for  centuries ;  and  of
course  is  not  mentioned  by  travellers.  Cotovicus  saw  the  spot,
but  held  it  to  be  Gibeah  of  Saul.^  Quaresmius  speaks  only  of
Ramah  as  at  Neby  Samwil ;  and  hence  probably  even  the  sharp-
sighted  MaundreU  failed  to  notice  er-Ram,  and  saw  Ramah  only
at  the  prophet's  tomb.'    Indeed,  I  have  been  able  to  find  no

'  Eusebius  and  Jerome  speak  of  two
Ataroths  in  their  day  in  the  tribe  of  Ben-
jamin, not  far  from  Jenisalem  ;  Onomast.
art.  Atharoth  'Krapdh.  To  one  of  these
this  place  doubtless  corresponds. — From
this  spot  the  village  of  Kuliindia  bore  S.
38°  W.  Neby  Samwil  S.  43'  W.  Also
er-Ram  about  S.  15°  E.  distant  three  quar-
ters of  an  hour.

*  The  following  among  other  bearings,
■were  taken  at  er-Riim :  Taivibeh  N.  36°
E.  Mukhmas  N.  70°  E.  Dcir  Duwan,  N.
38°  E.  'Anata  S.  24°  E.  Tuleil  el-Ful,
S.  10°  "W.  Neby  Samwil,  S.  75°  W.  el-
Jib,  W.  Kefr  '^ab,  ruins  about  45  min-
utes distant,  N.  5°  W.  Erha,  ruins,  S,
1 2°  E.  These  last  ruins  are  just  across  a
Bmall  Wady  running  down  towards  Aua-
thoth.

3  See  above,  pp.  437,  458.

*  Judg.   19,  13.     Euseb.  et  Hieron.

ii.  315,  316

Onom.  art.  Rama.  Hieron.  Comm.  in  Hos-

V.  8,  "  Rama,  quae  est  juxta  Gabaa  in  sep-
timo  lapide  a  Jerosolymis  sita."  Josephus
places  it  at  40  stadia  from  Jerusalem.
Antiq.  8.  12.  3.

'  Ezra  2,  26.  Neh.  7,  30.  Hieron.
Comm.  in  Zephan.  1,  15.  16,  "Rama  et
Bethoron  et  reliquse  urbes  nobiles  a  Salo-
mone  construct®  parvi  viculi  demonstran-
tur."

'  Brocardus,  c.  7.  p.  178.  Breydenbach
copies  Brocardus,  Reissb.  p.  128.  Sir
John  Maundeville,  (p.  10.5,)  and  William
de  Baldcnsel  place  Ramah  somewhere
north  of  Shiloh ;  p.  353.  ed.  Basnage.

'  Itin.  p.  331.  Fiirer  von  Haimeiidorf
speaks  of  it  in  A.  D.  1566,  and  says  it  was
called  Ramula ;  p.  202.  Nurnb.  1646.

"  Quaresm.  H.  p.  727.  Doubdan,  p.
489.    MaundreU,  Mar.  26th.

Mat  15.]  ER-RAM,  RAMAH.  577

•

further  mention  of  er-Ram  until  the  present  century,  and  that
only  in  one  or  two  travellers.'

Jeba',  half  an  hour  east  of  er-Ram,  is  not  visible  from  it,  on
account  of  broad  intervening  swells  of  ground.  We  went  out
upon  these  hills  half-way  to  Jeba',  where  we  had  a  fuU  view  of
both  these  villages,  and  examined  the  ground  carefully  in  all
directions,  to  see  whether  there  might  not  be  some  ancient  site
between  the  two.  But  our  search  was  fruitless  ;  no  trace  of
ruins  or  of  substructions  is  anywhere  to  be  seen  ;  the  surface  of
the  ground  being  mostly  covered  with  large  rocks  in  their  natural
position.

We  left  er-Ram  at  10  o'clock,  and  came  in  ten  minutes  to
the  Jerusalem  road,  at  a  place  called  Khuraib  er-Ram,  "Ruins
of  er-Ram,"  on  the  west  of  the  path,  bearing  from  that  place  S.
55°  W.  Here  are  some  eight  or  ten  ruined  arches  in  a  line  pa-
rallel to  the  road ;  and  the  foundations  of  as  many  more,  parallel
to  these.  They  may  probably  have  belonged  to  a  large  Khan
for  travellers  and  caravans.  There  are  also  several  cisterns.
Here  we  stopped  nearly  ten  minutes,  and  then  proceeded  along
the  great  road.  The  waters  of  this  tract  all  run  towards  Wady
Beit  Hanina.  At  10|  o'clock,  near  the  foot  of  the  ascent  lead-
ing to  the  table  land  north  of  Scopus,  we  passed  the  junction  of
the  camel  road  from  Yafa  to  J erusalem,  coming  by  el- Jib  ;  and
not  far  beyond,  we  came  upon  ancient  substructions,  large  un-
,  hewn  stones  in  low  massive  walls.

We  now  left  the  road  again,  in  order  to  pass  over  the  high
Tell  on  the  left,  called  Tuleil  el-Ful,  "  Hill  of  Beans,"  six  or
eight  minutes  from  the  path,  with  a  large  heap  of  stones  upon
it.  We  reached  the  top  at  11  o'clock.  There  seems  to  have
been  here  originally  a  square  tower,  fifty-six  feet  by  forty-eight,
buUt  of  large  unhewn  stones  and  apparently  ancient ;  this  has
been  thrown  down  ;  and  the  stones  and  rubbish  falling  outside,
have  assumed  the  form  of  a  large  pyramidal  mound.  No  trace
of  other  foundations  is  to  be  seen.  The  spot  is  sightly  and  com-
mands a  very  extensive  view  of  the  country  in  all  directions,  es-
pecially towards  the  east ;  in  this  respect  it  is  second  only  to
Neby  Samwil.*

It  seemed  to  us  at  the  time,  as  if  this  sightly  spot  must  have
been  connected  with  some  ancient  place ;  but  it  was  not  until
1843,  that  I  was  able  to  identify  it  with  the  ancient  Gibeah  of
Saul.     In  that  year,  Mr  Gross,  a  young  German  theologian,

'  First  apparently  in  Turner's  Tour,  11.       ^  From  the  Tell,  er-RAm  bore  N.  10"  E.
p.  160.    Neither  Richardson,  nor  Scholz,    Neby  Samwil,  N.  70"  W.    Jerusalem,  S,
nor  Monro,  nor  Schubert,  mention   the    10°  W.
Dame,  although  they  passed  on  this  route.

Vol.  I.-49  ii.  316,  317

578  FROM  BETHEL  TO  JEKUSALEM.  [Sec.  X.

•

since  deceased,  took  the  ground,  that  Gibeah  must  have  lain
south  of  Kamah  ;  and  he  conjectured,  that  it  might  have  been
at  Tuleil  el-FM.^  But  he  overlooked  the  passage  of  Josephus,
which  affords  historical  demonstration  to  the  correctness  of  the
hypothesis.

Josephus  relates,  that  Titus,  advancing  to  the  siege  of  Jeru-
salem, halted  for  a  night  at  Gophna ;  and  then,  after  another
day's  march,  encamped  at  a  place  called  the  Vale  of  Thorns,  near
by  a  certain  village  named  Gabath-Saul,  which  signifies  '  Hill  of
Saul,'  distant  from  Jerusalem  about  thirty  stadia.  During  the
night  a  legion  coming  from  Emmaus  (Nicopolis)  joined  the  main
army  ;  and  the  next  morning  Titus  moved  forward  and  encamped
at  Scopus.'^  In  this  account,  the  day's  march  from  Gophna,  the
thirty  stadia  from  Jerusalem,  and  the  arrival  of  a  legion  coming
from  Nicopohs,  all  go  to  fix  the  encampment  of  Titus  at  or  near
the  junction  of  the  camel  road  from  Yafa,  as  above  mentioned.
The  conclusion,  then,  is  irresistible,  that  the  Hill  of  Saul,  or
Gibeah,  was  the  lofty  and  isolated  Tuleil  el-Ful.  Not  impro-
bably the  limits  of  the  city  extended  down  so  as  to  include  the
walls  and  substructions  in  the  road,  as  above  mentioned.

The  same  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  a  passage  of  Jerome.
This  father,  in  narrating  the  journey  of  Paula,  describes  her  as
ascending  to  J erusalem  by  way  of  the  lower  and  upper  Beth-
horon  ;  on  her  right  she  sees  Ajalon  and  Gibeon ;  she  stops  a  lit-
tle at  Gabaa  (Gibeah),  then  levelled  to  the  ground,  calling  to
mind  its  ancient  crime  and  the  concubine  cut  in  pieces ;  and  then
leaving  the  mausoleum  of  Helena  on  her  left,  she  enters  J  erusa-
lem.^ Now  this  very  road  is  the  present  great  camel  road  from
Yafa  to  Jerusalem,  and  Mis  into  the  great  northern  road,  as  we
have  seen,  just  north  of  Tuleil  el-Fill.  Gibeah  therefore  must
have  lain  upon  this  road  somewhere  between  Gibeon  and  Jeru-
salem.

With  all  this  accords  likewise  the  narrative  of  the  Levite  and
his  concubine  in  the  book  of  Judges.  The  Levite  declined  to
spend  the  night  in  Jebus  (Jerusalem)  ;  but  passed  on  in  order  to
lodge  at  Gibeah  or  Karaah.  The  sun  went  down  upon  them  near
Gibeah  ;  and  they  turned  aside  to  lodge  in  that  city.''  This

'  TheoL  Stud.  u.  Kritiken,  1843,  p.  vite's  purpose  to  go  on  some  twenty  stadia

1082.    Biblioth.  Sac.  1844,  p.  .5'J8.  beyond  Jerusalem.

'  Jos.  B.  J.  5.  2.  1,  irpSs  rivi  kJouti       ^  "  Indc  proficiscens  ascendit  Bethoron

Ta&oAffaovKri  KaXovixfvrf  ar]u.aivei  Z(  Tovro  infeiiorem  et  superiorem  ; — ad  dexteram

\6(pov  2aoi\ov,  StfxovTa  i.-irh  twv  'Ifpoao-  aspiciens  Ajalon  et  Giibaon.    In  Gabaa

Xvixuiv  iaov  OMh  TpiiKOvra  araSlwy. — In  urbe  usque  ad  solum  diruta,  paulum  sub-

anotlier  passage  (Ant.  5.  2.  8)  Josephus  stitit,  recordata  peccati  ejus,  et  concubiuas

lias  been  supposed  to  fix  the  distance  from  in  i'rustra  divisaj,"  etc.    Hieron.  Epitaph.

Jerusalem  to  Gibeah  at  twenty  stadia.  PauUc,  0pp.  ed.  Martianay,  IV.  ii.  673.
But  he  is  there  speaking  only  of  the  Le-       *  Judg.  li>,  10-15.

Mat  15.]

TULEIL  EL-rUL,  GIBEAH.

579

shows  that  Gibeah  was  south  of  Ramah ;  and  fixes  it,  in  concur-
I  rence  with  Josephus,  at  TuleU  el-Fiil.'

Gibaah  is  often  mentioned  in  Scripture.  Here  was  the  seat
of  that  abominable  transaction,  which  led  in  its  consequences  to
the  almost  total  destruction  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.*  Saul
was  bom  here,  and  continued  to  make  Gibeah  his  residence
after  he  became  king.'  It  was  in  Gibeah  that  the  Gibeon-
ites  hanged  up  the  seven  descendants  of  Saul ;  and  this  was
followed  by  the  touching  maternal  tenderness  of  Rizpah,  who
"  took  sackcloth  and  spread  it  for  her  upon  the  rock,  from  the
beginning  of  harvest  until  water  dropped  upon  them  out  of  hea-
ven, and  suffered  neither  the  birds  of  the  air  to  rest  upon  them
!  by  day,  nor  the  beasts  of  the  field  by  night."*  Jerome  mentions
I  Gibeah  as  being  in  his  day  level  with  the  ground ;  °  and  since
that  time  it  appears  to  have  remained  unvisited  by  travellers.
Benjamin  of  Tudela  indeed  mentions  it,  and  Brocardus  speaks

of  it'  as  Gabaa  Saulis  :  but  neither  of  them  knew  its  exact

•  •  •
position.'

We  remained  here  half  an  hour ;  and  then  at  half  past  11
o'clock  descended,  and  regaining  the  road,  proceeded  across  the
high  level  tract.  In  fifteen  minutes  we  were  opposite  Sha'fat,  a
small  village  five  minutes  on  the  right,  where  the  remains  of  an
old  wall  are  ^"isible ;  and  at  five  minutes  past  noon,  we  came
upon  the  brow  of  Scopus,  overlooking  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat
and  Jerusalem  beyond.  The  view  of  the  city  from  this  spot  is
celebrated ;  here  Titus  first  beheld  it  and  admired  the  magni-
ficence of  its  temple."  The  distance  oif  this  spot  from  the  Da-
mascus gate  is  about  twenty  or  twenty-five  minutes.

We  now  turned  to  the  left  along  the  ridge,  having  continu-
ally fine  views  of  the  city,  and  searching  everrwhere  for  ruins
which  might  be  regarded  as  the  site  of  Nob.  We  came  at  12.20
to  the  'Anata  road.  Our  search  was  without  fruit ;  and  after-
wards in  returning  from  Bethany,  I  traversed  the  ridge  from  the
church  of  the  Ascension  northwards  to  the  same  spot,  with  the
like  ill  success.'  We  now  turned  directly  towards  Jerusalem  ;
and  as  we  descended  the  mount  of  Olives,  the  Khatib  sent  off
one  of  his  men  with  the  musket  of  the  tribe  along  the  side  of  the
lull,  not  caring  to  have  it  seen  within  the  city.  We  reached  St.
I  Stephen's  gate  at  12.40 ;  having  lost  about  twenty  minutes  by

'  See  generally,  Biblioth.  Sac.  18U,  pp.  '  See  p.  578.  a  3.

598-602.    See  also  under  Jeba'  (Geba)  '  Benj.  of  Tud.  p.  78.    Brocardus,  c.  7.

above,  p.  441.  n.  1.  p,  178.    Cotovicns  mistook  er-Ram  for

»  Judg.  19,  14  sq.  Gibeah;  Itin.  p.  .331.

»  1  Sam.  10,  26.    11,  4.   15,  34.  23,  '  See  above.  Vol.  I.  p.  276.

19.    26,  1.  '  See  more  on  Nob  above,  p.  464.

«  2  Sam.  21,  6-10.

ii.  317  318

580  FROM  BETHEL  TO  JERUSALEM.  [Sec.  X.

the  detour.  Our  friends  we  were  happy  to  find  all  well ;  although
the  city  was  still  filled  with  alarm.

Thus,  through  the  kind  providence  of  Grod,  we  had  been  pre-
served during  a  most  interesting  journey,  through  what  has  ever
been  considered  the  worst  and  most  dangerous  part  of  all  Palestine,
— as  the  retreat  of  robbers  and  outlaws  ever  since  the  most  ancient
times.  Yet  under  the  care  of  our  Sheikh  of  the  Ta'amirah  and
his  four  men,  we  had  not  suffered  the  slightest  let  or  hindrance  ;
nor  felt  the  slightest  degree  of  insecurity,  more  than  in  J erusa-
lem  itself  The  Khatib  had  fulfilled  his  pledge,  and  had  given
us  entire  satisfaction.  We  were  able  to  dismiss  him  likewise
satisfied  ;  and  parted  from  him  not  without  feehngs  of  respect,
and  also  of  regret,  at  the  idea  of  meeting  him  no  ijiore. '

With  the  two  Mukariyeh  (drivers,  muleteers)  we  had  less
reason  to  be  satisfied.  They  were  lazy  and  careless  ;  as  weU  as
utterly  indifferent  to  the  welfare  and  accommodation  of  those,
whom  they  had  undertaken  to  serve.  We  of  course  had  nothing
to  do  with  their  subsistence  ;  yet  they  took  nothing  with  them,
and  contrived  to  spunge  their  meals  out  of  us  and  our  guides.
Knowing  the  stern  law  of  Bedawln  hospitality,  that  whoever  is
present  at  a  meal  must  be  invited  to  partake,  whether  there  be
little  or  much,  they  were  impudent  enough  always  to  put  them-
selves in  the  way  of  the  guides,  and  thus  deprive  them  of  a  part
of  their  slender  pittance.  Indeed,  the  Mukariyeh  of  Jerusalem
are  notorious  for  their  insolence  and  bad  faith  ;  and  we  deter-
mined, so  far  as  possible,  to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  them.

'  The  American  missionaries  afterwards  too  showed  himself  faitliful,  and  also  grate-
kept  up  an  acquaintance  with  Sheikh  ful  for  various  slight  services,  which  they
Muhammed,  and  visited  his  people.    He    were  able  to  do  in  his  behalf.

ii.  318,  319

NOTES.

Note  I. — Page  15.

Diocletian's  Colpmn.  See  Wilkinson's  Thebes  and  Egypt,  Lend.
1835,  p.  289 ;  1843,  I.  p.  151.  Handbook  for  Egypt,  p.  92.  '•  The
pillar  of  Diocletian  has  an  inscription  at  its  base,  and  was  probably  once
surmounted  by  an  equestrian  statue  ;  as  four  cramps  are  still  visible  on
its  summit. — The  length  of  the  shaft  is  seventy-three  feet  [a  solid  block
of  granite]  ;  the  total  height  ninety-eight  feet  nine  inches ;  the  circum-
ference twenty-seven  feet  eight  inches  ;  and  the  diameter  of  the  top  of
the  capital  sixteen  feet  six  inches.  The  shaft  is  elegant  and  of  good
style ;  but  the  capital  and  pedestal  are  of  inferior  workmanship,  and
have  the  appearance  of  being  of  a  diflferent  period.  Indeed  it  is  probable
that  the  shaft  was  of  a  Greek  epoch  ;  and  that  the  unfinished  capital  and
pedestal  were  added  to  it,  at  the  time  of  its  erection  in  honour  of  Dio-
cletian."— The  inscription,  as  copied  by  Wilkinson,  "  by  means  of  a
ladder  and  chalking  out  the  letters,"  is  as  follows  ;  the  last  word  being
doubtful :

TON  TIMinTATON  ATTOKPATOPA
TON  nOAIOTXON  AAEHANAPEIAC
AIOKAHTIANON  TON  ANIKHTON
nOTBAIOC  EnAPXOC  AirTHTOT

EnAFAen  ?

Note  II.— Page  19.

Irrigation'.  On  the  different  machines  for  raising  water  in  Egypt,
see  Niebuhr's  Keisebeschr.  I.  p.  148,  and  Tab.  XV.  For  the  Shaduf,
see  Lane's  Mod.  Egyptians,  II.  p.  24. — The  water-wheel,  Sakich,  is
usually  turned  by  an  ox,  and  raises  the  water  by  means  of  jars  fastened
to  a  circular  or  endless  rope,  which  hangs  over  the  wheel.  The  Shaduf
has  a  toilsome  occupation.  His  instrument  is  exactly  the  well-sweep
of  New  England  in  miniature,  supported  by  a  cross-piece  resting  on  two
upright  posts  of  wood  or  mud.  His  bucket  is  of  leather  or  wicker  work.
Two  of  these  instruments  are  usually  fixed  side  by  side,  and  the  men
keep  time  at  their  work,  raising  the  water  five  or  six  feet.  Where  the
banks  are  higher,  two,  three,  and  even  four  couples  are  thus  employed,
one  above  another.

There  is  nothing  now  in  Egypt  which  illustrates  the  ancient  practice
of  "  watering  with  the  foot,"  alluded  to  in  Deut.  11,  10.  This  is  some-
times referred  to  the  mode  of  distributing  water  when  already  raised,

Vol.  L-49*

582

NOTES.

pn,  IV.

among  the  channels  of  a  field,  by  making  or  breaking  down  with  the  foot
the  small  ridges  which  regulate  its  flow.  But  this  explanation  seems
not  to  reach  the  point ;  for  the  passage  in  question  evidently  refers  to
the  mode  of  supplying  water,  not  of  distributing  it.  Possibly  in  more
ancient  times  the  water-wheel  may  have  been  smaller,  and  turned  not
by  oxen,  but  by  men  pressing  upon  it  with  the  foot,  in  the  same  way
that  water  is  still  often  drawn  from  wells  in  Palestine,  as  we  afterwards
saw.  Niebuhr  describes  one  such  machine  in  Cairo,  where  it  was  called
Sakieh  tedkr  bir-rij'l,  "  a  watering  machine  that  turns  by  the  foot,"  a
view  of  which  he  also  subjoins.  The  labourer  sits  on  a  level  with  the
axis  of  the  wheel  or  reel,  and  turns  it  by  drawing  the  upper  part  towards
him  with  his  hands,  pushing  the  rounds  of  the  under  part  at  the  same
time  with  his  feet  one  after  another.  In  Palestine  the  wheel  or  reel  is
more  rude  ;  and  a  single  rope  is  used,  which  is  wound  up  around  it  by
the  same  process.

Note  III.— Page  20.

Thebes.  The  Se.\.  Nahum  3,  8.  The  "  sea"  referred  to  in  this
passage  is  the  river  Nile,  which  to  the  present  day  in  Egypt  is  named
el-Bahr,  "  the  sea,"  as  its  most  common  appellation.  Our  Egyptian
servant,  who  spoke  English,  always  called  it  "  the  sea."  Comp.  Wil-
kinson's Mod.  Egypt,  II.  p.  164. — In  Egj-pt  the  word  el-Balir,  implying
the  Mediterranean  sea,  is  also  commonly  used  for  North  ;  a  north  wind
is  called  "  sea-wind,"  as  coming  from  the  Mediterranean.  This  shows
the  fallacy  of  an  argument  sometimes  used  to  prove,  that  the  Hebrew
was  the  original  language  of  Palestine,  viz.  that  the  word  sea  (=")  is  also
the  Hebrew  term  for  West.  If  for  this  reason  the  Hebrew  language
were  original  in  Palestine,  then  also  the  Arabic  must  have  been  so  in
Egypt. — In  like  manner  in  Syria  the  word  Kibleh,  referring  to  Mecca,
is  now  universally  employed  for  South.

Note  IV.— Page  22.

Theban  Tombs.  Among  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings,  that  marked  by
Wilkinson  as  No.  2,  has  become  a  sort  of  album  for  travellers.  The
name  of  Sheikh  Ibrahim  (Burckhardt)  appears  twice  in  1813,  both  on
his  way  upward  to  Dongola,  and  on  his  return :  Ibrahim — post  reditum
suum  d  limitibus  regni  Dongolce.  The  names  of  Belzoni,  Irby  and
Mangles,  Biippell,  and  many  other  travellers,  are  also  there.  In  a
corner  adjacent — an  American  corner — we  added  our  names  to  those  of
several  of  our  counti-ymen ;  some  of  whom  have  already  found  their
graves  in  distant  lands.

All  these  tombs  are  entirely  exposed  to  the  depredations  of  the
Arabs  and  of  travellers ;  and  are  every  year  becoming  more  and  more
defaced.  The  tomb  marked  by  Wilkinson  as  No.  35,  near  the  foot  of
the  hill  Sheikh  Abd  el-Kiirneh,  which  he  justly  regards  as  "  by  far  the
most  curious  of  all  the  tombs  in  Thebes,"  was  occupied  at  the  time  of
our  visit  by  an  Arab  family  with  their  cattle.  The  walls  were  already
black  with  smoke,  and  many  of  the  paintings  destroyed.  See  Wilkin-
son's Mod.  Egypt,  II.  p.  234.    Handbook  for  Egypt,  p.  383.

V— VII.]

THEBES.     CAIRO.     EGYPT,  ETC.

583

Note  V.— Page  24.

Cairo.  Lane's  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Modern  Egyptians,
2  vols.  Lond.  1836  and  later. — Through  our  friend,  the  Rev.  Mr  Lieder,
we  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  bookseller  so  amusingly  described  by
Mr  Lane  in  his  preface.  He  visited  us  several  times  at  our  rooms,
bringing  with  him  books  which  had  been  inquired  for.  In  this  way  we
were  able,  my  companion  especially,  to  purchase  several  valuable  Arabic
works.

The  magician  who  has  become  so  famous  in  Europe  through  Mr
Lane,  (Vol.  I.  p.  347,)  we  did  not  see.  But  we  learned  enough  on  the
subject  to  persuade  us,  that  the  whole  matter  depends  on  a  certain
proneness  to  believe  on  the  part  of  the  spectator,  and  a  series  of  leading
questions  on  the  part  of  the  operator.  We  were  further  informed  on  good
authority,  that  he  exhibits  his  art  only  before  Franks ;  and  that  the
native  Egyptians  know  little  or  nothing  of  the  matter.

Note  VI.— Page  30.

Eg\tt.  For  the  traveller  in  Egypt,  the  two  works  so  often  referred
to  in  the  text,  are  indispensable,  viz.  Wilkinson's  Topography  of
Thebes  and  General  View  of  Egypt,  Lond.  1835 ;  reprinted  and  en-
larged in  two  volumes,  Modern  Egypt  and  Thebes,  Lond.  1843 ;  and
condensed  in  his  Handbook  for  Egypt,  Lond.  1847,  etc.  Also  Lane's
Account  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Modern  Egyptians,
2  Vols.  Lond.  1836,  and  later  editions.  If  the  traveller  wish  to
know  how  the  Egyptians  of  old  lived,  he  may  best  add  Wilkinson's
Account  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,
5  Vols.  Lond.  1837.  If  further  he  be  desirous  of  comparing  the  con-
tradictory accounts  and  theories  of  former  travellers,  he  may  take  along
the  volumes  of  the  Modern  Traveller  in  Egypt.

The  best  works  on  the  present  condition  and  statistics  of  Egypt,
are  the  following  :  Mengin,  Histoire  de  VEgypte  sous  le  Gouvernement
de  Mohammed  Aly ....  avec  des  notes  par  MM.  Langles  et  Jomard,
2  Tom.  Paris  1823 ;  also  a  continuation  of  the  same  work,  "  de  I'an  1823
a  I'an  1838,"  Paris  1839.  St.  John,  Egypt  and  Mohammed  Ali,  or
Travels  in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile,  2  Vols.  Lond.  1834.  Marmont,
(Due  de  Raguse)  Voyage  en  Hongrie  etc.  .  .  .  en  Syrie,  en  Palestine,  et
en  Egyptc,  5  Tom.  Paris,  1837.  I  was  however  assured,  on  very  high
authority,  that  the  statistical  accounts  in  these  works  were  not  wholly
to  be  relied  on.  The  most  condensed  and  accurate  account  of  Egypt
and  Muhammed  Aly  which  I  have  yet  seen,  is  contained  in  the  prelimi-
nary sections  of  Rufpell's  JReise  in  Abyssinicn,  Frankf.  1838.  Per-
haps the  most  authentic  document  is  Bowring's  Beport  on  Egypt,
containing  the  statistics  of  the  country  in  1838,  printed  by  order  of
Parliament,  Lond.  1840.

Note  VII.— Page  46.

Rate  of  Tra\t:l.  During  our  journey,  we  several  times  measured
the  ordinary  rate  of  our  camels'  walk ;  and  found  it  to  be  on  an  average
nearest  to  2i  English  miles  the  hour,  when  in  full  progress.    But  there

584

KOTES.

[vm.

are  always  little  delays  ;  sometimes  the  animals  browse  more  ;  or  a  load
is  to  be  adjusted  ;  or  an  observation  to  be  taken  ;  so  that  the  preceding
estimate  would  be  too  high  for  a  whole  day's  march.  If,  therefore,  we
assume  the  hour  with  camels  at  two  geographical  miles,  or  nearly  2j
English  miles,  we  shall  obtain  a  near  approximation  to  the  truth.  The
statement  in  the  text  is  founded  on  this  estimate.  According  to  Wil-
kinson, the  direct  distance  from  Cairo  to  Suez  is  about  73  English  miles,
and  about  79  by  our  road.    Mod.  Egypt,  I.  p.  305.

The  rate  of  the  camel's  walk,  and  of  course  the  distance  passed  over
in  an  hour,  varies  somewhat  according  to  the  nature  of  the  ground.  On
the  gravelly  plains  of  the  desert  it  is  naturally  greater  than  in  moun-
tainous and  rocky  districts.  The  following  rates  upon  subsequent  parts
of  our  journey,  were  deduced  by  Berghaus  from  a  comparison  of
our  routes  with  the  known  geographical  distances  between  the  given
points  :

Between  Suez  and  Sinai,  G.  M.  2,090
"  Sinai  and  'Akabah  1,837
"       'Akabah  and  Hebron  2,130

Mean  rate  2,019

The  rate  of  travelling  with  horses  and  mules  in  Palestine  is  con-
siderably faster  than  the  above ;  and  is  usually  assumed  at  three  English
miles  the  hour.  But  some  allowance  must  be  made  from  this ;  and,
besides,  the  rate  is  far  more  variable  than  with  camels  in  the  desert ;
owing  partly  to  the  character  of  the  animals,  and  partly  to  the  state  of
the  roads  and  the  uneven  nature  of  the  country.  Under  all  the  circum-
stances, I  can  fix  on  no  better  mean  rate  for  the  hour  with  horses  and
mules,  than  2.  4  geogr.  miles,  which  is  equivalent  to  about  2§  Engl,
miles  or  exactly  3  Roman  miles.  But  the  rate  which  would  be  quite
correct  between  Gaza  and  Ramleh,  for  example,  would  be  much  less  so
between  Ramleh  and  Jerusalem ;  the  former  distance  being  nearly  level,
and  the  latter  mountainous  and  difficult.

Note  VIII.— Page  47.

Suez.  The  present  town  of  Suez  appears  to  have  sprung  up  in  the
first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century.  The  early  Arabian  writers  speak
only  of  Kolzum,  which  Abulfeda  (born  A.  D.  1273)  describes  as  a  small
city;  Reiske's  Transl.  in  Biisching's  Magazin,  Th.  IV.  p,  196.  Ludolf
de  Suchem,  who  travelled  here  about  1340,  speaks  of  a  castle  of  the
*  Soldan  '  on  this  part  of  the  Red  Sea,  probably  the  remains  of  Kolzum  ;
but  he  gives  it  no  name.  Tucher  of  Niirnberg  was  here  in  1480,  and
mentions  the  "  mountain  of  Suez  "  at  the  end  of  the  Gulf,  meaning  pro-
bably 'Atakah.  He  says  there  was  here  a  landing-place,  to  which  spices
and  wares  were  brought  from  Althor  (et-Tiir)  and  so  carried  to  Cairo
and  Alexandria.  Breydenbach  and  Felix  Fabri  passed  in  1484,  but
give  no  name,  and  speak  only  of  the  remains  of  the  canal.  In  1516  it  is
mentioned  still  as  a  landing-place  by  Ben-Ayas,  an  Arabian  writer ;  and
in  1538  a  fleet  was  built  here  by  Suleiman,  who  sailed  hence  on  an  expe-
dition against  Yemen.  See  Notices  et  Extraits  des  Mss.  etc.  Tom.  VI.
p.  356.  Bitter's  Erdkunde  Th.  II.  p.  231.  ed.  1818.    Belon  about  1546

LX,  X.]

SUEZ,  ETC.

585

describes  Suez ;  and  says  an  old  castle  lay  near  it  upon  a  small  hill,
doubtless  Tell  Kolzum.  Lowenstein  and  Wormbser  in  1561,  and
Helffrich  in  1565,  speak  of  Suez  as  a  fortress,  near  which  vessels  lay ;
and  the  latter  describes  it  as  consisting  of  several  block-houses  built  of
the  trunks  of  palm  trees,  and  filled  in  with  earth,  with  a  few  dwclling-
hoQses.  In  16i7,  according  to  Mouconys,  (I.  p.  209,)  it  was  a  small
place  in  ruins,  inhabited  chiefly  by  Greek  Christians.  In  Niebuhr's  time
it  was  still  without  walls ;  Reisebeschr.  I.  p.  219. — For  the  older  tra-
vellers above  cited,  see  R^ssbuch  des  heiligen  Landes,  fol.

The  head  of  this  gulf  has  always  been  a  place  for  building  fleets,
^lius  Gallus  in  his  celebrated  expedition  into  Arabia  Petrasa,  built  at
Cleopatris  a  fleet,  first  of  80  large  galleys,  and  then  130  smaller  vessels ;
Strabo  10.  4.  23.  During  the  crusades  also,  the  brother  of  Saladin
caused  a  fleet  to  be  hastily  built  at  Kolzum  against  the  Christians  who
had  attacked  Ailah.  See  Wilken's  Geschichte  der  Kreuzziige,  III.  ii.
p.  223.

Note  IX.— Page  50.

Wady  Tawarik.  Our  guides  of  the  Tawarah,  and  also  intelligent
natives  of  Suez,  knew  no  other  name  for  the  valley  south  of  Jebel
'Atiikah,  than  Wady  Tawarik.  By  the  French  engineers,  and  also  by
some  writers  before  them,  it  is  called  Wady  er-Ramliyeh,  '  the  Sandy.'
Niebuhr  and  a  few  earlier  travellers  speak  of  the  part  near  the  gulf
under  the  name  of  Bedea ;  though  the  former  says  his  Arab  guides  did
not  know  this  name.  See  Le  Pere  in  Descr.  de  I'Egypte,  Et.  Mod.  I.
p.  47.    Niebuhr's  Beschr.  von  Arabien,  p.  409.

The  name  Wady  et-Tih,  '  Valley  of  Wandering,'  which  has  some-
times been  given  to  the  same  valley  by  travellers,  seems  not  now  to  be
known ;  and  if  it  ever  actually  existed  among  the  Arabs,  it  was  pro-
bably of  Christian  origin.  Monconys  in  1647  travelled  through  the
valley,  but  did  not  hear  this  name.  Pater  Sicard,*the  Jesuit  missionary
in  Egypt,  who  wrote  an  essay  to  prove  that  the  Israelites  passed  by
way  of  this  valley,  (which  he  himself  visited  in  1720,)  does  not  mention
the  name  Tih ;  although  it  would  have  afforded  him  so  opportune  an
argument  from  tradition  in  support  of  his  theory.  The  name  therefore
probably  did  not  exist  at  that  time ;  and  may  perhaps  have  come  into
partial  use  among  the  Latins  and  their  Arab  dependents  in  consequence
of  this  very  theory.  Yet  neither  Pococke  nor  Niebuhr  has  the  name,
as  applied  to  this  valley.  The  latter  indeed  gives  the  name  Etii  to  the
part  of  the  desert  plain  opposite  to  its  mouth,  on  the  east  side  of  the
gulf ;  of  which  however  no  trace  now  exists.  Reisebeschr.  I.  pp.  229,  251.
See  Nouv.  M6m.  des  Missions,  T.  VI.  p.  1  sq.  in  Paulus'  Sammluug  der
Reisen,  Th.  V.  p.  210  sq.

Note  X. — Page  51.

Valley  of  the  Seven  Wells.  In  February,  1827,  the  Rev.  Mr
Smith,  my  companion,  travelled  with  a  caravan  by  the  direct  route  from
Belbeis  to  el-'Arish,  passing  by  the  well  of  Abu  Suweirah.  The  follow-
ing is  an  extract  from  a  letter  written  by  him  at  the  time,  describing  the

586

NOTES.

[XI

valley  of  the  Seven  Wells.  "  We  passed,"  he  says,  "  one  tract  of  land,
the  features  of  which  were  so  distinctly  marked  as  to  excite  considerable
curiosity.  It  was  a  sort  of  valley  a  little  lower  than  the  surrounding
country,  into  which  we  descended  at  a  place  with  ruins  about  ten  and
a  half  hours  from  Belbeis.  It  extends  northwest  and  southeast,  descend-
ing towards  the  Nile,  and  narrowing  in  this  direction.  We  were  told
that  the  Xile  occasionally  flows  up  this  valley  to  the  spot  where  we
crossed  it.  Towards  the  southeast  it  gradually  ascends,  and  widens  into
an  immense  plain,  the  limits  of  which  in  th^t  direction  we  could  not
discern.  From  this  plain,  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  Suez  mountain
["Atakah]  which  now  showed  itself  for  the  first  time,  bore  S.  by  E.  The
soil  of  this  tract  was  a  dark  mould.  I  do  not  doubt  that  water  might  be
found  in  any  part  of  it,  by  digging  a  few  feet.  Indeed  after  travelling
upon  it  four  and  a  half  hours,  we  came  to  a  well  only  twelve  or  fifteen
feet  deep,  but  suflaciently  copious  to  water  the  [200]  camels,  and  fill  the
water-skins,  of  the  whole  caravan,  and  containing  the  only  sweet  water
that  we  found  in  the  desert ;  all  the  other  wells  being  brackish.  It  is
called  Abu  Suweirdh.  Having  seen  how  extensively  artificial  irrigation
is  practised  in  Egypt,  I  was  easily  persuaded  that  this  whole  tract  might
once  have  been  under  the  highest  cultivation."  They  passed  the  mounds
of  the  ancient  canal  on  the  north  side  of  this  valley  ;  and  saw,  on  their
right,  tracts  covered  apparently  with  salt,  like  those  mentioned  by
Seetzen ;  see  Note  XI.

Note  XI.— Page  51.

Ancient  Canal.  French  Measurements.  The  statements  in  the
text,  here  and  elsewhere,  respecting  the  country  along  the  ancient  canal,
are  founded  on  the  results  obtained  by  the  French  engineers,  as  recorded
in  the  great  work  on  Egypt ;  and  in  a  more  convenient  form  in  the  arti-
cle of  Mr  Maclarin,  Edinb.  Philos.  Journal,  1825,  Vol.  XIII.  p.  274  sq.
It  is  proper  to  mention,  however,  that  strong  doubts  exist  as  to  the
accuracy  of  these  results.  I  have  been  informed,  that  a  learned  foreigner
[A.  von  Humboldt]  when  in  Paris  once  endeavoured  to  get  access  to  the
original  notes  and  measurements,  in  order  to  submit  them  to  a  re-
examination ;  but  without  success.

The  French  found  the  level  of  the  Red  sea  at  Suez  to  be  at  high
water  30 1  Fr.  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean;  and  at  low
water,  25  Fr.  feet ;  giving  a  mean  of  27^  Fr.  feet.  The  height  of  the
Nile  at  Cairo,  they  found  to  be  in  ordinary  floods  39!  Fr.  feet  above  the
Mediterranean ;  and  at  its  lowest  point,  lU  Fr.  feet ;  giving  a  mean  of
27i  Fr.  feet.  Hence  it  appears  that  the  mean  height  of  the  Nile  at
Cairo,  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  gulf  of  Suez;  while  at  ordinary
times  the  Nile  sinks  several  feet  below  the  level  of  the  gulf. — But  the
tolerably  accordant  testimony  of  ancient  writers,  and  especially  that  of
Strabo,  who  wrote  as  an  eyewitness,  shows  pretty  conclusively,  that  the
canal  was  supplied  with  water  wholly  from  the  Nile,  and  that  the  water
of  that  river  flowed  through  the  a  holc  length  of  the  canal  into  the  Red
sea.  See  the  extract  from  Strabo  in  Note  XIII.  The  testimony  of
Arabian  historians  as  to  the  opening  of  the  canal  under  the  Khalif  Omar,
about  A.  D.  640,  goes  to  support  the  same  view ;  see  especially  Makrizi

ANCIENT  CANAL.     TELUSIAC  NILE,

587

in  Notices  et  Extraits  des  Mss.  etc.  Tom.  VI.  p.  333  sq. — This  however
would  obviously  be  incompatible  with  accuracy  in  the  French  measure-
ments, except  at  the  height  of  the  inundation  of  the  Nile.

In  A.  D.  1810  Seetzen  travelled  with  camels  along  the  track  of  the
ancient  canal ;  and  his  notices  of  it  are  found  in  Zach's  Monatl.  Cor-
respondeuz,  Vol.  XXVI.  p.  385  sq.  He  calls  the  valley  of  the  Seven
Wells,  Wady  Sho'aib ;  and  the  Crocodile  Lakes,  el-Memlah.  The
marshes  further  east  he  speaks  of  as  a  salt  plain  of  a  white  appearance,
bounded  in  some  parts  by  precipitous  hills.

The  mounds  of  the  ancient  canal  commence,  as  we  saw  them,  about
an  hour  and  a  half  north  of  Suez.  From  this  point  Seetzen  traced  them
two  hours  and  a  half  with  camels ;  and  then  travelled  an  hour  and  a  half
fui  ther,  to  the  border  of  the  salt  plaiu.  This  accords  well  with  the  dis-
tance from  Suez  to  the  Bitter  Lakes  as  given  by  the  French,  viz.  11^
geogr.  miles  nearly.  From  this  spot  to  cI-Arbek,  the  point  which  the
water  of  the  Nile  reaches  in  high  inundations,  Seetzen  found  the  distance
to  be  two  hours ;  and  the  whole  distance  from  Suez,  eight  hours ;  1.  c.
p.  389.  This  traveller  seems  not  to  have  been  aware,  that  the  French
had  found  the  level  of  this  tract  to  be  lower  than  that  of  the  gulf  of
Suez ;  for  he  remarks,  that  "  this  plain  has  everywhere  a  slight  declivity
towards  the  salt  lake  el-Memlah,  which  annually  receives  water  from
the  Nile;"  1.  c.  p.  388.

The  mounds  of  the  canal  now  remaining  are  described  as  being  from
one  or  two  feet  to  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  in  height ;  the  space  between
them  being  generally  about  thirty  or  forty  yards.

Note  XII. — Page  52.

Pelfsiac  Nile.  The  Pelusiac  arrr  of  the  Nile  has  usually  been
assumed  as  navigable,  in  consequence  of  a  passage  in  Arrian,  where  he
is  describing  the  expedition  of  Alexander  against  Memphis  ;  Exp.  Alex.
3.  1.  4.  From  Pelusium,  he  says,  Alexander  ordered  part  of  his
troops  to  sail  with  the  fleet  up  the  river  to  Memphis ;  while  he  with  the
remainder  marched  through  the  desert  to  Heliopolis,  having  the  Nile  on
the  right  hand.  'O  Se  eis  fxev  H-qXavaiov  v\aKiiv  turrjyayf.,  tov%  6e  cttI
ru)v  i'€(ov  avaTrXttv  Kara  rbv  TroTUfiov  KfXevrra^,  Is  re  (—1  Me'/Ac^iv  iroXiv,
avTos  icf>  HXiovTrdXeojs  rjfi,  ev  6e5ta  t'^wv  tov  Trorafxbv  ^eiXov,  xal  ....  8ia
Trjs  ipTf'iftov  iff>LK€-o  es  'HAtov-oAiv.  But  this  language  certainly  does
not  necessarily  imply,  that  the  fleet  sailed  up  the  Pelusiac  branch,  or
that  it  did  not  proceed  for  some  distance  along  the  coast  and  then
ascend  another  branch.  Just  as  at  the  present  day,  when  it  is  said  that
a  vessel  sails  from  Alexandria  up  the  river  to  Cairo,  we  do  not  under-
stand that  it  follows  the  canal  or  the  old  Canopic  arm,  instead  of  run-
ning along  the  shore  to  the  Rosetta  or  Damietta  branch.  All  ancient
writers  appear  to  be  silent  as  to  the  magnitude  of  the  eastern  arm  of
the  Nile  ;  nor  is  there  any  thing  in  the  nature  or  appearance  of  the
country,  to  show  that  it  was  formerly  very  much  larger  than  the  modern
canal  which  occupies  its  place.  The  most  definite  mention  of  it  is  by
Strabo  17.  1.  4.  Compare  Rennell's  Geogr.  Syst.  of  Herodot.  11.
p.  171  sq.

588

NOTES.

[xni,  XIV.

Note  XIII.— Page  55.

Heroopolis.  See  on  this  whole  subject  the  M6moires  of  Le  Pure
and  Du  Bois  Aym6  in  Descr.  de  I'Egypte,  Et.  Mod.  I.  p.  21  sq.  p.  187  sq.
Also  of  Roziere,  ibid.  Antiq.  Mem.  I.  p.  127  sq.  Ritter's  Erdkunde  II.
p.  234  sq.  1818.

One  passage  of  Strabo  is  too  remarkable  and  decisive  not  to  be
inserted  here:  17.  1.  25,  26,  'AXX-q  8'  icrriv  [8iajpi;|]  iK^iBova-a  tk  rrjv
EpvSpav  Kol  TOV  ApafSiov  koXttov,  koi  [Kara]  ttoAiv  'Apcnvor/v,  rjv  tvioi
KXeoTrarptSa  KaXovai.  Atappet  8e  Kat  8ta  tuiv  niKpuiv  KaXovpLevtav  Xtp,v:;"'s,  1-^3,
Tip2-:'rx  ;  and  also  "^nbx  nzi- ,  ex  ,  ■'brsbx  n:? .  The  Arabic  arti-
cle is  frequent  in  the  names;  but  has  not  always  the  Alef  (x)  when  in
composition. — It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  not  one  Jewish  or  Christian
name  has  yet  been  found.  The  words  which  are  not  proper  names,
seem  rather  to  belong  to  an  Aramaean  dialect.  A  language  of  tliis  kind.
Prof  Beer  supposes  to  have  been  spoken  by  the  inhabitants  of  Arabia
Petrsea,  in  other  words  by  the  Nabathaeans,  before  the  present  Arabic
language  spread  itself  over  those  parts;  and  of  that  language  and
writing,  these  inscriptions  he  regards  as  the  only  monuments  now  known
to  exist.

The  question  as  to  the  loriters  of  the  inscriptions  receives  very  little
light  from  their  contents.  A  word  at  the  end  of  some  of  them,  maybe  so
read  as  to  affirm  that  they  were  pilgrims;  and  this  opinion  Beer  also
adopts.  But  tliis  reading  is  not  certain ;  and  the  opinion  is  to  be  sup-
ported chiefly  from  the  fact,  that  the  inscriptions  are  found  only  on  the
great  routes  leading  from  Suez  to  Mount  Sinai.  The  multitude  of
them  in  Wady  Mukatteb  and  around  Serbal  may  be  accounted  for,  by
supposing  that  mountain  or  some  spot  in  its  vicinity  to  have  been  regard-
ed as  a  lioly  place  ;  though  probably  not  as  Sinai. — That  the  writers
were  Christians,  seems  apparent  from  the  crosses  connected  with  many
of  the  inscriptions.  The  same  inscription  is  in  several  instances  found
in  more  than  one  place,  once  with  the  cross  and  again  without  it.  The
crosses  are  of  such  a  shape,  that  they  could  not  well  be  accidental  nor
unmeaning,  e.  g.   Y.+.-P.  .  .

Tlie  aje  also  of  the  inscriptions  receives  no  light  from  their  contents ;
as  no  date  has  yet  been  read.  On  palaeographic  grounds.  Prof.  Beer
supposes  the  greater  part  of  them  could  not  have  been  written  earlier

XIX.]

SIXAITIC  INSCRIPTIONS.

595

than  the  fourth  century.  Had  they  been  written  later,  some  tradition
respecting  them  would  probably  have  exi.sted  in  the  time  of  Cosmas.
The  character  of  the  writing  also  forbids  this  supposition.

Thus  far  Prof.  Beer;  and  thus  far  all  is  sufficiently  clear.  But
there  still  remain  some  historical  points  of  difficult  solution.  These
Christian  pilgrims,  who  were  they  ?  and  whence  did  they  come  ?  The
fact  that  all  the  inscriptions  are  found  only  on  the  great  routes  from
Egypt,  would  seem  to  imply  that  they  came  from  that  country,  or  at  least
from  the  western  side  of  the  gulf  of  Suez.  But  if  so,  how  comes  it  that
not  a  trace  of  this  alphabet  and  .language  is  found  in  Egypt  or  its  vicin-
ity ?  Egypt  too,  we  know,  was  full  of  Jews  and  Christians  in  the  early
centuries;  how  comes  it  then  that  no  Jewish  nor  Christian  names  are
found  among  the  inscriptions  ?  It  is  true  that  the  heathen  proper  names
continued  to  be  used  long  after  the  introduction  of  Christianity ;  as  we
see  from  the  names  of  the  early  fathers  and  bishops ;  but  this  will  not
account  for  the  entire  absence  of  Christian  and  Jewish  names  among
such  hosts  of  pilgrims  coming  from  Egypt.

On  the  other  hand,  were  these  pilgrims  Nabathaeans,  Ishmaelites,
Saracens,  the  native  inhabitants  of  the  peninsula  and  of  Arabia  Petraea
in  general  ?  The  heathen  names  and  the  language  and  writing  would
lead  to  this  conclusion.  But  then,  how  comes  it  that  all  the  inscriptions
are  on  the  western  side  of  the  peninsula,  and  not  one  upon  the  eastern  ?
Besides,  there  is  no  historical  evidence,  that  any  native  Christian  popu-
lation existed  in  or  around  the  peninsula  in  the  early  centuries;  but
rather  the  contrary,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  text;  p.  122  sq.  The
Christian  exiles  from  Egypt,  and  the  hermits  of  these  mountains,  lived
in  constant  exposure  to  slavery  or  death  from  the  heathen  around  them.

Again ;  how  comes  it  that  in  the  time  of  Cosmas,  about  A.  D.  530,
all  knowledge  of  this  alphabet  and  language  had  already  perished  among
the  Christians  of  the  peninsula,  and  no  tradition  remained  respecting  the
inscriptions  ?

So  far  the  note  in  the  former  edition.  The  work  of  Prof  Beer,  en-
titled Studia  Asiatica,  Fascic.  I,  was  printed  in  1840;  but  was  not  pub-
lished until  the  next  year,  about  the  time  of  the  lamented  author's
decease.  It  contains  his  explanation  of  the  alphabet,  and  his  reading
of  many  of  the  inscriptions ;  as  also  his  general  historical  views  as  above
described.

The  work  of  Beer  was  reviewed  by  Credner,  in  the  Heidelberger
Jahrbiicher,  1841,  p.  908  sq.  He  gave  to  the  historical  question  a  new
direction ;  and  was  the  first  to  bring  forward  the  important  passage  from
Diodorus  Siculus,  referred  to  below.

In  the  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society  for  1849,  (Zeitschr.
d.  morg.  Ges.  III.  p.  129-215,)  there  appeared  a  paper  by  Prof.  Tuch  of
Leipzig,  containing  the  results  of  his  investigations  on  the  general
subject,  and  an  exposition  of  twenty-one  inscriptions.  In  respect  to
Beer's  explanation  of  the  alphabet  this  writer  remarks,  that  after  the
keenest  scrutiny,  he  has  found  nothing  to  change  ;  p.  130.  In  respect
to  the  historical  inquiry,  his  main  results  are  the  following.

The  dialect  of  the  inscriptions  is  neither  Aramaean  nor  Nabathaean,  as
held  by  Gesenius  and  Beer;  but  Arabic.  This  appears  from  the  flexion,
grammatical  structure,  stock  of  words,  and  the  proper  names ;  p.  136  sq.

596

NOTES.

The  authors  of  the  inscriptions  were  therefore  Arabs,  ancient  Tawa-
rah,  inhabiting  the  peninsula,  and  known  to  us  centuries  before  the  rise
of  Muhammedanism  by  their  hostilities  towards  the  early  Christian
settlers ;  see  text  p.  122  sq.  All  the  circumstances  go  to  show  that
they  were  heathen ;  as  also  the  fact  that  no  J ewish  or  Christian  name  has
yet  been  found  in  the  inscriptions ;  p.  145  sq.  159  sq.

Pilgrimages  to  some  holy  place  were  the  occasion  of  the  inscriptions ;
as  represented  by  the  authors  themselves.  Such  sacred  places  were  not
unusual  among  the  Arabs  in  the  times  before  Muhammedanism;  one
indeed  existed  in  Mecca  itself.  And.  according  to  Diodorus  Siculus
(3.  42,  43),  there  was  in  his  day  and  earlier  a  spot  of  the  like  kind  in  the
peninsula  of  Sinai,  a  luxuriant  palm  grove  with  fountains  and  streams,
an  oasis  in  the  midst  of  a  desert  region,  otherwise  without  water  or  shade,
and  with  a  southern  exposure.  Here  was  an  altar  of  hard  stone  with
an  inscription  in  ancient  unknown  characters.  Hither  the  people,
who  dwelt  round  about,  were  accustomed  to  repair  once  in  five  years,  to
celebrate  a  festival,  sacrifice  hecatombs  of  camels,  and  carry  home  a
supply  of  water  from  the  sacred  fountains.  (See  also  Strabo  from  Ar-
temidorus,  16.  4.  18.)  Whether  this  palm  grove  was  at  Feiran,  or  per-
haps at  Tiir,  is  not  clear;  though  more  probably  it  was  at  Feiran;  see
Lepsius,  Briefe  p.  442  sq.  A  heathen  altar  is  likewise  mentioned  by
Antoninus  Martyr  in  the  sixth  century,  as  on  the  mountain  of  the  Cross ;
see  text  p.  125;  and  not  improbably  there  may  have  been  others  in  the
peninsula.  The  tomb  of  Sheikh  Salih  is  not  very  different  at  the  present
day.  It  was  on  occasion  of  these  religious  festivals,  when  the  people
collected  around  these  sacred  spots,  that  the  pilgrims  on  their  way
to  or  from  them,  or  in  their  loiterings,  recorded  their  journeys  in  these
inscriptions;  as  do  Christian  pilgrims  in  and  around  the  convent  at  the
present  day.

The  epoch  of  the  inscriptions  reaches  back  beyond  the  time  of  Dio-
dorus  Siculus,  when  the  characters  were  already  ancient;  of  course  one
or  more  centuries  before  Christ ;  and  is  probably  to  be  extended  down
to  the  third  or  fourth  century  after  Christ;  pp.  171,  174.

The  crosses  found  in  connection  with  some  of  the  inscriptions,  are
regarded  by  Tuch  as  ornamental  rather  than  symbolical ;  like  the  many
other  figures  everywhere  intermingled;  p.  154  sq.    Comp.  text  p.  182.

Such  is  the  present  state  of  the  inquiry  respecting  the  inscriptions.
It  is  understood,  that  since  the  date  of  Prof.  Tuch's  paper,  a  large
number  of  the  inscriptions  have  been  accurately  copied  by  a  French
traveller ;  but  nothing  further  has  yet  been  published.

The  work  of  Mr  Foster  on  this  subject,  is  too  visionary  to  require
notice  here.

In  the  Travels  of  Irby  and  Mangles,  a  fact  is  mentioned  which  de-
serves further  examination  from  travellers.  In  the  vicinity  of  Wady
Milsa,  on  the  left  hand  side  of  the  track  leading  to  the  village  of  Dibdiba
on  the  north,  this  party  found  upon  a  tomb,  with  a  large  front  and  four
attached  columns,  an  oblong  tablet  containing  an  inscription  "  in  five
long  lines,  and  immediately  underneath,  a  single  figure  on  a  large  scale,
probably  the  date."  Tiiey  describe  the  letters  as  "well  cut,  and  in
a  wonderful  state  of  preservation,  owing  to  the  shelter  which  they  receive
from  the  projection  of  cornices  and  an  eastern  aspect.    None  of  the

XX.]

THE  CONVENT  AND  ITS  SERFS.

597

party  had  ever  seen  these  characters  before,  excepting  Mr  Bankes ;  who,
upon  comparing  them,  found  them  to  be  exactly  similar  to  those  which
he  had  seen  scratched  on  the  rocks  in  the  Wady  Mukatteb,  and  about
the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai."  This  inscription  they  copied ;  but  it  has  never
been  made  public.  See  Travels  of  Irby  and  Mangles,  pp.  411,  413.
[126.]

When  we  were  at  "Wady  MCisa,  I  was  not  aware  of  the  position  of
this  inscription;  and  the  ^circumstances  in  which  we  were  there  placed,
prevented  our  finding  it;  nor  does  it  appear  to  have  been  discovered  by
any  later  traveller.  But  the  same  Journal  for  18.55  (Zeitschr.  d.  morg.
Ges.  IX.  p.  230  sq.)  has  an  article  by  Blau,  giving  an  account  of
three  short  Sinaitic  inscriptions  found  in  or  near  Petra,  by  Mr  Ross,
an  English  traveller.  They  seem  however  to  have  no  'connection  with
the  one  above  described.

In  Cairo  I  was  told  that  similar  inscriptions  exist  in  the  immense
ancient  quarries  back  of  T  ara  just  above  Cairo  ;  and  also  in  the  granite
quarries  of  AswAn.  Lepsius  however  testifies,  that  in  none  of  these
quarries  is  there  any  trace  of  the  Sinaitic  characters ;  and  the  report
doubtlesi  arose  from  confounding  with  them  the  Egyptian  demotic  char-
acters, which  are  found  in  the  quarries.  Zeitschr.  der  morg.  Ges.  III.
p.  146.

Note  XX.— Pages  125,  185.

Thk  Convent  and  its  Serfs.  The  following  passage  from  the
Arabic  Annals  of  Eutychius,  (Sa'id  Ibn  el-Batrik,)  Patriarch  of  Alex-
andria in  the  latter  half  of  the  ninth  century,  has  been  hitherto  appa-
rently overlooked ;  and  seems  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  inserted  here
in  a  translation.  It  is  found  in  Eutychii  Annales,  Tom.  II.  p.  160  sq.
Oxon.  1658.

"But  when  the  monks  of  Mount  Sinai  heard  of  the  clemency  of  the
emperor  Justinian,  and  that  he  delightea  to  build  churches  and  found
convents,  they  made  a  journey  to  him  and  complained,  how  the  wander-
ing sons  of  Ishmael  were  wont  to  attack  them  suddenly,  eat  up  their  pro-
visions, desolate  the  place,  enter  their  cells  and  carry  off  every  thing ;
and  how  they  also  broke  into  the  church  and  devoured  even  the  holy
wafers.  Then  the  emperor  Justinian  said  to  them,  '  What  do  ye  desire  ?  '
And  they  said,  '  We  ask  of  thee,  0  emperor,  that  thou  wouldst  build
for  us  a  convent  which  may  be  a  strong  hold.'  For  before  this  time  there
was  no  convent  in  Mount  Sinai  common  to  all  the  monks ;  they  lived
scattered  upon  the  mountains  and  in  the  valleys  round  about  the  bush,
out  of  which  God  (his  name  be  praised  !)  spoke  with  Moses.  Above  the
bush  they  had  a  great  tower,  which  remains  to  this  day,  and  in  it  was
the  church  of  St.  Mary.  And  when  danger  was  near,  the  monks  fled
into  this  tower  and  fortified  themselves  in  it.  The  emperor  dismissed
them,  aud  sent  with  them  a  legate  furnished  with  a  great  sum  of  money  ;
and  he  wrote  to  his  prefect  in  Egypt,  to  supply  the  legate  with  money,  as
much  as  he  needed,  and  also  with  men,  and  to  see  that  he  likewise  received
corn  from  Egypt.  And  he  commanded  the  legate  to  build  a  church
at  Kolzum,  aud  the  convent  Rayeh  (Raithu  ?),  and  a  convent  in  Mount
Sinai ;  and  to  build  this  so  strong,  that  in  all  the  world  there  should  not

S98

NOTES.

[XX.

he  found  one  stronger  ;  and  so  secure,  that  from  no  quarter  should  there
be  any  harm  to  fear,  either  for  the  monks  or  the  convent.

"  And  the  legate  came  to  Kolzum,  and  built  there  the  church  of  St.
Athanasius ;  and  he  built  also  the  convent  Rayeh.  Then  he  came  to
Mount  Sinai ;  and  found  there  the  bush  in  a  narrow  place  between  two
mountains,  and  the  tower  near  by,  and  fountains  of  water  springing  up ;
but  the  monks  were  dispersed  in  the  valleys.  At  first  he  thought  to
build  the  convent  high  above  upon  the  mountain,  and  far  from  the  bush
and  tower.  But  he  gave  up  this  purpose  on  account  of  water ;  for  there
was  no  water  above  upon  the  mountain.  He  built  therefore  the  convent
near  the  bush  on  the  place  of  the  tower,  including  the  tower  in  the  con-
vent ;  in  the  narrow  place  between  two  mountains.  So  that  any  one  on
the  top  of  the  northern  mountain,  might  throw  down  a  stone  into  the
midst  of  the  convent  and  injure  the  monks.  And  he  built  the  convent
in  this  place,  because  here  was  the  bush,  and  other  celebrated  monu-
ments, and  water.  And  he  built  a  chapel  on  the  top  of  the  mountain,
on  the  spot  where  Moses  received  the  law.  The  name  of  the  prior  of
the  convent  was  Daula.

"  Then  the  legate  returned  back  to  the  emperor  Justinian,  and  told
him  of  the  churches  and  convents  he  had  built,  and  described  to  him
how  he  had  built  the  convent  of  Mount  Sinai.  And  the  emperor  said
unto  him,  '  Thou  hast  done  wrong,  and  hast  injured  the  monks;  for
thou  hast  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies.  Wherefore
hast  thou  not  built  the  convent  on  the  top  of  the  mountain  ?'  And  the
legate  said  to  him,  '  I  have  built  the  convent  near  by  the  bush,  and  near
water.  Had  I  built  it  above  on  the  top  of  the  mountain,  the  monks
would  have  been  without  water ;  so  that  if  ever  they  had  been  besieged,
and  cut  off  from  the  water,  they  must  have  died  of  thirst.  Also  the
bush  would  have  been  far  distant  from  them.'  Then  the  emperor  said,
'  Thou  oughtest  then  at  least  to  have  levelled  to  the  ground  the  northern
mountain  ;  so  that  from  it  no  one  could  do  the  monks  any  harm.'  The
legate  said  to  him,  '  Had  we  laid  out  all  the  treasures  of  Egypt  and
Rome  and  Syria  upon  it,  we  could  not  have  made  an  end  of  this  mountain.'
Then  the  emperor  was  wroth,  and  commanded  to  strike  off  his  head.

"  Thereupon  he  sent  another  legate,  and  with  him  a  hundred  slaves
out  of  the  slaves  of  Rome,  with  their  wives  and  children ;  and  commanded
him  also  to  take  from  Egypt  another  himdred  slaves  out  of  the  slaves  of
Rome,  with  their  wives  and  children ;  and  to  build  for  them  dwellings
outside  of  Mount  Sinai,  wherein  they  might  dwell,  and  so  guard  the  con-
vent and  the  monks  ;  and  also  to  provide  for  their  sustenance,  and  to  see
that  a  supply  of  corn  was  furnished  to  them  and  to  the  convent  from
Egypt.  When  now  the  legate  had  come  to  Sinai,  he  built  many  dwel-
lings outside  of  the  convent  towards  the  east,  and  fortified  them,  and
placed  in  them  the  slaves,  to  guard  and  protect  the  convent.  And  the
place  is  called  unto  this  day  Deir  el-Abid^  '  Convent  of  the  Slaves.'

"  But  when  after  a  long  time  many  children  were  born  unto  them,
and  they  were  multiplied,  and  the  religion  of  Muhammed  was  spread
abroad,  (this  took  place  under  the  Khalif  Abd  el-Melek  Ibn  Merwdn,)
then  they  fell  upon  one  another  and  killed  each  other.  And  many  were
Blain,  and  many  fled,  and  others  embraced  the  Muhammedan  religion.  And
to  this  day  their  posterity  in  the  convents  profess  this  religion,  and  are

XXI,  XXII.]

TEZKIRAH.     HAJ  STATIONS,

599

called  Benu  Sdlih,  and  are  also  named  Children  (Servants)  of  the  Con-
vent. Among  them  are  the  Lakhraiyin.  But  the  monks  destroyed  the
dwellings  of  the  slaves,  after  they  had  embraced  the  religion  of  Muham-
med ;  so  that  no  one  could  any  more  dwell  therein.  And  they  remain
desolate  unto  this  day."

NoTK  XXI.— Page  168.

Tezkirah,  or  Passport  of  the  Governor  of  ^Akabah.  "  The  reason
of  writing  it  is,  that  when  it  was  Wednesday  the  10th  of  Muhurram,
year  1254,  there  came  to  us  Mr  Robinson,  and  with  him  two  others,
having  an  answer  from  the  Council  to  us.  This  answer  he  gave  to  us,
and  we  have -read  it  and  understood  what  is  in  it.  In  it  we  are  informed,
that  they  need  Arabs  and  camels  to  take  them  to  the  Wady  Miisa.  Now
we  have  found  no  camels  in  our  neighbourhood,  all  the  Arabs  being  in
Syria.  Therefore  we  said  to  them,  '  How  is  your  opinion  ?  We  have
no  Arabs  nor  camels.  We  will  send  for  you  to  Hussein.'  They  said,
'  We  shall  be  detained.'  And  we  said,  '  Consult  your  views;  that  we
may  be  at  ease,  both  we  and  you.'  And  they  said,  '  We  will  go  to  Gaza ;
Wady  Miisa  is  not  necessary ;  we  will  go  to  Gaza.'  So  we  gave  them
Arabs  of  the  Tawarah,  and  one  guide  to  conduct  them  as  far  as  Wady
el-Abyad.  And  they  went  towards  Gaza,  with  the  peace  of  God  most
High.

"  We  have  written  this  answer,  to  prevent  interference  with  them ;
and  no  one  must  interfere  with  them."

Dated  the  10th  of         )      (Signed)  Othjlan,

Muhurram,  year  '54.  j  Governor  of  the  Castle  of  'Akabah.

(L.  S.)

Note  XXII.— Page  172.

Haj  Stations.  The  following  is  a  list  of  the  stations  on  the  Haj
route  from  Cairo  as  far  as  Muweilih,  with  the  portions  of  the  road  for
which  the  various  tribes  of  Arabs  are  responsible  and  furnish  a  convoy.

Stations.

1.  Birket  el-Haj.  8.  eth-Themed.

2.  Dar  el-Humra;  no  water.  9.  Rasen-Nukb;  no  water.

3.  'Ajrud.  10.  el-'Ahabah.

4.  en-Nawatir ;  water  at  Mab'uk.  11.  Hakl.

5.  Jebeil  Hasan;  no  water.  12.  Il:\s  esh-Shuraf ;  no  water.

6.  NMil.  13.  el-Beda'.

7.  Wady  el-Kureis.  14.  Muweilih.

Between  el-Beda'  and  Muweilih,  Riippel  inserts  another  station,
Ainune  as  he  calls  it,  the  Eynunah  of  Moresby's  chart.  Reisen  in  Nu-
bien,  etc.  p.  218.

Convoys.  The  route  from  Cairo  to  'Ajrild  is  free.  The  Tawarah
are  then  responsible  for  it  from  'Ajrud  to  NCikhl.  But  ever  since  they
plundered  a  caravan  several  years  ago,  and  were  punished  for  it  by  the
Pasha,  they  have  been  deprived  of  their  tolls  from  the  Haj ;  though  it

600

XOTES.

[xxm.

is  still  their  duty  to  furnish  an  escort,  and  they  are  still  responsible  for
the  safety  of  the  caravan  on  this  part  of  the  route. — The  Tiyahah  are
responsible  only  at  Xukhl. — The  Stziwif  from  Niikhl  toRas  en-Nukb. —
The  ''Alaicm,  from  Ras  en-Nukb  to  'Akabah.  The  'Amran  from  'Aka-
bah  to  el-Beda'. — The  Ha  iceiiat  from  el-Beda'  to  Muweilih,  etc. — All
these  tribes,  except  the  Tawarah,  receive  tolls.

A  list  of  stations  on  the  route  of  the  Syrian  Haj,  from  Damascus  to
Mecca,  is  given  in  the  Appendix  to  Burckhardt's  Travels  in  Syria,  p.
656  sq.

Note  XXIIL— Page  194.

'Abdeh,  Eboda.  Our  'Amran  guides  knew  these  mine  only  under
the  name  of  "Aujeh.  Tuweileb  called  them  'Abdeh  ;  but  told  us  after-
wards, that  he  knew  this  name  only  from  M.  Linant,  who  had  visited  the
place  a  few  years  before.  In  Hebron  we  were  asked,  whether  we  had
been  at  'Abdeh,  which  was  said  to  be  three  days  distant  from  that  town.
From  what  was  there  told  us,  we  were  for  some  time  in  doubt,  whether
the  place  we  had  visited  was  the  'Abdeh  of  the  Arabs.  For  a  long  time
we  cotdd  get  no  definite  information,  nor  find  any  person  who  had  been
there.  Some  said  it  lay  nearer  to  the  'Arabah,  eastward  of  el-Birein.
It  was  not  till  after  our  return  from  Wady  Musa  in  June,  that  we  be-
came satisfied  on  this  point.  We  then  found  in  Hebron  a  very  intelli-
gent owner  of  camels,  who  himself  had  travelled  through  all  Syria  and
the  adjacent  countries,  and  had  been  at  'AbdeL  He  described  to  us
the  route  he  had  taken,  and  gave  a  minute  account  of  the  ruins  and  their
situation;  mentioning  expressly  that  they  lay  northwest  of  el-Birein.
His  account  tallied  so  exactly  with  what  we  had  ourselves  seen,  that
we  no  longer  had  any  doubt  on  the  subject.

These  ruins  have  not  been  described  by  any  traveller ;  nor  am  I
sure  that  they  have  been  visited  by  any  one,  except  M.  Linant,  as  above
mentioned.  Sir  F.  Henniker,  indeed,  in  crossing  the  desert  from  the
convent  to  Gaza,  speaks  of  having  seen  somewhere  in  this  quarter,  '•  two
large  stone  buildings,  having  the  appearance  of  fortresses,  and  situate  on
the  edge  of  a  lofty  rock.'*  (Xotes,  etc.  p.  253.)  This  language  and' the
circumstances  of  the  case,  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  'Abdeh  was
here  meant ;  but  the  other  details  of  his  account  are  so  totally  at  variance
with  what  we  saw,  that  I  must  distrust  either  this  conclusion,  or  the
accuracy  of  the  writer.  Seetzen,  in  1807,  travelled  direct  from  the  vi-
cinity of  Gaza  to  Sinai.  On  the  third  day  he  came  to  a  place  called
'Abdeh,  of  which  he  before  had  heard  much;  but  he  found  only  a  "town
whose  houses  all  lav  in  ruins,  and  exhibited  nothing  worth  seeing."
(Zach  s  Monatl.  Corr.  XVIL  p.  144.  Reisen  III.  p.  43.j  This  could  not
well  have  been  the  'Abdeh  that  we  saw ;  though  he  speaks  of  the  ruins  of  a
church.  M.  Callier  also,  in  passing  in  1834  among  the  mountains  bor-
dering on  the  'Arabah,  where  the  Wadys  run  towards  the  Dead  Sea,
speaks  of  visiting  the  ruins  of  an  Aid'-,  which  were  near;  but  he  does
not  describe  them.  (Journal  des  Savans,  Jan.  1836,  p.  47.)  This  lo-
cation does  not  correspond  at  all  to  the  'Abdeh  we  visited. — I  am  in-
clined to  suppose,  that  both  these  latter  travellers  were  misinformed  by
their  Arab  guides.    They  had  both  heard  of  'Abdeh,  and  naturally  in-

XXTV.]

■  ROUTES  FROM  MOUNT  SIN'AI.

601

quired  for  it ;  and  the  Arats  in  their  usual  manner  answered  at  random,
and  pointed  out  any  spot  that  happened  first  to  come  to  hand.  There
can  be  no  question,  that  the  ruins  we  saw,  are  on  or  near  the  ancient
Roman  road,  and  answer  to  the  position  of  Eboda  in  the  Peutinger  Ta-
bles.

Note  XXIV.— Page  199.
Routes  from  Mount  Sinai,  across  the  Desert  to  Gaza  a^-d  Hebron.

I.  Chief  Route  from  the  convent  to  Gaza,  over  the  Pass  el-Mu-
reiKhy,    Ten  days.
1st  Day.       Convent  to

'Ain  el-Akhdar,  in  the  "Wady  of  the  same  name.  ,  See  page
85.

2d  Day.       el-Mureikhy,  the  Pass.

'Ammar  es-Salimeh,  a  plain.
3d  Day.       er-Rejlm,  a  spring  of  water  in  "Wady  el-'Arish,  near  its
head.

4th  Day.      Humadet  el-Berbery,  a  plain.     Here  the  route  No.  II
comes  in.

el- J ughamileh,  a  spring  of  bitter  water  in  W  el-'Arlsh,  a

little  off  the  road.
Themail  Um  es-Sa'ideh,  pits  of  bitter  water.
5th  Day.      Wady  el-Hamdh.

6th  Day.      "Wady  el-'Arish.    The  path  crosses  the  "Wady  and  keeps
along  more  to  the  east.
Jebel  Ikhrimm  ;  see  p.  184.
TVady  el-Kureiyeh;  see  p.  184.
esh-Shureif.

7th  Day.      Wady  el-Lussan         ^^.^^^  j^^^
W^SS  ^PP.  187,  188.  189.

el-Muweilih,  with  brackish  water,  near  W  el-' Ain ;  see  p.
190.

8th  Day.      Wady  es-Seram  (head).    Here  this  route  falls  into  oura
See  p.  191.

9th  Day.      er-Ruhaibeh.    Route  the  same  as  ours.
10th  Day.     Nuttar  Abu  Sumar,  where  the  Bedawin  havfe  store-houses
for  grain.

Wady  esh-Sheri'ah,  running  to  the  sea.  ^
Ghuzzeh  (Gaza).

This  appears  to  be  the  route  taken  by  Seetzen  in  1807,  from  near
Gaza  to  the  Convent.  Zach's  Monatl.  Corresp.  XVII.  p.  142  sq.

n.  Route  by  the  Western  Pass,  er-Rdkineh.    Ten  days.

Ist  Day.      Convent  to

Wady  Berah.    See  page  84.
2d  Day.       el-Murak,  at  the  foot  of  et-Tih.    See  p.  77.
3d  Day.       er-Rakineh,  the  Pass.

Vol.  I.— 51

602

KOTES,

[XXIV.

Abu  Nuteighineh,  with  good  water.
4th  Day.      Humadet  el-Berbery  in  No.  I.

Hence,  as  before,  to  Graza.

III.  Branch  Route  from  Nos.  I  and  II,  hy  way  of  Niikhl.  Eleven

days  to  Gaza

3  Days  to  er-Rejim  as  in  No.  I;  or  to  Abu  Nuteighineh  as  in  No.  II,

4th  Day.  Abu-Ulejan.

5th  Day.       Nukhl,  fortress  on  the  Haj  road.

6th  Day.       Wady  er-Rawak.    (Comp.  Burckhardt,  p.  449.)

7th  Day.       esh-Shureif,  in  No.  I.

Hence,  as  before,  to  Gaza.
Sir  F.  Henniker  passed  by  er-Eakineh  and  Nukhl;  Notes  etc.  pp.
246,  247.  Russegger,  a  few  months  after  our  journey,  crossed  the
Tib  by  the  Pass  el-Mureikhy,  and  then  went  by  Nukhl  to  Ruhai-
ben  and  Hebron.  See  Berghaus'  Annalen  der  Erdkunde,  Marz
1839,  p.  427  sq.

IV.  Eastern  route  hy  el-^Ain,  etc.    Ten  days  to  Gaza.

2  Days  from  the  Convent  to  the  head  of  Wady  ez-Zulakah ;  see  page
148.

3d  Day.       el-'Ain  ;  living  water.
4th  Day.       Wady  el-'Atiyeh,  running  to  Wady  Wetir.
5th  Day.      Pass  of  et-Tih,  northern  ridge,  near  the  head  of  Wady  el-
Jerafeh.

eth-Themed ;  water.    See  p.  176.
6th  Day.      el-Musheh-hem.    Comp.  in  No.  VII.
7th  Day.      Wady  el-Mayein  on  our  road.

Hence,  the  same  route  as  ours,

V.  Branch  Route  from  Nos.  I  and  II,  direct  to  Gaza  along  the

tvestern  side  of  Wady  el-^Arish.

From  the  Convent  to

Wady  el-Hamdh,  5  days,  as  in  No.  I,  or  No.  II.
Muktul  edh-Dhuleim.
Wady  el-Hasana.    Comp.  in  No.  VI.
el-Burkein.
Mukrih  el-Ibna.
Jebel  el-Helal.    See  p.  185.
el-Kusaby ;  here  the  route  crosses  W'^  el-'Arish.
el-Khubarah.    See  p.  202.
_  el-Bawaty.

el-Minyay.
Ghuzzeh  (Gaza).

Thb  appears  to  have  been  the  route  of  the  pilgrims  in  the  15th  and
16th  centuries.    See  the  next  page.

VI.  Route  between  Suez  or  ^Aj'rud  and  Hebron.

From  Suez  or  'Ajr&d  to

el-Mab'Cik,  wells  just  south  of  the  Haj  route.
Ferashat  esh-Shih.

XXIV.]

ROUTES  FROM  MOUNT  SINAI.

603

13.

Wady  el-Mudheiyat,  which  unites  vrith  "W''  et-Tawal  and

enters  the  sea  at  'AmbeL
Ka'  a  el-Baruk.

el-Hasana,  a  plain  with  living  water.    Comp.  in  No.  V.
Wady  el-'Arish,  at  the  junction  of  W^  el-'Ain.    See  pp.

189,  190.
Wady  es-Seram,  on  our  road.
Hence  to  Hebron,  on  our  route.

VII.  Lord  Prudhoe^s  Route  from  ^Ajriid  direct  to  Wady  Miisa.

From  'Ajrud  to                                         co^.    Hoors.  m.

Mahebeug  [Mab'  Ok],  11.  27.

Wady  el-Hadj,  winding,     .    .    .  N.  N.  E.    8.  20.

Nakl  [Nukhl],   E.  S.  E.  14.  38.

Wady  Eeah  )  [er-Eawak],   .   (  E.  N.  E.   2.  5.

W'  Acaba      \             ,„^,^,      ^  X.  E.  by  E.  2.  5.

W'  'Arish      }                       { E.  N.  E.   2.  5.

W'  Souph  (Hadjar  il-Abiad),   ...    id.    .  1.  2^.
W'  il-Mashakam  [el-Musheh-      (  E.  N.  E.

hem;  comp.  in  No.  IV.]  \  E.  S.  E.

Gaza  and  Tor  [convent]  road,  "i

(The  well  Meleyha  is  4  miles   V  S.  S.  E.    1.  2^.

north.)  5

Wady  Ghureir,  E.  N.  E.   5.  14.

W  Geraffe  [el-Jerafeh],  ...  S.  E.  5^.  14.
W'  Lechiyaneh  [el-Lehyaneh],  .    E.  5.  12.

el-  'Arabah.

Compare  the  route  of  Burckhardt  in  the  opposite  direction ;  Trav-
els, p.  444  sq.

In  A.  D.  1483,  Breydenbach  and  Felix  Fabri,  belonging  to  difiFerent
companies  of  pilgrims,  travelled  together  from  Gaza  to  Mount  Sinai,
and  each  described  the  route.  The  account  of  Fabri  is  the  fullest ;  but
presents  little  more  than  a  few  names  which  can  hardly  be  recognised ;
except  the  pass  er-Rakineh,  by  which  they  crossed  the  Tih.  The  route
is  as  follows:  Sept.  10,  Lebhem,  a  village. — 11,  Chawaia,  a  distiict
called  in  Latin  Cades. — 12,  Gayan,  a  Wady. — 13,  Wadalar,  a  torrent.
[Wady  el-'Arish  ?]  Magdahey,  a  torrent. — 14,  Magare,  a  torrent  near
Gehelhelel  [Jebel  Helal]. — 15,  Hachssene,  a  torrent.  [el-Hasana.]  Jlin-
schene,  a  torrent. — 16,  Alherock,  a  torrent. — 17,  Chalep,  a  high  white
mountain.  Meschmar,  a  torrent. — 19,  Backani,  Pass.  [er-Rakineh.]
Eamathim. — 20,  Schoyle. — 21,  Abelharocka,  near  the  Seat  of  Moses.

Four  years  earlier,  in  A.  D.  1479,  Tucher  of  Nurnberg  had  also
passed  from  Gaza  to  Sinai ;  but  his  route  is  still  less  intelligible  than
that  of  Fabri.  He  seems  to  have  crossed  the  Tih  by  the  pass  el-Mu-
reikhy,  which  he  calls  Roackie  ;  and  says  expressly  that  the  usual  road
crossed  much  further  to  the  right  or  west.  He  gives  the  following
names :  Sept.  22,  Mackati,  Wady.— 23,  Nockra,  Wady.— 26,  Lodro,
Wady. — 27,  Schilludy,  mountain.— 28,  Torcko.—SO,  Viniheine,  Wady.
— Oct.  1,  Roackie,  Pass.  [el-Mureikhy.] — 2,  3Ialchaluch,  Wady.  '

For  the  Travels  of  all  these  pilgrims,  see  Reissbuch  des  h.  Landea.

604

NOTES,

[XXV.

Elevations.  The  elevation  of  the  following  points  (among  others)
along  the  middle  route  and  by  Nukhl,  are  given  by  Russegger  from
barometrical  observations  in  1838 ;  see  Berghaus'  Annalen  der  Erd-
kunde,  etc.  Miirz,  1839,  p.  428.  It  must  however  be  borne  in  mind,  that
the  numbers  here  given  do  not  fully  accord  with  the  observations  of
Eiippel  at  Sinai,  or  of  Schubert  at  Hebron.

Paris  Feet.

Convent  of  Sinai       ......  5115.

'Ain  el-Akhdar   3793.

High  Plateau  of  Jebel  et-Tih    ....  4322.

Wady  el-'Arish,  Head          ....  2832.

"          "          at 'Ain  er-Eejim      .       .       .  2492.

Nukhl    1396.

Wady  Jerur     .       .  "   1013.

er-Ruhaibeh    1032.

Khulasah         .......  661.

Wady  el-Khulil  (?)   1097.

Dhoheriyeh   2040.

Hebron   2842.

Hebron  according  to  Schubert   ....  2664.

Note  XXV.— Page  275.

Mount  of  Olives.  The  northern  summit  of  this  mountain  affords
an  instance  of  the  fluctuating  nature  of  the  later  monastic  traditions.
Brocardus,  about  A.  D.  1283,  is  perhaps  the  first  writer  who  mentions
it ;  cap.  9.  He  gives  to  the  southern  part  of  the  mountain  the  name
Mons  O/Tensionis,  because  Solomon  set  up  there  an  image  of  Moloch;
while  on  this  northern  point,  he  says,  he  placed  his  other  idol  Chemosh ;
1  K.  11,  7.  8.  Afterwards,  according  to  Brocardus,  the  Maccabees  erect-
ed here  a  castle,  the  remains  of  which  were  visible  in  his  day.  He  gives
no  name  to  this  summit ;  but  Adrichomius  after  him,  calls  it  Mons
Scandali. — Some  sixty  years  later,  about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth
century,  Maimdeville  and  Ludolf  de  Suchem  both  speak  of  this  north-
ern point  under  the  name  of  Galilee  ;  the  former  calls  it  Mount  Galilee,
and  the  latter  says  there  was  upon  it  a  village.  The  same  account  is
given  by  Tucher,  A.  D.  1479,  and  by  Breydenbach  and  Fabri  A.  D.
1483.  In  A.  D.  1573,  Rauwolf  found  here  ruins,  which  were  said  to  be
those  of  a  Khan  or  inn,  where  the  Galileans  anciently  lodged  when  they
came  up  to  Jerusalem.  Cotovicus  in  A.  D.  1598,  calls  it  Galilee;  and
says  a  large  building  had  just  before  been  commenced. — Next  comes  Qua-
resmius  about  1620,  who  calls  the  same  point  Galilee  and  also  Viri  Ga-
lilcei,  and  is  in  doubt  whether  this  appellation  comes  from  a  former  village,
or  a  like  inn  once  situated  here  ;  or  whether,  as  some  said,  from  the  cir-
cumstance, that  here  the  two  angels  met  the  disciples  after  the  ascension
of  Jesus,  and  addressed  them  :  "  Men  of  Galilee,"  etc.  Acts  1,  11.  See
Quaresm.  Elucid.  Terr.  Sanct.  II.  p.  319.  The  same  writer  unites  the
names  Mons  Offensionis  et  Scandali  UTpon  the  southern  ridge ;  ib.  p.  278.
Doubdan  describes  the  northern  summit  in  1652,  as  called  Viri  GaliloBi,
and  occupied  by  a  large  new  building  not  yet  finished ;  Voyage,  etc.  p.

XXVI.]

ZION  AND  AKRA.

605

285.  In  1697  Maundrell  still  gives  it  the  same  name ;  and  says  a  liigh
tower  had  stood  here,  which  had  been  thrown  down  two  years  before. —
Pococke  appears  to  have  found  the  name  transferred  to  another  spot
lower  down ;  Vol.  II.  i.  p.  28.  So  too  Turner,  Tour,  etc.  II.  p.  256.  At
present  the  name  Galilee  seems  to  be  forgotten ;  or  at  least  recent  tra-
vellers do  not  mention  it  as  applied  to  this  summit,  and  we  heard  no-
thing of  it.

Still  earlier  than  Brocardus,  Saewulf  about  A.  D.  1103,  speaks  of
the  Coenaculum  on  Zion  as  then  called  Galilee,  because  the  "  men  of
Galilee  "  often  assembled  there  ;  Peregrinat.  p.  266.  Early  Travels  in
Palest,  p.  43.

NoTK  XXVI.  Page  281.

ZioN  AND  Akra,  according  to  Clarke  and  Olshausen.  Two  theo-
ries respecting  J erusalem  have  been  broached  within  the  present  century,
which  have  made  some  noise  in  the  learned  world  ;  more  perhaps  from
the  reputation  of  the  scholars  who  have  brought  them  forward,  than
from  any  intrinsic  merit  in  the  theories  themselves.

Dr  E.  D.  Clarke,  who  visited  Jerusalem  in  1801,  and  wrote  ten
years  later,  held  it  as  probable,  that  the  hill  of  Evil  Counsel,  now  so
called,  south  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  was  "  the  real  Mount  Sion ;  "  and
that  which  we  have  called  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  he  regarded  as  the
Tyropoeon  of  Josephus.  Travels,  etc.  Part.  II.  Vol.  I.  p.  557.  4to.  Lon-
don, 1812.  He  does  not  however  attempt  to  disturb  the  site  of  the  temple
as  commonly  assumed  ;  but  considers  the  great  mosk  of  Omar  as  occupy-
ing the  spot,  where  that  ancient  structure  stood.  Ibid.  pp.  601,  602.
Dr  Clarke  apparently  did  not  take  the  trouble  even  to  think  of  reconci-
ling his  theory  with  the  other  topographical  details  of  the  ancient  city.
He  forgot,  or  did  not  know,  that  Josephus,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  text,
describes  the  northern  part  of  Zion  as  lying  west  from  the  temple,  and
connected  with  it  by  a  bridge,  which  was  not  so  long  but  that  persons
could  hold  a  colloquy  across  it.  Now  Dr  Clarke's  Mount  Zion  is  more
than  an  English  mile  distant  from  the  great  mosk  or  site  of  the  temple ;
and  between  the  two  lies  the  whole  extent  of  the  high  hill,  which  all  tra-
vellers but  Dr  Clarke  do  not  hesitate  to  regard  as  Zion. — The  hypothe-
Bis  is  too  absurd  to  admit  of  further  refutation.

The  theory  of  Olshausen  has  respect  to  Akra  and  the  Lower  City;
which  in  his  little  tract  he  holds  to  have  been  the  same  with  the  narrow
ridge  south  of  the  great  mosk,  and  east  of  Zion ;  Topogr.  des  alien  Jems.
pp.  4,  5.  But  to  say  nothing  of  the  fact,  that  a  gate  led  out  from  the
west  side  of  the  temple  into  the  "other"  or  Lower  City,  as  described
in  the  text ;  I  would  here  only  remark,  that  Akra  lay  "  overagaiust "
the  temple ;  was  naturally  higher  than  Moriah ;  and  was  separated  from
it  by  a  valley.  Now,  as  we  have  seen,  the  present  narrow  ridge  of
Ophel,  30uth  of  the  great  mosk,  is  not  and  never  was  separated  from
Moriah  by  a  valley ;  it  being  only  a  lower  prolongation  of  one  and  the
same  ridge.  Nor  can  it  ever  have  been  even  so  high  as  the  level  of  Moriah ;
for  at  present  its  upper  part,  adjacent  to  the  city  wall,  is  at  least  one
hundred  feet  lower  than  the  area  of  the  mosk ;  and  it  continues  to  slope

6Q6

NOTES.

[xxm

down  rapidly  with  occasional  rocky  offsets  quite  to  Siloam.  The  rocky
sui'face  which  appears  in  many  parts  of  it,  and  indeed  its  whole  aspect,
demonstrate  that  it  never  was  much  if  any  higher  than  at  present.

I  carried  with  me  the  tract  of  Olshausen  above  mentioned,  in  order
to  examine  his  arguments  upon  the  spot.  And  since  this  note  was  written,
I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  submitting  it,  as  well  as  the  part  of  the  text
to  which  it  refers,  to  the  inspection  of  Prof.  Olshausen  himself;  and
have  reason  to  suppose,  that  the  information  thus  presented  has  led  him
to  reconsider  his  former  views.

Note  XXVII.— Page  289.

The  ancient  Arch  and  Bridge.  In  revising  this  work  for  a  new
edition,  I  have  left  untouched  the  account  of  my  first  visit  to  the  an-
cient arch,  and  the  identification  of  it  with  the  bridge  mentioned  by
Josephus.  Two  reasons  led  to  this  course;  first,  because  the  account  ia
in  itself  simply  truthful ;  and,  secondly,  because  its  truthfulness  has  been
drawn  in  question.  This  charge,  refuted  at  the  time,  has  since  the
decease  of  its  author,  been  repeated  in  the  stereotyped  volumes  of  his
Life,  without  any  intimation  that  it  was  ever  met  or  denied.  It  becomes
therefore  necessary  here,  to  record  in  like  manner  the  evidence  of  its
falsehood.

The  marginal  note  on  p.  289  of  this  volume,  was  written  in  London
in  October,  1840,  immediately  after  an  interview  with  Mr  Bonomi.  He
spoke  of  the  remains  as  being  the  fragment  of  an  arch ;  but  frankly
added:  "We  could  make  nothing  more  of  it."  The  same  note  was
afterwards  submitted  in  manuscript  to  Mr  Catherwood  in  New  York ;
who  showed  me  his  fine  drawing  of  the  remains  in  question,  and  corrobo-
rated the  general  statement  of  Mr  Bonomi.  He  did  not  then  inform  me,
that  he  had  at  once  regarded  the  arch  as  having  belonged  to  "  a  viaduct
or  aqueduct ;  "  had  he  done  so,  I  should  so  have  written  it.  The  note
was  printed,  in  its  present  form,  with  his  sanction. — No  charge,  therefore,
could  possibly  lie  against  me  in  reference  to  any  supposed  priority  on
my  part,  either  in  noticing  the  remains  in  question,  or  in  identifying  them
with  an  ancient  bridge  or  aqueduct.  It  could  only  refer  to  the  identifi-
cation of  these  remains  with  the  ancient  historical  bridge  several  times
mentioned  by  Josephus.

The  charge,  as  first  made  in  1843,  was  in  substance  that  of  unfairness
towards  Mr  Catherwood ;  who,  it  was  averred,  "  had  examined  the
remains  of  the  bridge  several  years  before"  [in  1833];  and  who,  "as
well  as  several  other  gentlemen  in  Jerusalem,  regarded  and  spoke  of  this
monument  as  the  remains  of  an  ancient  bridge,  that  connected  the  Jewish
temple  with  Mount  Zion."  This  statement  was  made  on  the  alleged
authority  of  Mr  Catherwood  himself,  and  also  that  of  the  Rev.  Mr
Nicolayson.

The  following  letter  from  Mr  Catherwood  contains  a  sort  of  literary
history  of  the  remains  in  question ;  and  I  therefore  give  longer  extrac  s
than  would  otherwise  be  necessary.

"iowfon,  M /'eJ.  1844.

*  *  *  "Before  going  to  Jerusalem,  I  was  furnished  with  a  miuiuscript  map  of  the  city
by  Mr  J.  J.  Scoles,  architect,  who  made  it  on  the  spot ;  aud  at  that  time  it  was  the

xxvn.]

THE  ANCIENT  ARCH  AND  BRIDGE.

607

best  extant.  I  also  had  conversations  with  Mr  Barry  and  Mr  Scoles  regarding  the
most  interesting  points  that  stUl  remained  for  investigation.  Among  other  directions,
Mr  Scoles  told  me  to  "  look  out  for  the  remains  of  a  bridge,  which  joined  Mount
Moriah  to  Mount  Zion."  He  had  been  unsuccessful  in  finding  it  himself ;  and  did  not
mention  to  me  whence  he  derived  his  information  respecting  it.  This  direction  was  a
■wrbal  one,  not  written  down,  and  which  I  afterwards  forgot  altogether  ;  and  when  I
discovered  the  arch,  it  was  not  from  purposely  looking  for  it,  but  casually,  in  making
my  survey  of  the  walls  surrounding  the  mosk  of  Omar.

"  I  therefore  was  in  error  when  I  stated,  that  others  (meaning  Messrs  Barry  and
Scoles)  were  previously  acquainted  with  the  arch  in  question.  Mr  Scoles  has  set  me
right  on  this  point ;  and  I  thus  rather  unexpectedly  find  myself  to  have  been  (so  far  aa
I  know)  the  discoverer.  I  had  no  doubt,  from  the  moment  I  saw  it,  that  it  had
formed  part  of  a  viaduct  and  aqueduct ;  but  I  was  totally  iffnorant  of  Us  historical  importance.
I  merely  looked  at  it  as  an  architect,  with  reference  to  its  position,  both  to  the  water-
course from  Bethlehem,  and  the  deep  ground  between  it  and  Mount  Zion.  *  *  *

"  This,  therefore,  wiU  explain  my  not  having  made  any  observation,  when  I  read
your  note.  I  was  in  doubt,  and  I  therefore  said  nothing ;  at  least,  so  far  as  I  can  recol-
lect. I  was,  moreover,  desirous,  that  you.. . . .  should  have  the  full  merit  (as  is  justly
due  to  you)  of  being  the  first  to  publish  and  bring  to  light  the  historical  importance  of
this  monument.  F.  CATHERWOOD."

In  subsequent  conversations  in  New  York,  Mr  Catherwood  frankly
stated  to  me  and  to  others,  that  he  was  not,  at  the  time,  aware  of  the  testi-
mony of  Josephus  respecting  the  existence  of  an  ancient  bridge ;  and
further,  that  the  said  testimony  of  Josephus,  as  also  the  identity  of  these
remains  with  that  ancient  bridge,  first  became  known  to  him  through
and  in  connection  with  my  researches  and  results  in  1838,  five  years
after  his  own  visit  to  the  Holy  City.

The  Rev.  Mr  Nicolayson  wrote  as  follows  :

''Off  Cyprus,  May  31,  1844.

*  *  *  "I  am  happy  to  be  ablg  at  once  to  give  an  answer  satisfactory  to  you ....  I
have  the  most  distinct  recollection,  not  only  that  I  had  never  heard  the  projection  in
question  identified  with  the  bridge  mentioned  by  Josephus  till  it  was  thus  identified  by
you;  but  moreover  that  I  had  myself  never  noticed  the  projection  itself  till  on  the  occa-
sion of  your  visit,  when  it  first  became  known  to  me  ;  nor  have  I  any  recollection  of
havino-  heard  it  ever  mentioned  by  any  previous  traveller ;  certainly  not  by  Jlr  Cather-
wood and  his  party.  J.  NICOLAYSON."

The  letters  of  Messrs  Catherwood  and  Nicolayson  may  be  seen  in  full
in  the  Bibliotheca  Sacra,  1844,  p.  794  sq.

At  the  same  time,  letters  came  to  me  from  Messrs  Lanneau,  Whiting,
and  Eli  Smith,  members  of  the  Syrian  mission,  testifying  to  the  same
effect,  and  to  the  correctness  of  the  narrative  in  the  text.  I  subjoin  those
of  the  two  latter.

"  BeinU,  June  7th,  1844.

"  It  wives  me  pleasure  to  state,  that  my  impressions  accord  fidly  with  those  of  Mr
Lanneau';  namely,  that  previously  to  your  visit  to  Jerusalem  in  1838,  the  projecting
stones  referred  to" were  not  known  to  travellers  as  the  remains  of  the  ancient  bridge
described  by  Josephus  as  leading  from  the  temple  to  the  Xystus.  I  can  certify  also,
that  according  to  the  best  of  mj  recollection,  the  statement  and  description  in  your
Biblical  Researches  are  strictly  correct.  G.  B.  WHITING."

"Beirut,  June  Sth,  1844.

*  *  *  "  My  own  recollection  is  perfectly  distinct,  that  the  first  suggestion  I  ever
heard,  that  the  projecting  stones  referred  to  are  a  remnant  of  the  bridge  mentioned  by
Josephvis,  was  from  yourself.  ELI  SMITH."

608

NOTES.

[xxvn.

The  charge  against  me,  so  far  as  it  related  to  Mr  Catherwood,  having
thus  been  put  to  rest,  was  renewed  soon  after  from  the  same  quarter
in  behalf  of  another  person.  A  letter  was  put  forward,  dated  March
13,  1845,  from  an  individual  then  resident  at  Constantinople;  who  had
been  at  Jerusalem  in  1837,  and  who  was  also  present  at  the  meeting*  af
the  Syrian  mission  in  1838;  claiming  that  in  1837  he  (as  also  Mr  Whiting)
had  already  recognised  the  identity  of  this  arch  with  the  bridge  of  Jose-
phus;  that  in  1838  he  first  called  my  attention  to  the  arch,  as  a  frag-
ment of  that  bridge ;  and  that  he  made  an  appointment  with  me  to
conduct  me  for  the  first  time  to  the  spot.

What  had  passed  in  his  own  mind,  of  course  none  but  the  writer  of
the  letter  could  know.  But  that  he  had  ever  communicated  to  me  the
slightest  suggestion  on  the  subject,  I  could  only  meet  then,  as  now,
with  an  unqualified  denial ;  confirmed  by  an  appeal  to  my  notes  made  at
the  time.  That  he  ever  previously  spoke  upon  the  subject  to  any  of  the
missionaries,  is  disproved  also  by  the  testimony  of  Messrs  Nicolayson,
Lanneau,  Whiting,  and  E.  Smith,  already  given;  and,  further,  by  let-
ters afterwards  received  from  Messrs  W.  M.  Thomson,  J.  L.  Thom-
son, and  Mr  Ladd,  written  with  direct  reference  to  the  claim  in  ques-
tion.

It  will  be  perceived,  that  these  seven  names  comprise  those  of  all  the
missionaries  who  were  present  in  Jerusalem  at  the  time,  April,  1838;
with  the  exception  of  the  writer  of  the  letter  himself,  and  of  Mr  Hebard,
who  died  in  1841.

I  subjoin  extracts  from  the  letter  of  the  Rev.  W.  M.  Thomson,  now  of
Sidon ;  those  of  Messrs  J.  L.  Thomson  and  Ladd  being  of  the  same
tenor.  Mr  Thomson  enters  into  some  previous  details,  interesting  in
themselves  and  confirming  the  like  statements  of  Mr  Catherwood.

Beiru/,  Dec.  17,  1845.

*  *  *  "  When  I  was  residing  in  Jerusalem  in  1834,  I  frequently  visited  the  great
stones,  which  form  the  abutment  and  spring  of  the  arch.  I  also  distinctly  remember
to  have  received  the  idea,  that  they  formed  part  of  an  arch,  which  must  have  once
spanned  the  narrow  Wady  between  the  foundations  of  the  temple  and  the  lower  part  of
Mount  Zion.  And  more  than  once  I  examined  the  opposite  side  for  some  traces  of  an
abutment  answering  to  the  one  now  in  dispute.  But,  as  you  know,  there  are  no  such
traces  in  existence.

"  I  do  not  think,  that  the  idea  of  these  stones  in  question  being  part  of  an  arch,
was  original  with  me.  I  probably  received  it  from  Mr  Catherwood  or  Mr  Bonomi ;
for  I  was  acquainted  with  both  those  gentlemen  subsequently  to  their  long  visit  to  the
Holy  City.  I  however  never  heard  any  one  suggest,  that  this  abutment  formed  part  of
'  Joseplma'  bridge.'  And  so  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  the  honour  of  this  identifi-
cation belongs  entirely  to  yourself.  I  heard  of  it  at  the  time  as  your  discovery ;  and  at
any  rate,  it  was  new  to  me.  W.  M.  THOMSON."

The  preceding  testimony  comprises  that  of  Messrs  Bonomi,  Cather-
wood, Nicolayson,  and  the  six  surviving  American  missionaries  then
resident  in  Palestine  and  Syria.  It  amounts  to  this,  viz.  that  while  Mr
Catherwood  regarded  the  arch  as  having  "  formed  part  of  a  viaduct  and
aqueduct,"  and  Mr  Thomson  and  very  possibly  others  had  received  a
like  impression;  yet,  down  to  the  time  of  my  visit  at  Jerusalem  in
April,  1838,  not  one  of  all  these,  nor  any  other  person  to  their  knowledge,

xxvin.]

TOMBS  SOUTH  OF  HINNOM.

609

had  ever  connected  the  arch  or  the  supposed  viaduct,  in  any  way  what-
ever, with  the  ancient  historical  bridge  so  definitely  mentioned  by  Jose-
phus.

Here  the  matter  has  rested  for  many  years  ,  except  as  stirred  again
in  the  publication  referred  to  in  the  beginning  of  this  note.

Note  XXVIII.— Page  355.

Tombs  south  of  Hinnom.  The  language  of  Dr  Clarke  in  speaking
of  the  tombs  south  of  Hinnom,  is  exaggerated  and  reprehensible.  He
describes  them  as  "  hewn  with  marvellous  art :"  and  says  that  "  some  of
them,  from  their  magnificence  and  the  immense  labour  necessary  to  form
the  numerous  repositories  they  contain,  might  lay  claim  to  regal  honours."
Travels  in  the  Holy  Land,  4to.  pp.  549,  551.  The  impression  given  by
this  language  is  false.  Labour  enough  they  must  indeed  have  cost ;  but
there  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of  magnificence,  nor  of  any  particular
architectural  skill.  Such  extravagant  assertions  could  come  only  from
one  who  had  a  theory  to  support.

The  theory  of  Dr  Clarke  was,  that  this  hill  was  the  ancient  Zion ;
and  this  hypothesis  he  founded  on  the  very  slender  basis  of  the  sepul-
chral inscription,  t^s  dyias  Stwv,  given  in  the  text.  The  absurdity  of  the
theory  has  been  sufficiently  shown  in  Note  XXVI,  above.

The  same  traveller  also  broached  another  hypothesis  not  much  less
extravagant,  viz.  that  a  tomb  which  he  entered  here  was  probably  "  the
identical  tomb  of  Jesus  Christ ! "  Page  564.  This  supposition  cannot
of  course  be  disproved,  any  more  than  it  can  be  proved;  but  we  might
with  just  as  much  propriety  select  some  fifty  or  more  among  the  hundreds
of  sepulchres  around  the  city,  as  having  been  the  tomb  of  the  Saviour.
Besides,  the  place  of  crucifixion,  so  far  as  we  know  any  thing  about  it,
was  near  the  city,  and  also  near  to  one  of  the  great  roads  leading  from
the  gates.  It  must  therefore  be  sought  in  all  probability  on  the  north-
ern or  western  side  of  Jerusalem.  The  sepulchre  was  in  a  garden  near
the  same  place.    John  19,  20.  41.

Dr  Clarke  claims  further  to  have  been  the  first  to  "  discover"  the
tombs  on  the  south  side  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  lying  west  of  the  Acel-
dama and  below  the  villa  of  Caiaphas,  so  called.  He  speaks  confidei^ly
of  "the  discovery  of  antiquities  undescribed  by  any  author;  and  mar-
vellous it  is,  [he  says,]  considering  their  magnitude,  and  the  scrutinizing
inquiry  which  has  been  so  often  directed  to  every  object  of  the  place,  that
these  antiquities  have  hitherto  escaped  notice."  Page  548.  Strange
indeed  it  would  have  been ;  for  they  must  have  been  seen  by  every  pil-
grim visiting  Jerusalem ;  and  even  Dr  Clarke  himself  suggests  that
Sandys  may  allude  to  them  in  speaking  of  "  divers  sepulchres  "  in  this
part  near  the  Aceldama;  Sandys'  Travels,  Lond.  1655.  p.  145.  But  had
he  looked  further,  he  would  have  found  that  other  travellers  have  men-
tioned these  sepulchres  repeatedly.  They  have  not  described  tliem  in-
deed ;  for  that  was  not  the  fashion  of  the  early  pilgrims.  Nor  indeed  was
there  anything  about  them  deserving  of  special  remark,  except  the  in-
scriptions; and  these  Dr  Clarke  has  the  merit  of  being  the  first  to  copy.

610

NOTES.

[xxrx.

The  following  are  some  of  the  writers  who  mention  these  tombs.
Edrisi  in  the  twelfth  century,  in  speaking  of  the  Aceldama,  says,  that
"  there  are  near  it  numerous  dwellings  hewn  in  the  rock  and  inhabited  by
hermits;"  ed.  Jaubert.  p.  345.  Sir  John  Maundeville  speaks  here  too
of  "  manye  Oratories,  Chapelles,  and  Hermytages,  where  Hermytes
weren  wont  to  duelle;"  p.  93.  Lond.  1839.  In  the  same  (fourteenth)
century,  Ludolph  de  Suchem  likewise  mentions  "  the  many  dwellings  of
hermits,  now  forsaken  and  uninhabited;"  p.  85.  Reissb.  p.  847.  In
A.  D.  1483  Felix  Fabri  describes  them  more  particularly  as  "  ancient
Jewish  sepulchres,"  which  he  often  visited  and  entered  alone ;  though
some  of  them  were  "so  deep,  that  he  never  ventured  to  the  end  of  them
for  fear  of  losing  himself  in  the  dark."  They  had  formerly,  he  says,
been  inhabited  by  the  Greek  monks.  Reissb.  p.  256.  But  to  come
down  later;  Pococke  in  A.  D.  1738,  after  describing  the  Aceldama  and
the  tombs  around  it,  speaks  of  the  hill  of  Evil  Counsel  or  villa  of  Caia-
phas,  and  then  remarks :  "  I  saw  several  other  sepulchral  grottos  as  I
descended  from  this  place  into  the  vale  that  is  to  the  west  of  the  city ;"
Descr.  of  the  East  II.  i.  p.  25. — All  this  is  sufficient  to  show  that  Dr
Clarke's  "  discovery  "  had  been  at  least  spoken  of  more  than  six  centuries
before  his  day ;  to  say  nothing  of  the  language  of  Antoninus  Martyr,
who  also  mentions  the  cells  of  anchorites  near  Aceldama.

Note  XXIX.  Page  363,  364.

Tomb  of  Helena.  Pansanias.  The  following  is  the  text  of  Pau-
sanias ;  Arcadia,  i.  e.  Lib.  VIII.  c.  16,  'E/3paiois  "EXivrjs  yvvatKos
CTTi^wptas  Ta<^os  tcrriv  ev  TrdXet  2oXv/xois,  ■^i'  es  tBa(f>os  KaTc'/JaXcv  6  'Pw-
/^aiW  jSacrtXei's "  fJUfxri^avriTai  Se  ev  t<3  ri^M  rr]v  ^vpav  6/x.ot(i)s  rravra
ovcrav  t(3  t6.<^<^  XiSCvrjv,  /j-t]  irpoTtpov  eaavoiyfcr.^at  iTpXv  av  rjfjifpav  re  det
Koi  wpav  TO  £TOs  eTraydyr]  tjjv  aur^v  •  Tore  B(  vtto  /jlovov  rov  p.rj'^avi^-
fjLaTO<;  avoix^iica,  koX  ov  ttoXv  eTTLO^ovcra  crvveKXelcrSr]  St'  oXi'yr/s  •  rovrov
[x.€v  Br)  ovToy-  t6v  Be  aXXov  )(p6vov  dvol$aL  TTfipw/xevo';,  avoL^as  fJ-tv  ovk  av,
Kara^ei?  Be  avrrjv  Trportpov  /iia^o/xevos.  "  Et  apud  Hebraeos  in  Solymo-
rum  urbe,  quam  Romanorum  Imperator  funditus  excidit,  Helenae  indi-
genae  mulieris  sepulchrum  [miri  operis]  eSt ;  in  eo  enim  ostium  fabrica-
tuna  est  e  marmore,  uti  ceterae  sepulchri  partes ;  id  anni  stato  die,  atque
hora,  occulto  machinae  cujusdam  motu  aperitur ;  ueque  ita  multo  post
occluditur.  Quod  si  alio  tempore  aperire  conatus  fueris,  efifringas  faei-
lius,  quam  ulla  vi  recludas." — This  passage,  I  believe,  was  first  brought
into  notice  by  Valesiusin  his  Notes  on  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  lib.  II.  c.  12.

Carelessness  of  Writers.  The  discussions  of  Pococke,  Chateau-
briand, and  Dr  Clarke,  respecting  the  tomb  of  Helena,  exhibit  a
curious  instance  of  careless  second-hand  citation.  Josephus,  as  we
have  seen,  describes  the  sepulchre  as  having  had  three  pyramids;  and
Zuallart  in  A.  D.  1586  gives  the  first  modern  account  of  it  in  its
present  state.  At  that  time  the  Jesuit  Villalpandus  was  preparing  at
Rome  his  laborious  work  :  Apparatus  Urhis  ac  Templi  Hierosolymi-
iani,  which  forms  the  third  volume  of  Pradi  et  Villalp.  in  Ezech.  Ex-
planationes,  etc.    III.  Tomi,  fol.  Romac  1594-1G04.   In  this  work  he

xxrx.]

TOMB  OF  HELENA.

6%

speaks  of  the  supposed  Tombs  of  the  Kings,  and  quotes  the  description
of  Zuallart ;  Viagg.  3.  c.  16.  Thus  far  all  is  well  enough.  But  Quares-
mius,  a  few  years  later,  in  quoting  Villalpandus,  makes  him  (not  Jose-
phus)  speak  here  of  pyramids.  Quaresm.  Elucid.  II.  p.  730.  Here
is  the  first  lapsus  ;  and  this  Pococke  has  contrived  to  increase,  by  saying,
unaccountably,  that  "  Villalpandus,  describing  them  as  sepulchres  of  the
kings,  takes  notice  of  one  pyramid  standing  over  them  in  his  time  ;  the
other  two  probably  having  been  destroyed,  as  the  third  has  been  taken
away  since  his  time ;  "  Descr.  of  the  East,  II.  i.  p.  20.  This  could  have
come  only  from  a  careless  misapprehension  of  Quaresmius.  Then  comes
Chateaubriand,  repeating  apparently  the  words  of  Pococke :  "  Ce  mo-
nument souterrain  6toit  annonce  au  dehors  par  trois  pyramides,  dont  une
existait  encore  du  temps  de  Villalpandus ;"  Itin.  II.  p.  81.  Par.  1837.  Dr
Clarke  improves  upon  this  still  farther  ;  "  The  circumstance  of  his  ( Jose-
phus')  allusion  to  the  pyramids  at  the  sepulchre  of  Helena,  one  of  which,
actually  seen  by  Villalpandus,  having  since  disappeared,  and  thereby
warranted  the  probable  annihilation  of  the  other  two,  is  deemed  sufficient
by  Pococke  to  identify  the  place  alluded  to  by  the  Jewish  historian;"
Travels,  etc.  4to.  Part  II.  Vol.  I.  p.  597.  This  then  is  a  version  from
Pococke,  and  converts  Father  Villalpandus  at  once  into  an  oriental  travel-
ler !  After  all  this,  one  would  hardly  expect  to  find,  that  neither  Villal-
pandus, nor  his  voucher  Zuallart,  nor  any  other  traveller  of  that  or  a  pre-
vious age,  says  one  word  of  any  pyramid  or  pyramids  in  connection  with
this  spot.   Yet  such  is  the  naked  truth.

But  one  blunder  was  not  enough  for  Chateaubriand;  and  therefore
he  contrives  to  commit  another  still  more  gross,  which  has  come  down
through  all  the  editions  of  his  Itinerary  to  the  present  day.  Speaking
of  these  same  tombs,  he  says  :  "  Arculfe  {apud  Adamn.)  qui  les  a  decrits
avee  une  grande  exactitude,  {Sepulchra  sunt  in  naturali  collis  rupe,  etc.)
avoit  vu  des  ossements  dans  les  cercueils.  Plusieurs  siecles  apres,  Vil-
lamont  y  trouva  pareillement  des  cendies,  qu'on  y  cherche  vainement
aujourd'hui ;"  Itin.  Par.  1887,  Tom.  II.  p.  81.  The  work  of  Adamna-
nus  was  written  about  A.  D.  697 ;  Villamont  travelled  in  A.  D.  1589.
When  I  first  read  the  above  passage  I  was  gratified  to  find  that  this  se-
pulchre could  be  traced  back  so  far ;  but  on  turning  to  the  work  of
Adamnanus,  which  is  very  brief,  I  sought  in  vain  for  the  quotation.
Recollecting  however  such  a  passage  somewhere,  I  turned  to  the  folios  of
Quaresmius,  and  there  found  the  description  beginning  with  :  Sepulchra
sunt  in  naturali  collis  rupe,  etc.  and  the  mention  of  the  bones,  given
as  the  result  of  his  own  personal  observation  ;  Elucid.  Terrae  Sanct.  II.
p.  730.  Thus  instead  of  an  alleged  notice  out  of  the  seventh  century,
we  are  furnished  with  one  out  of  the  seventeenth ;  a  difference  of  more
than  nine  hundred  years.  Nor  did  this  blunder  arise  from  a  mere  slip
of  the  pen ;  as  is  shown  by  the  mention  of  Villamont  "  plusieurs  siecles
apr^s;"  this  traveller  having  been  earlier  than  Quaresmius.

C

^612

NOTES.

[XXX.

Note  XXX.— Pages  510,  513,  515,  539.

The  Dead  Sea.  Jordan.  Lake  of  Tiberias.  The  object  of  this  note
is  to  exhibit  in  one  view  the  results  of  measurements,  made  chiefly  by  the
United  States  Expedition  in  1848,  for  determining  the  depth,  depression,
and  extent  of  the  Dead  Sea ;  as  also  the  similar  measurements  relating
to  the  Jordan  and  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.

In  connection  with  the  English  military  survey  of  Palestine  in  1841,
Lieutenant  Symonds  was  able,  by  a  series  of  vertical  angles,  to  deter-
mine the  level  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  Lake  of  Tiberias ;  making  the  neces-
sary allowances  for  refraction  and  curvature.  The  result  gave  1312.2
English  feet  for  the  depression  of  the  Dead  Sea;  and  328.1  feet  for  that
of  the  upper  lake.  See  Journal  of  the  R.  Geogr.  Soc.  for  1843.  p.  xi,
Ixxiv;  comp.  1842,  p.  Ix,  Ixi.    Biblioth.  Sac.  1848,  p.  399.

As  there  seemed  to  be  a  possible  element  of  error  in  these  measure-
ments, (that  of  the  upper  lake  having  also  been  at  first  reported  at  84
feet;  see  Biblioth.  Sac.  ibid.)  I  ventured  to  suggest  to  the  ofi&cers  of
the  United  States  Expedition,  on  their  departure  for  Palestine,  the  desira-
bleness of  having  the  question  settled  by  a  regular  engineer's  survey  and
level.  Such  a  level  was  accordingly  carried  by  them  from  'Ain  Terabeh
on  the  Dead  Sea,  by  way  of  Mar  Saba  to  Jerusalem,  and  thence  to  Yafa.

They  likewise  took  many  soundings  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  are
inserted  in  their  maps.  The  bottom  along  the  middle  was  found  to  be  a
deep  valley  or  plain.  They  determined  also  the  latitude  of  various
points.  The  results  were  first  fully  published,  together  with  the  geolo-
gical report  of  Dr  Anderson,  in  the  Official  Eeport  of  the  Dead  Sea
Expedition,  1852,  4to. — In  the  following  statements,  the  references  are
to  the  pages  of  that  volume,  and  to  the  transverse  Section  opposite  p.  43.

I.  Soundings.

Greatest  depth  of  the  Dead  Sea,  opposite  'Ain  Terabeh,

p.  43  and  Sect   1308.

II.  Results  of  the  Level.

Depression  of  the  Dead  Sea  below  the  Mediterranean,

p.  43  and  Sect   1316.7

"          by  Barometer,  p.  32   1234.6

Height  of  the  Pass  back  of  'Ain  Terabeh,  p.  43.     .       .  1305.75

Elevation  of  Mar  Saba  above  the  Mediterranean,  Sect.  .  587.8

"  "  above  the  Dead  Sea.  .  .  .  1904.5
Elevation  of  Jerusalem  above  the  Mediterranean,  p.  43

and  Sect  -  2610.5

"          above  the  Dead  Sea,  ibid.       .       .       .  3927.24

Note. — It  is  a  singular  coincidence,  that  the  depression  and  depth  of  the  Dead  Sea
are  very  nearly  equal,  about  1300  feet ;  and  also  that  the  elevation  of  Jerasiilem  above
the  Mediterranean  and  the  Dead  Sea,  is  in  each  case  a  multiple  of  the  same  number.

XXX.]  BEAD  SEA,  JORDAN,  LAKE  OF  TIBERIAS.

613

III.  Latitudes,  etc:  p.  68.

North  end  of  Dead  Sea,  Map,  about  .  .  31°  46'  20"  N.
South  end  "     "      "     «'        «  .       .  31©    g'  20"  "

Difference,  length  of  Dead  Sea,        ...  40'
or  40  geographical  miles.

General  breadth  of  do.  9  to  9|  geographical  miles.

North  end  of  Lake  of  Tiberias,  p.  68.  .  .  32°  53'  87"  N
South  end      "  "        "    .      .      .    32°  42'  30"  "

Difference,  length  of  Lake  of  Tiberias,      .       .          11'  7"
or  about  11 J  geographical  miles.

South  end  cJf  Lake  of  Tiberias,        .       .       .32°  42'  30"

North  end  of  Dead  Sea,  31°  46'  20"

Difference,  distance  between  the  two  lakes,        ,  56'  10"

or  56 1  geographical  miles.

IV.  With  the  Barometer.

Depression  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  viz.

United  States  Expedition,  p.  15,  .  .  .  653.3
Bertou  (Bull,  de  la  Soc.  Geogr.  Oct.  1839,

p.  146,)   756.

Wildenbruch  (Berl.  Monathsb.  1845,  IILp.

271  and  Profile),  average  793.3  Par.   .       .  833.

3)2242.3

Mean,        .  747.4

V.  Level  of  Jordan  Valley.

Length  of  valley  between  the  lakes,  as  above,  .        561  G.M.

Difference  of  level  in  the  two  lakes,  viz.

United  States  Expedition,  1316.7— 653.3  =       663.4  Feet

Average,                      1316.7—747.4  =       569.3  "

«

Descent  of  the  Jordan  in  each  mile,  viz.

According  to  United  States  Expedition,  about  11.8  "

Mean,  as  above,  10.1  "

Note. — According  to  the  results  of  Lieut.  Symonds,  the  difference  of  level  between
the  two  lakes  was  984.1  Engl,  feet ;  and  the  descent  of  the  Jordan  in  each  mile  nearest
1 7.2  feet.  The  barometrical  measurements  above  given  reduce  this  by  more  than  one
third  ;  and  the  swift  current  and  many  strong  rapids  of  the  Jordan  may  account  for  the
rest.  Still,  an  engineer's Jevel  between  the  lake  of  Tiberias  and  the  Mediterranean
remains  a  de^deratum  in  physical  geography.  See  an  article  on  the  general  subject  by
the  author,  Biblioth.  Sac.  18-18,  p.  397  sq.

VOL.  I.  52

614

NOTES.

[XXX.

VI.  Analysis  of  the  Dead  Sea  Water. — Off.  Rep.  pp.  73,  204.

This  analysis  was  made  by  Prof.  Booth  of  Philadelphia,  with  water
drawn  up  from  a  depth  of  185  fathoms  or  1110  feet.

Specific  gravity  at  60°  1.22742

Chloride  of  magnesium,
"       "  calcium,
"       "  sodium,  .
"       "  potassium,

Bromide  of  potassium,

Sulphate  of  lime,

Water,

145.8971
31.0746
78.5537
6.5860
1.3741
0.7012

264.1867
735.8133

1000.0000

End  of  Vol.  I.

7571CE

89-85-86  3?1BB  MS

Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Libraries

1  1012

01283  6666

DATE  DUE

HIGHSMITH  #45115

