SOURCE: https://archive.org/download/domesticlifeinp01rogegoog/domesticlifeinp01rogegoog_djvu.txt

Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE,

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE,

LONDON :

R, CLAY, SON, AND TAYLOK, VUINTFRS.

BREAD STREET H(LI^

DOMESTIC LIFE

IN

PALESTINE.

BY

MARY ELIZA EOGEES.

LONDON:
BELL AND DALDT, 186, FLEET STREET.

1862.

VS//Z

^7^

TO

MY BROTHER,

EDWAED THOMAS EOGEES,

H.B.M/g( consul at DAMASCUS,

IN REMEMBRANCE OF THE HAPPY YEARS
WHICH I SPENT WITH HIM IN PALESTINE,
I DEDICATE THIS VOLUME.

i

PREFACE.

While lesiding in Palestine, I was placed in circum-
stances which gave me unusual facilities for observing the '
inner phases of Oriental Domestic life.

I mingled freely with the people, of all creeds and
classes, and daily became better acquainted with their
habits and modes of thought.

The women especially interested me, an^ I gleaned many
facts concerning them, which have never hitherto been
published, and probably have never been collected.

The pleasure which my Notes and Journal afforded 1;o
members of my home circle, on my return to England, led
me to think that possibly my countrymen would like to
gain a further insight into the mysteries of Eastern life.
Hence it was that I resolved to publish this volume.

In compiliDg it, I have avoided as much as possible
those subjects with which the public are already familiar.
Descriptions of well-known places are only given when
they are necessary to form an introduction or background
to those scenes of real life which I have attempted to
pourtray.

VUl

PKEPACE.

To avoid complication, I speak of the people of Palestine
generally as Arabs ; for though they are a mixed race, they
aU call themselves " Arabs," or ^ sons of the Arabs," and
Arabic is their mother-tongue. I classify them only, ac-
cording to their creeds, but I may here mention, that the
Christians of the land are said to be of pure Syrian origin,
while the Moslems are chiefly descended from the Arabians
who settled in the towns and villages of Syria and Palestine
in the seventh and eighth centuries.

21, SoHO Square, London.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

From London to the Levant — Yftfa, the ancient Joppa, in sight—The
Quarantine Boat — Landing in Palestine— The Quarantine Station —
Breakfeist in T&fa — Arab Ladies' Toilette — Salutations and Kisses— Sit
Leah, and her First-bom Son — Fruit Gardens of Yfiia — Guest Chamber
at Bamleh — Lepers— The Hill Country of Judaea—" Village of Grapes "
— " Fountain of Birds"— Jewish Builders and Greek Gardeners — First
Sight of Jemsalem-^-Arrival at the TaUbeyeh—Tent Life, and the Con-
sul's Children 1—23

CHAPTER II.

Jerusalem — Church of the Knights of St. John— Bishop Gobat's Encamp-
ment— Holman Hunt's Goat — Sunday on Mount Zion — Bazaars and
Shopkeepers— Girls of Bethany and Siloam — A Madman — Moresque
Building — View from the Seraglio — European Homes in Jerusalem—
A Whirlwind at Night — The Convent of the Cross —Mosaic Pave-
ment 24^-38

CHAPTER IIL

Learning Arabic— Carriage Roads — Ride to Bethlehem, %.e. Beit Lahm —
The Convent and its Shrines — Population of Beit Lahm— The Carver of
Beit Lahm— His Wife and Child— The Veil of Ruth—" The Mother of
Joseph" — Description of House and Furniture— Note on Mark ii —
The Fields of Boaz— Milk Grotto Miracles — Girls of Beit Lahm —
Bedouins on the move— The Gardens of Solomon— The Cottage in the
Valley — The Reservoir— Aqueducts and Chariot-roads — Reeds — Remedy
for Mosquito Bites . . ^ 39—57

CHAPTER IV.

Rainbows and Bee-catchers— Philip's Fountain— A Runaway Horse-
Katrine, and her Delusions — Start for "EkifA — The little Lame Girl of
Kubd,b— Siesta at Ramleh— The Abyssinian Slave— The Bedouin's Song
to his Camel— Sunday at Y&fe* — " There cometh a Shower" — Exhibition
of a Performing Goat— Circumcision— Making Bread— Scene in an Arab
Sailing-boat— The Custom-house at TantClra— Women of Tantiirar—
Ruins of Dora and Athlite— A Wedding Party— Cradles— " Locusts and
Wild Honey"—The Monks of Mount Carmel—Hld& . . . 58-82

X CONTENTS.

CHAPTBR V.

GreetmgB at the Gate, at Night— Onr Houae and SenrantB— The Poor
Widow*8 Petition— People of Hii&— Siege of Hlki&— Betieat of the
Ttrehites— Help from an English Slup— A Fake Alann— Wedding at
the Greek Church—Wedding Procession— Songs and Dances— Going
forth to Meet the Bridegroom, at Ni^t— Professional Bride-dresaers—
Toikiah Baths— Kohl and Henna— Angehna and the Cleigy of Hlii&—
Denunciation of Blade Lace Mittens— The Bazaar, (m a Night of Be-
joidng— Jane Eyre, and Aiab Stoiy-tellers — ^An Important Question —
Tassin Agha, and his two Wives— Mohammed Bek, and his Wife
Miriam— Sheik Abdallah, and lus aev^ Wives— << The Holder of the
Keys'* — A Hint to Polygamists — ^A Divination Dictionaiy, or Dream-
hook— My Dream Interpreted — Hannah and Penninah— A Maiket
Garden— African Maniac in the Cemetery 83—109

CHAPTER VI.

To Nawreth, i.e. Nftsiiah— The River Kishon— '< Dan^tera of Sound"—
A Village Oven— The Birtiiplace of Saleh's Mare— Hiddm Treasures
and Treasure-trove— Necr(»nancy and dairvoyants — Saleh's little Sister
—Congregation at the Latin Church— Costumes of the People of N^sirah
— R^ntation of N&sinkh— Willow-pattern Cheese Plates : a Hint to
Decuratois— Mount Tabor— Eiinna the Heimit, and ** his Man Friday "
—Reeds and Ink-honis- The Cnisades— Stephani's Guest Chamber-
Dances, Songs, and Supper— The Greek and Latin deigy— Castle of
She& 'Omer— The Governor's Hareem — ^Lament of the Senior Wife —
Native Sdiools— Jewish Synagogue— The Olive Harvest— Cotton Fields
in the Plain of'Akka-Productiveness of the Plain . . . 11(K— 142

CHAPTER Vn.

** New Brooms sweep Clean "—Death at Midni^t— The Moslem Bier —
Armenian Remedies for Cholera— Note on the '^ Eariy and Latter Run "
Panic in Hiu&— '' The Yellow Wind"— Suleiman the Taifor— Quaran-
tine at the Convent — ^A Dream, and its Consequences — '* Imps of the
Yellow Wind"— Rain— Our New House— Ccmtents of tiie Storeroom-
Reverence for Bread— ^Death of Abiahlm— Funeral Procession— The
Mother's Grief and Death— Funeral Service— The Widowor Ehalil, and
his young finde— Elias Sakhali— Government of Syria— Death of Elias
— ^The Widow and her Children— Songs and lamentations for the Dead
— ^The Sword Dance— Funeral Orations 143 — 167

CHAPTER Vm.

Sparrows on the House-tops — Gras^grown Roofo— Fotoium Spinosom,
the Crown of Thorns— Hvvest on the House-tops —My Bedouin Visit(»rs
—Katrine Sakhali and her Cousin— The White Mare and the Si^pUie
Bead— Our Egyptian Groom M<^iammed— The Wandering HerdsoMD—
Bedouin Depredations — The Horse-guards of Galike— 8u]^per with

CONTENTS. XI

Salihh Agha — Salihh Agha's little Son — Wrestling-— A Home at Shefa
'Omer— Women at the Bake-house — Bedouin Eye-sight — A Gazelle
Hunt — Moslem and Christian Prayers at Sunset — Persecution of Jews
— Characteristics of Arah Children — My Moslem Teacher and his Ex-
planation of the Rosary — A Moslem Free-thinker— Christening of Jules
Aumann— F6te at the French Consulate— The African Foot Messenger
— Saleh Bek*s Good-hye 143—196

•

CHAPTER IX.

Katrine and her Scapulary— Preparations for a Journey— A Bedouin
Encampment — Bedouin Women — Bedouin Bread-making — Moslem
Villages — Seeking a Night's Lodging— Women of Kefr K&ra — The
Blind Man's Questions— Conjecture Concerning "the Manger" and
" the Nativity" — Morning Visitors — ^An Encampment of Gipsies —
Jugglery and Gymnastics — Government of Nablus — Arrabeh — The
Divan — The Hareem— Helweh the Youngest Wife — ^Dinner ; Starch and
Conserve of Roses — Curious Inquiries — ^A Marriage Portion — Songs of
Rejoicing— Discussion about the Queen of England — ^A War Song— A
Mother and her Infant Son — Preparation for a Nighf s Rest in the
Hareem — The Lord's Prayer and the Moslem Women— Moslem Prayers
and Salutations — Scenes at Midnight in the Hareem — Morning
Visitors 196—235

CHAPTER X.

From Arrabeh to Sentb:— Castle of SenClr— Abrahlm Jerrar's Portrait—
The Hareem —Approach of Turkish Cavalry — Hostilities Prevented —
To Nablfts— A Price for the Head of Abrahlm — Marriage among the
Samaritans — SellLmeh the Aged Priest, and the Samaritan Synagogue —
Home of Habtb and Zora — Anithe the Betrothed— Samaritan Laws
and Customs— The Priesthood — The Passover — ^.Sanaaritan Women —
Character of the Samaritans— Jacob esh Shellabi — ^Letter from Priest
Amran — The Widow and her Son — The Schoolmaster in search of a
Wife— The Betrothal- Protestants of Nablfis— The Bazaars— Sheik
Mdssa — ^Visit to the Governor of Nabliis — Test for Building Stone —
Sheik Mfissa's Ideas about Wisdom and Folly — Jacob's Well— Search
for a Bible at the Bottom of the Well — Joseph's Tomb— False Alarm —
Little Zahra and the Violets — Oriental Enjoyments— Brothers and
Sisters Ibrahim Pasha and the Woman of Sefurieh— Wit Rewarded —
Dinner with D. Tannoos — The Women's Apartments . . . 236—275

CHAPTER XI.

To Jerusalem — Priest Amratt and the Greek Catholic — My Escort — A
Dangerous Road — Valley of Figs— Darkness— The Lost Track — ^Alone
on the Hill-top^Arrival at Jerusalem at Midnight— Jerusalem in the
Spring — ^Rain — Flowing of the Kedron — En Rpgel— Course of the
Kedron— Easter—Birth of the Imperial Prince of France Proclaimed—
Fdte at the French Consulate— Outbreak at Nabl{Ls— Attack on the

XU CONTENTS.

Christians — Rescae of Rev. S. Lyde — Celebration of Peace— Sham Fight
— Sieges of Jerusalem — The Holy Fire— Greek and Armenian Pilgrims
—"Bishop of the Fire"— Fight of the Fanatics— Turkish Soldiers -
Confessions of a Greek Priest — Truth — Fire-worshippers . . 276 — 306

CHAPTER XII.

Peasant Girls — Harvest of Roses — Caverns — Rules for the Observance of
Ramadan — Sir M. Montefiore's Schools for 'Jewesses— " Sale by the
Broken Group" — Urt&s— Peter Meshullam— An Arab Encampment —
Dar el Benftt, the House of Girls— Solomon's Hareem — Queen's Birth-
day—My Home on Mount Olivet— The Sheik of El Tur-His Wives
and Children — A Moslem Funeral— Tombs of the Prophets— Skirmishes
on Olivet— Farewell F§te at Urt&s 307—336

CHAPTER XIII.

Abu Ghaush — Art and Poetry of the Modem Arabs — Education of
Native Girls— Y&fe. — The Sea-shore and the Sanctuary — Moslem call to
Prayer — ^Edwin Arnold— Melon Harvest — Ruins of Caesarea- Wreck of
an Arab Boat— Hebrew Boy adopted by Bedouins — Stone Quarries —
Prayers at a Moslem Village — Village Supper— A Piano at H&ifa— My
Moslem Friends from Arrabeh — Saleh Bek and his Children — Home of
the Gardener's Daughter— Chess — New Ideas in Saleh Bek's Hareem —
Helweh's Questions— Jews— An Earthquake— Widow and her Children
— Day of Ill-luck — Feast of Sainte Barbe— Force of. Custom— Helweh
and her First-bom Child — Saleh Bek's Perplexities about the Education
of his Daughters — Thoughts about Moslem Women— Missionaries— The
Day of Congratulation— Society for the Difiusion of Useful Knowledge
— Yassln Agha's Petition and Proposal 337 — 373

CHAPTER XIV.

The Queen's iBirthday — Hafeefee in her New Home — Camiella and her
African Attendant— Women of Damascus contrasted with the Women
of H&ifa — Bastreena — ^Winter at Jerasalem— Surreya Pasha — Houses of
Jerasalem Numbered — Russian Influence in Palestine — Dr. Levisohn
and the Samaritan Pentateuch— Prince Alfred — Refugees from Arrabeh
— ^Appeal for Protection— "Dakhal"— Prisoners from Arrabeh — The
Govemor's Demand for my Prot6g6s — His Forbearance — The Boys taken
Prisoners and Conveyed to 'Akka— Farewell to Hldfa— Miss Bremer —
Russian Steamer— F^te of the Grand Duke Constantino — The Bishop's
Benediction— Feast for the Pilgrims— The S. S. Demetrius — Jew of
Aleppo— Collision— Rabbi Shaayea'a Timidity—" Hallo, Jack ! "—The
Captain and Solomon— Shaayea "Missing" — Fraitless Search for Shaayea
—Official Inquiry 374—410

Note. — Hareem. The variation in the spelling of this word, in the following pages, is
the result of a mistake. Harim and harem better represent the sound of the word as it
is pronounced throughout Syria.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

CHAPTEE I.

THE good byes and farewell greetings on board the
Rhine, at London Bridge, on the night of the 14th of
June, 1855, need not be recorded here. At midnight the tide
was favourable, the bell rang, the steam was up, lingering
friends hurried away, and I found myself alone with my
brother. He had been enjoying a few months' leave of
absence in England, after having spent more than six
years in consular service in Syria^ and I had gladly con-
sented to accompany him, on his return to his official
duties. We landed at Boulogne the next day, and arrived
at Marseilles, in time to embark by the Egyptus, on the
morning of the 21st of June. We passed through the
Straits of Bonifacio on the 22d, at mid-day; and on Sun-
day, the 24th, spent a few hours ashore at Malta. On
Thursday morning (the 28th) we landed at Alexandria,
and after seeing Said Pasha's palace, Cleopatra's needle,
and Pompey's pillar, went on board the Tagey on the
evening of the 29th.

It was crowded with passengers, Greeks, Syrians, Turks,
and Jews, who were leaving Alexandria on account of the
outbreak of cholera there. The sunset gun flashed from
the fort as the steamer glided out of the harbour.

We remained on deck till a late hour, listening to the
animated songs of the Greek sailors, who were celebrating

B

2 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

the festival of their patron saint, Paul The deck passen-
gers were trying to make themselves comfortable for the
night, and soon men, women, and children, Moslems, Chris-
tians, and Jews, wrapped up closely in carpets, cloaks, and
wadded quilts, looked like gigantic chrysalises crowded
together in the moonlight.

We were in the cosy little deck saloon soon after dawn
on the following day; and, when the sailors came to wash
the decks, I was sorry to see the motley crowd of sleepers
disturbed, and pushed hither and thither as they tried to
save themselves and their baggage from saturation.

We watched the sun rise out of the sea, which was sud-
denly changed from grey to gold, while the lead-coloured
sky was crimsoned ; but the land I was longing to see was
not in sight.

The next morning, July the 1st, I was roused by the
joyful news that we were approaching the shore, and was
soon on deck, looking with strange delight and emotion
over the blue sea to the coast of Palestine, stretching far
away north and south in low undulating lines. The
picturesque walled town of Yafa (the ancient Joppa) was
immediately before me, with its white stone houses built
down to the water's edge, and rising one above another on
a rounded hill sloping to the sea.

My brother said, " Look far into the east, a little towards
the south, where the sun has just risen ; those distant hills
which are now almost lost in bright mist are the hills of
Judea, Uhe hills round about Jerusalem,' and from their
summits you wiU. have the first view of the Holy City.
They are separated from these low coast hills by the broad
fertile plains of Sharon and Philistia." He reminded me
how the pines and cedars of Lebanon were brought "m
Jlotes hy sea to Joppa^' and thence carried up to Jerusalem,
for the building of the Temple.

This ancient port, with its bustling quay, its large con-
vents, tall minarets, palm-trees, and extensive gardens, is
the only cheerful and animated spot on the somewhat
monotonous coast, which runs in an almost unbroken line

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 3

from the bold headland of Mount Carmel, about fifty miles
north, to the ruins of Gaza, forty miles south.

We were soon at anchor just outside a semicircular belt
of rocks, Fome of which rose dark and high out of the
water, while others had sunk beneath its surface and were
only indicated by the dashing of the surf over them. This
rocky belt stands like a barrier in front of the town, and
forms a natural harbour of about fifty feet in width, but it
is only entered by small boats, and affords no protection in
bad weather. Tradition connects the names of Perseus
and Andromeda with these rugged rocks. Two Austrian
war steamers were at anchor near to us ; they were waiting
the pleasure of the Archduke Maximilian and his suite,
who were then in Jerusalem. A few merchant vessels,
Greek and French, were also to be seen, and little Arab
boats were plying to and fro.

A quarantine boat, containing an oflBcer and garde de
sante, was towed alongside, and baskets of delicious fruits
were taken on board, oranges, apricots, lemons, &c. A
beautiful branch of an orange-tree, covered with glossy
leaves and laden with ripe iruit, was handed to me. It
was a difficult matter to get into the little quarantine boat
destined to convey us to the shore, for the breeze was fresh,
and a heavy swell disturbed the sea, and the Arab sailors
in the towing boat would not touch the boat they were
employed to tow, even to render necessary assistance, lest
they should be compromised and imprisoned in the quaran-
tine station. After many vain attempts, we, yith two
Franciscan monks, and our baggage, were lowered clumsily
into the clumsy boat, and narrowly escaped a fall into
the sea ; and when free from the TagCy we were dragged
along boisterougly. The little towing boat was quite
hidden from us now and then, as it bounded over a wave,
leaving us on the other side of it. As we approached
the belt of rocks, I felt that it was impossible to escape
being dashed to pieces, and while steering through the
narrow pass I was silent with fear ; but the seeming danger
was soon over ; within the belt the water was smooth as a

b2

4 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

lake, and once more I looked with delight on the scenes
around me. There are two openings in the line of rocks ;
one towards the north and one due west. "We had entered
at the latter ; I felt the boat grating on the rocks beneath us.

It was now half-past eight, and the quays were already
crowded with people, mostly in the brilliant native cos-
tumes ; but there were a few Franks in the usual Levantine
dress, which is white from head to foot. Rags were waving
from the consulates and from the convents, as well as from
the ships, for it was Sunday, and the place had quite a
holiday appearance.

We passed in front of the town, towards the quarantine
station, which is an isolated building, a little distance be-
yond the walls on the southern side.

Friendly voices from the shore welcomed my brother,
in Arabic, Italian, French, and EnglisL When we arrived
opposite to our destination, the boat was dragged towards
the sands, and the garde de santi, who wore only a coarse
shirt and a girdle, jumped knee deep into the water, caught
me in his strong arms, and ran splashing through the sandy
sea, and when we came to land still ran on, and would
not release me till he put me in charge of another garde, at
the foot of the rude steps, leading up the sandy cliff, to the
quarantine station. Then he hastened back to the boat for
my fellow-travellers, carrying them one after the other to
terra Jirma.

I had wondered how I should feel on first landing in
Palestine, but this proceeding quite took the romance out
of the event. I almost forgot I was in the Holy Land,
while fully realizing the fact of being a prisoner. As soon
as my brother and the monks joined me, we were led
up the steps, to a door, which admitted us to a square en-
closure, formed of low flat-roofed buildings of stone, in a
dilapidated state ; in the centre of the square, a wooden
shed covers a deep well, and tall, large-leaved, thriving
mulberry-trees throw a thick rand welcome shade round it.
The station was unusually full, owing to the outbreak of
cholera in Egypt.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE 5

Our fellow-travellers, the Franciscans, were quartered
on some ecclesiastical pilgrims, and lodged eight in one
room.

The only chamber unoccupied opened into a little court-
yard in the left-hand comer of the square, and that was
allotted to us. It was by no means a pleasant lodging, but
we determined to make the best of it. It was about
twelve feet square ; the floor was of stone ; the walls white-
washed ; and the door, which was formed of rough planks,
had no fastening inside ; a casemented window, with half
the glass out, looked towards the north, and showed us the
blue sea, the rocky shore, and the southern wall of YSfa
with its curious profile of flat-roofed houses, rising step by
step one above the other, with here and there a minaret or
a palm-tree, and groups of children were playing under the
trees near to us ; so the prospect without somewhat com-
pensated for the desolate picture within.

There was nothing in the room but our luggage, our
garde de santS, with his long stick, thousands of flies, an
ant's nest, and ourselves.

I sat in the narrow window seat, while my brother threw
himself on the portmanteaus and boxes ; for some minutes
we could only laugh at each other, and at the ridiculous
position we were placed in ; however, if we had not been
in excellent health and good spirits, it would have been a
serious matter.

Fortunately my brother was no stranger there, so help
was at hand. Mr. Kayat, the English Consul (a native of
Syria), sent his dragoman, who soon provided us with mat-
ting, mattresses, and lehaflfs (i e. wadded quilts), and we
made a sort of impromptu divan.

Soon afterwards our kind friend, Mr. Graham, of Jeru-
salem, came to see us ; he stood outside the window in the
presence of the garde^ who watched us ; and if our visitor
had touched our hands, he would have been obliged to share
our quarantine lodging. Mr. G. lent us some of his tent
furniture, cooking utensils, &c., and made our abode more
comfortable.

6 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

When we sent to the market for provisions, we had to put
the money in a cup of water to prevent infection, but we
certainly looked more wholesome than any of the dirty little
half-naked messengers who executed our commissions, and
by whose aid we obtained fowls, goat's milk, coffee, rice,
firuit, and vegetables, at a very reasonable rate.

There were two rooms in addition to ours opening into
the courtyard; one was occupied by a party of Moslem
travellers, and the other by the Franciscan pilgrims. The
courtyard was in shade and cooler than the rooms, so with
one accord we all took breakfast there.

The Moslems, after pouring water over their hands
and feet, spread their carpets, prayed, and then sat round
a dish of rice, butter, and tomatoes, putting their hands
together into the dish. They ate rapidly and in silence,
then washed their hands, and smoked tchibouques and
narghiles. The monks, who spoke French, Italian, and
Spanish, invited us to share some of their conserves and
syrups.

When the heat of the day had passed, we were allowed
to take a walk, accompanied by a garde, to prevent our
contact with human beings.

We gladly descended the steps of our prison, and reached
the broad sands ; the sun was going down, tinging the sea
and the sky, and the white walls of Yfi that is at the gate." We
gave the girls a backsheesh, and they gave us their bless-
ings as we rode away.

The men and boys whom we met, or saw working in
the orchards above, or the plains below, wore nothing but
short coarse white shirts, girdled with broad red leather
belts, ornamented with stitching and embroidery. Their
heads were protected and adorned with bright red and
yellow striped shawls, tastefully bound round their tas-
seled tarbouches, the crowns of which were bleached by
the sun. A few of them wore red, pointed, clumsy-looking,
but picturesque boots. Nature, however, provides admirably
for the shoeless, and famishes a hardy and ever-growing
homy case, which is insensible to the sharpness of stones
and thorns, and to the roughness of tl^e stubble-field.

In the valley below, we saw broad fields of green millet
and broom-corn (a strong grass about five or six feet in
height, of which brooms are made), but the wheat and
barley was all cut, and mules and oxen were busy on the
threshing floors.

On the eastern side of this valley the hiUs were un-
cultivated, and on the neglected terraces wild fig-trees,

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 51

evergreen oaks, and thorns grew ; in the breaks between
these hills we had occasional glimpses of the Dead Sea,
calm and blue and bright in the sunshine, and the long
range of Moab beyond ; its channeled and furrowed hills
bounded the view, and met the sky in an almost level line.

The sun was very powerful, for it was the fifth hour
(between ten and eleven o'clock) ; we protected our heads
from sunstroke by winding round our hats long strips of
muslin, after the fashion of turbans, which are the most
suitable head-dresses for hot countries.

We left aU traces of cultivated land presently, and came
to hills which were clothed with thorns and thistles, wild
thyme and sage, except where the scanty soil had been
washed away from the greyish blue slab-like rocks.

As we descended into the valley of Urt§,s, by a pathless
steep, we paused to watch a long line of camels, and a con-
siderable body of Bedouins, who were entering it from a
narrow wady just opposite. They were preceded by three
stiu'dy-looking men mounted on spirited horses, and car-
rying spears about twelve feet long, garnished with tufts of
ostrich feathers.

They were evidently on their way to seek some favour-
able site for a summer encampment, for they were accom-
panied by a large number of women and children, who
rode in clumsy cradles or panniers on the foremost camels,
while the rest were laden with black hair tents and bundles
of tent poles, cooking utensils, water jars, mats, and sacks
of provisions ; goats, sheep, and a few donkeys, brought up
the rear, pausing only to drink at the little shallow pools
of water which rested in natural and stony basins in the
middle of the valley, bordered with fresh green grass and
flowers. The tinkling of the camel bells, and the wild,
plaintive, monotonous song of the women rang in our ears
long after the primitive procession had passed out of our
sight No doubt those wanderers pitched their tents, and
made themselves at home by sunset, near to some stream
or fountain of sweet water : their dusky dwellings up they
quickly rear, and build a village in an hour's space.

e2

52 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINR

When we reached the bottom of the valley, and had
passed a bold projecting and cavemed rock which causes
an abrupt turn in its course, I was startled with delight
and surprise at the picture before us — ^the loveliest I had
seen in the East.

No wonder that Biblical topographists agree in calling
Urt&s the site of the gardens of Solomon, and no wonder
if Solomon selected this valley for his especial retreat,
and made this part of it his pleasure ground. It may have
been more magnificent in his time, when the now fallen
and shattered columns supported stately buildings, and the
terraces were paved with tiie now scattered tesserae ; but it
could not have been more beautiful and refreshing even in
those golden days,' for here the pomegranates still yield
their pleasant fruit, the vine flourishes, the fig-trees put forth
their green figs around the fouiitain of gardens, the well of
living water. Vegetable marrows, cucumbers, melons, and
tomatoes carpet the bed of the valley with their broad
leaves and glossy fruits, and fields of lentils, beans, potatoes,
millet, and patches of golden maize, blossoming tobacco
and sesame in excellent order, proclaim the agricultural
skill of the successor of Solomon ; while higher up in the
valley is a splendid orchard, where peach, apple, pear, and
plum-trees flourish side by side with the more common
fruits of the country, watered by sparkling streams which
intersect the gardens and orchards like silver threads.

"We followed a narrow bridle-path, raised a little above
the bed of the valley. This led us to a solitary stone house,
built up against the abruptly rising hill on the right : here
we dismounted, and were kindly welcomed by its occu-
pants, Mr. MeshuUam and his family, the present culti-
vators and shareholders of this favoured spot. (They are of
Jewish birth, but have become Christians, and are under
British protection.) We rested under an immense fig-tree,
on a divan of rocks and stones, built round its massive
trunk, and covered with carpets and cushions. Opposite
to us was a wide arched portal, or lewan, the approach to
the house ; a wooden locker, and two stone benches or

DOMESTIC LIFE IH PALESTINE. 53

raised seats, covered with mats, occupied its three sides;
for it is used as a summer sitting-room. Above the rude
door leading to the inner rooms were a number of badger-
skins hanging to dry, and some foxes' tails and tusks of
wild boars, trophies of the courage and skill of the young
Meshullams. Bunches of Indian com, and some large
dried gourds, of a golden tint and cup-like form, were sus-
pended from the arched roof; with a few captured birds in
cages, and a large lantern.

The room within was just as simple; and we dined
there with Mr. Meshullam and his family, and Mr. Henry
Wentworth Monk, who for two years had lived there almost
a hermit's life, his only constant companion a Greek Testa-
ment, and his chief intercourse with the world the Times
newspaper. He spent nearly all his time in the open air,
entering the house only to sleep and to eat. (His life-like
portrait, by Holman Hunt, appeared in the Eoyal Academy
Exhibition in 1860.)

Our hostess, Mrs. Meshullam, an Italian Jewess, told me
she could only give us an Italian peasant's dinner, as she
had not expected us that day ; but the savoury soup of lentils
and other vegetables, the dishes of fried beans, the potato
fritters, omelettes, and fruit, needed no apology.

After dinner, Mr. MeshuUam's sons kindly led us up the
rocky hillside to the ruins of Urt&s. Scattered blocks of
stone, fallen columns, foundations of houses, and broken
walls alone remain. A few wild Arabs of the T^iamari
tribe haunt these ruins and the caverns in the limestone
hais which rise behind them, attracted by the spring
which gushes impetuously from a rock ovei^own with
mosses and ferns, and overshadowed with fine trees.
The water falls in a large body, splashing and bubbling,
into a square reservoir, where a group of little Bedouins
stood enjoying shower-baths; and a few men were
bathing their feet and washing their hands, in preparation
for prayer.

From this basin the water escapes into a lower and
larger reservoir, where a number of UrtS^s women and girls.

54 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

were washing their white and purple Unen shirts, and their
tattered veils, in primitive style, folding them, and placing
them on smooth slabs, just under the surface of the water
at the margin of the pool, and then beating them with flat
stones, which they held in their hands. Little naked,
bronzed children were luxuriating there, and wriggling
about like tadpoles. The girls called to me to come down
into the reservoir, to bathe my feet. The rough stone
walls enclosing these pools were tapestried with ferns,
cresses, delicate creepers, and liverwort.

We followed the course of the stream, and, with it,
descended into the valley between the low stone walls
which inclose the plantations of olive, fig-trees, lemons,
and pomegranates. We had to make our way cautiously,
now on one side, and then on the other, of the rocky bed
of the swiftly flowing stream.

The pleasant sound of the rushing waters — the songs of
the goldfinches — ^the sight of the blossoming and fruitful
trees in the garden below, inclosed by steep hills, covered
with aromatic herbs — the breezy air, laden with the helio-
trope-like scent of the fig-trees, and tasting of the wild
flowers and herbs around — delighted us. King Solomon
could scarcely have enjoyed such scenes more completely,
when he, long ago, went into the garden to eat the
pleasant fruits. " Awake, north wind ! and come, thou
south 1 blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may
flow out."

The stream led us to the bottom of the valley, and then
took its way rather more gently in a narrow bed, bordered
with grass and brook-lime speedwell, close to the hillside,
which was festooned with masses of maiden-hair and
mosses of the most vivid green. We walked on a raised stone
path, or viaduct, across the gardens, and passed through a
field of tall broom-corn, every stem of wMch was crowned
with a plumy tuft, and wreathed with convolvulus, pink
and white. We saw a number of gardeners at work, most
of whom were Jews, in the employ of Mr. Meshidlam.
He has a shop in Jerusalem, exclusively for the sale of

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 65

the fruit and vegetables from this spot. He has intro-
duced many fruit-trees and vegetables which had never
before been cultivated in the East ; and they thrive well,
especially the seeds and slips from America Were it
not for the vigorous protection afforded to him by Mr.
Finn, however, he could not resist the encroachments of
the Arab tribes in the district, and the fruitful valley
would soon be a desert.

After taking leave of the Meshullams, we rode up the
valley to see the three great pools, one above the other,
which collect the springs of the neighbourhood. The
largest and lowest is 582 feet long, and 50 feet deep ; the
next is 423 feet long, and 39 feet deep ; the upper one is
380 feet long, and 25 feet deep. Clear blue water half-
filled these tanks — a precious reserve for the dry season.
The bottom of the upper pool is higher than the top of the
next, and so with the second and third. They are partly
formed of excavations in the rock, and partly of immense
hewn stones. These are called Solomon's Pools ; and he
perhaps thought of them, and of his gardens at Urtlls,
when he said, " I made me gardens and orchards, and I
planted trees in them of all kinds of fruits ; I made me
pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth
forth trees." No doubt the fountain and streams which
supply these pools found their way down the valley of
UrtSs to the Dead Sea, and wasted their sweet waters in
the bitter lake, till a Solomon's hand restrained them, and
led them into these great reservoirs, and built the famous
duct round hillsides, over plains, and across valleys, to
convey the water to the Temple on Mount Moriah ; and
even now the fountain opposite to the Mosque-el- Aksa is
thus supplied. Sometimes, it is true, the supply is scanty
there, owing to the careless keeping of the aqueduct ; for
men water their horses at the various openings, and other-
wise waste the water, before it can reach the city. Every
new Pasha does Ms best to enforce strong measures to
prevent this abuse, but generally gives up the attempt
after a short time.

56 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

We rode homewards, following, as nearly as we could,
the course of the aqueduct ; and at every opening we saw
the running water framed in a mass of delicate maiden-
hair and moss ; at several of these places women were,
contrary to the law, washing their clothes, and filling their
water-jars. It strikes me, that there may have been a
chariot-road by the side of this aqueduct, in ancient times,
and it may have served as a sort of coping or parapet to it;
no chariot-road is to be found there now, and in some places
the path is difficult even for a mule, yet, when we consider
what damage the torrents of one winter will effect, we
may wonder that the torrents of centuries have not proved
even more destructive than they have.

Eoads in this land must have required peculiar attention
and care ; in the Talmud it is said^ that, before the goiDg
up of the tribes, three times a year, to Jerusalem, the roads
leading to it were prepared. " Prepare the way of the
people : cast up the highway, gather out the stones, take
up the stumbling-block out of the way of my people," &c.
I can imagine the kind of preparation required in obedience
to this command ; how the rocks, and stones, and d&yris of
the hills, washed down by the winter rains, were cleared
away; how the fallen tree-trunks were gathered up and
supported ; and the broken edges of the road and the holes
formed by the bursting of springs were blocked up ; and
I see, in fancy, the chariot-roads winding round terraced
hills, and through vineyards, pleasant gardens, and pasture-
land in the plains, as they did in the days when such kings
as Solomon the magnificent ruled, or when Uzziah the
lover of husbandry reigned. (See 2 Chron. xxvi. 10, 11.)

The sun had gone down in red and gold and purple
splendour when we quitted the tortuous course of the
aqueduct. We lost the cheerful sound of the running
stream, whose waters were flowing freely towards Jeru-
salem ; and we took a more direct route, turning towards
the Convent of Mar Elias : we mounted the hill, and then
galloped quickly over the plain of Eephaim, meeting long
"trings of unladen camels gently jolting along, and numbers

DOMESTIC LIFB IN PALESTINE. 57

of Bethlehem peasants and women, returning homewards,
with their empty baskets poised on their heads ; they had
been selling fruit and vegetables in Jerusalem.

It was dusk when we reached the Talibeyeh. We found
that some poor Jews had been employed there throughout
the day, to make a sort of verandah or shelter of reeds in
front of the little stone house, and it proved a very pleasant
retreat. The reeds used were from the banks of the Jordan ;
they are about an inch and a half or two inches in dia-
meter, and twelve or thirteen feet in height, with a plumy
tuft at the top, like a miniature palm-tree. It is very
likely that this kind of reed is referred to in the history of
the Crucifixion, where it is said, " And straightway one of
them ran and took a sponge and filled it with vinegar, and
put it on a reedy and gave him to drink." (Matt, xxvii. 48.)

Thoroughly tired, but well pleased, I went to my tent ;
and, according to the advice of the Armenian nurse, bathed
my feet and arms with milk and vinegar, to allay the
irritation caused by the mosquitoes, which had tormented
me in the convent at Bethlehem. It proved an effectual
remedy, and I recommend travellers to try it.

CHAPTER IV.

IT was our intention to remain only a short time in
Jerusalem, but my brother had been detained on con-
sular business, and was appointed to attend Kamll Pasha
on an expedition to Hebron, to quell a serious insurrection
there.

I was left in the care of my good friends at the Talibeyeh,
where I enjoyed excellent opportunities for improving
myself in Arabic, and gleaning information about the
people of Palestine. Every day brought some new delight.
I visited all the places of interest in the neighbourhood,
sketching and making notes, and had the privilege of ac-
companying Sir Moses and Lady Montefiore when they
explored the Moslem mosques and shrines on Mount
Moriah.

Mr. W. Holman Hunt was then busy in his studio on
Mount Zion, and there I watched the progress of his won-
derful picture of the " Meeting in the Temple," and with
delight looked through his portfolios and sketch-books.
On the 21st of August I went to Hebron, and after spend-
ing a few days with my brother at the Pasha's camp, I
returned to the Talibeyeh; but of these pleasures I wiU
not pause to speak in detail here. On the 9th of Septem-
ber, at sunrise, a shower of rain fell, the first I had seen in
Palestine ; it only lasted half an hour, and seemed quite
local; low down among the hills, rainbows, one within
another, spanned the vaUeys, and produced a most beauti-
ful effect. Soon after the rain was over, a cloud of birds
appeared coming from the north, their strange snapping
cries sounding louder and louder as they approached ; they

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 59

were bee-catchers, bright-coloured birds of the swallow
kind : but a strong north wind soon carried the rain-clouds
and the birds far away, and cooled the air, which had been
very sultry.

On September 11th, Miss Creasy (who had long been
resident in Jerusalem) took me to see Philip's Fountain,
which is about two hours S.W. by W. of Jerusalem. We
started early, with one kawass, and rode over the rocky
hiUs to the Convent of the Cross before the dew had dis-
appeared ; we met large companies of " fellahln " (peasant
women), flocking to the city with fruit and vegetables;
most of them wore blue linen shirts, white cotton veils,
which fell over their shoulders, and crimson girdles fastened
very low. The foremost were carrying a great variety of
cucumbers and vegetable marrows ; some of which were
pear-shaped and of a deep violet-red colour, and very glossy.
The group of girls, who balanced on their heads baskets
of grapes from the Greek gardens, made a beautiful picture ;
trailing branches and tendrils of the vine were hanging
over their shoulders. We went down a narrow vaUey,
newly planted with mulberries and vines by the enter-
prising monks of the Greek convent : on the summit of a
steep hill, on our right, we saw the picturesque little
village of Melihah, and large kilns for preparing charcoal
were burning on the rock ledges or terraces below it.

We entered the Wady-el-Werdeh, or Valley of Roses
(well named) ; its broad bed, for above a mile, is like a
thicket of rose-bushes, cultivated for making rose-water
and conserves: beyond this garden, which attracted
thousands of birds to feast on its crimson berries or hips,
we found fig-orchards, blackberry-bushes, and walnut-trees.
On our left hand we saw the remains of an ancient build-
ing, large hewn stones, excavations in the native rock, a
few fallen columns, and a small stone foimtain called Ain
Yalo, or the Spring of Ajalon. We were following the
course of the ancient road " which goeth down from Jeru-
salem, to QazaP Long ago, Queen Candace's eunuch tra-
versed it, riding in his chariot ; but the Eomans kept " the

60 DOMESTIC LIFE IX PALESTINE.

way "* in repair then ; no chariot could pass it now. It is
little better than a track for mules, and runs along a sort
of terrace half-way up the hiU on the left-hand side of the
valley : rugged rock ledges were above and below us, and
a few flocks were feeding on the scanty herbage and
thorns, but down in the bed of the vale there were thresh-
ing floors and stubbl^fields. About a mile beyond A in
Yalo we came to Ain Haniyeh, a fine spring of pure
water, commonly called Philip's FountaiiL Two pilasters,
with richly carved Corinthian capitals, flank a semicircular
apse, formed of very large, carefully hewn stones ; from a
deep arched recess or niche, in the middle of this apse, a
large body of water gushes and falls with great force into
a small basin, which overflows into a stone reservoir below,
and then forms a narrow stream which finds its way into
the valley. I climbed over immense blocks of stone,
assisted by a shepherd boy, and gathered some of the
maiden-hair and mosses which festooned the arched mouth
of the fountain ; indications of a much larger apse can be
traced just beyond ; and exactly opposite the fountain, at
about forty paces from it, there is a fragment of the shaft
of a column nearly six feet in diameter, but only about
five feet high ; a few shafts of smaller columns are to be
seen in a neighbouring field : the viUagers around carry
away the hewn stones which are found here to build their
little watch-towers, or to repair their houses. Local tradi-
tion says that this is the very fountain to which the
eunuch referred when he said to his teacher, Philip, " See,
here is water! What doth hinder me to he baptized?'*
Some boys and girls, wilder looking than the shaggy goats
which they led to drink at the fountain, crowded around
me as I sat on the great column, sketching the scene
before me : my horse, in the meantime, less obedient than
the chariot of the eunuch, had broken away from the
block of stone to which he was tethered, and was running
at full speed into the valley. Loud cries and shouts from
the boys brought, from all directions, volunteers to pursue
^he runaway, and, after some little time, the frightened

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 61

animal was caught, in a circle of the noisiest, wndest-look-
ing little fellows I ever saw, and to whom the few piastres
which I distributed was a fortune.

We returned by a rather different route, and passed
another fountain, more simple than the others, but very
picturesque, and formed chiefly of blocks of unhewn stone :
women were washing their linen shirts and veils in the
reservoir, and a number of rough desperate-looking men
were lounging idly round it. They looked over my paper
while I sketched the fountain and a few figures ; one of
them said, " If we were to fetch aU the men of the valley,
and all the men of the hills, they could not do that.'' They
seemed, by their remarks, to fancy that drawing was a
sense or faculty peculiar to the lYanks; they were cla-
morous for backsheesh, and followed us for some distance,
muttering, grumbling, and disputing among themselves:
after they had given up the pursuit, I found that I had
lost my pocket-book, containing papers of value. I gal-
loped back to Philip's Fountain, though the rays of the sun
were very powerful : I explained my loss to the shepherd
boys (now my firm allies), then I rode back to the other foun-
tain, where I found the group of men who had followed us,
standing as if in consultation ; I felt certain that they had
my book. I told them I came from the English consulate,
and asked them to help me in my search : they so posi-
tively declared that my book was not lost there, that I felt
more convinced than ever that they had found it. Pre-
sently I tried the effect of a small piece of gold, which I
offered to the finder : in a moment one of the men drew
my book from his girdle, and rather hesitatingly placed it
in my hands. I feared he might repent, so I immediately
gave it to the kawass to take charge of, and we very thank-
fully rode away. These men were all ftdly armed, and
dressed in coarse scanty clothing : they looked as if a trifle
would excite them to mischief and to deeds of daring.
When we were far enough from them, we sat down
and took our lunch, which we had provided before setting
out; we rested under a walnut-tree during the hour of

62 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

noon, and did not reach the Talibeyeh till three o'clock,
where we were anxiously awaited, for the Gaza road is not
considered a very safe one. In the arched recess at the
back of the house, figs from XJrt&s, strung together, were
hanging in the sun to dry ; and one of the servants,
sitting in the shade, was busy stripping off the flag-like
envelopes of large ripe ears of Indian com, or maize. She
told me she was going to make a mattress of the dried
husks for one of the men-servants ; and added that poor
people, who cannot afford to buy cotton wool, make their
beds of the outer skins of onions, thoroughly dried and
sweetened by exposure to the sun,- and sewn up in coarse
linen cases.

On the following day, my brother returned from Hebron,
and was at last free to leave Jerusalem and start for his
vice-consulate at Haifa. A few days were spent in making
preparations for the journey. I engaged Katiine, a widow
of Bethlehem, as my attendant ; she was highly recom-
mended to me as a faithftd and affectionate woman, but
with the serious drawback that she was subject to fits of
mental derangement; for in the year 1834, when her
native town was the scene of rebellion, her husband and
little sons were murdered in her presence in their beds,
and alarm and despair disordered her mind.* (Who can
calculate how much harm of this nature will be the
-result of the late massacres in the Lebanon and Damascus,
and how many weakened intellects will be transmitted to
succeeding generations? Men survive the sight of open
warfare on the battle-field; but who can wonder that
women become mad with rage and terror, who see their
sons and fathers murdered in their homes ?)

In a day or two Katrine was quite at home with me.
She had known my brother for years, and fancied that he
and I were her own children. She often told me curious
stories of our childhood, fictions of her imagination ; this
delusion, however, made her happy, and caused her to be a
most devoted servant to us.

* See note, page 43.

DOMESTIC UFE IN PALESTINE. 63

On the 14th of September I was roused before sunrise
by the tinkling sound of mule bells, which reminded me
that our journey was planned for that day. All was bustle
and animation at the camp ; groups of Arab servants were
seated among the rocks ; bags and baggage were strewn
around; tents and tent poles were being removed and
packed ; and mules and muleteers stood waiting for orders.
Mr. Finn was about to make a tour with his niece and a
Mend, and had arranged to travel with us as far as Yafa.

After a great many delays, all the attendants were in
readiness by eleven o'clock ; but it happened that my brother,
who had gone into Jerusalem early on business, was de-
tained, and consequently kept a prisoner there, for it was
Friday, the Moslem Sabbath, and the city gates are always
closed on that day during the hours of morning prayer, and
we knew, therefore, that he could not on any consideration be
released till noon. (This custom is rigidly observed, owing
to a prophecy which declares that the Holy City will be
invaded and conquered at Sabbath prayer-time.) So the
Consul with his party started, leaving us to overtake him
at Yafa ; and I spent one more evening with Mrs. Finn and
the little ones at the TaJibeyeh. We had nothing to detain
US the next day, and at half-past three I rose by lantern
and starlight, gathered a branch from the olive-tree above
the tent which had been my resting-place for ten weeks,
breakfasted with Mrs. Finn, and rode away, well mounted,
just as the first gleams of light appeared in the eastern sky.

A Moslem kawass led the way, and my soi-disant mother,
Katiine (a Latia Christian), closely veiled and wrapped in
a red Arab cloak,^ sat, a la cavalier^ on the broad pack-
saddle of a nimble little donkey, and two laden mules, in
the care of a Jewish muleteer, followed. Although our
attendants were thus of three conflicting creeds, they
fraternised very well on the way.

We did not pause tiU we came to the Fountain of Birds,
where a peasant boy brought us fine grapes, and helped us
to give our animals water. The orchards around were now
in their full beauty, bright with pomegranate fruit and

64 DOMESTIC LIFB IN PALESTINE.

blossom ; the rich green fig-trees, wet with dew, smelt like
heliotropes, and were garlanded and interlaced with richly-
laden vines ; little birds were rustling the sUveiy leaves of
the olive-trees, and they now and then swarmed forth in
cheerful chirruping flight.

At eight o'clock we reached Abu Ghaush, and while
we waited for Katrine and the muleteer (who lagged
behind), I sketched the old church, and then hastened
onwards. At ten we rested and lunched under a tree
by a well-side near to Latrone, and the kawass con-
trived to make us some coffee. I was astonished to find
that I had travelled through the hill-country of Judea,
without fear and without fatigue, by the same road which
a short time before had appeared to me so full of danger
and difficulty. The hills seemed to me to have been made
low, and the " rough places plain."

When we entered the level country, the sun was shaded
every now and then by quickly moving clouds, and a
breeze sprang up from the west, pleasantly fanning our
faces. We cantered over the plain till we reached a village
calted Kubab, a poor, straggling place, with a few gardens
fenced with yellow blossoming cactus hedges. We paused
by a well, in a sort of farmyard, and a lame girl handed
us some water in a red jar ; she made curious signs and
gestures, and we soon saw that she was deaf and dumb :
we gave her a backsheesh, and she limped away well
pleased. A boy followed us, noisily demanding money as
we rode on, but we did not give him anything ; so he ran
back to the poor lame girl, threw her down, and snatched
her treasure from her. She rose with difficulty, and with
silent and impotent rage threw handfuls of dust after him,
and when he was out of sight, she began tearing her scanty
clothing. We turned back and tried to console her, but
our words were useless; however, some sweet chocolate
cakes were more efiectual; we left her stealthily eating
them, and went on our way, thinking how sad her life
must be.

Before noon we entered Eamleh, leaving our servants far

IX)MESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 65

behind. We rode under the tall palm-trees, now laden
with glossy red and golden fruit, hanging in clusters on
orange-coloured stalks. Strings of camels and laden don-
keys crowded the dirty, dusty streets, and with diflBculty
we made our way to the house of a Syrian friend. My
brother was received with kisses and embraces by the sons
of the house, and I was led by an Abyssinian slave (a
eunuch) to his widowed mistress, a superior-looking woman
dressed in black silk garments embroidered with gold
thread ; she said, " Welcome, my daughter," and after giving
me some lemonade, took me to a pleasant chamber opening
on to a terrace covered with pots of blossoming pinks and
roses. She called the slave, and he immediately spread a
mattress for me on the floor ; then she took off my hat and
habit, and told me to " Rest in peace," and sitting by my
side on a soft cushioned carpet, she gently fanned me to
keep away the flies and mosquitoes. When I awoke, after
an hour or two of refreshing sleep, I found that my hostess
had gone, and the black slave was kneeling by my side,
fanning me with a little flag made of a green split palm
frond nicely plaited ; his dark polished face and large eyes,
contrasting with his white turban, white cotton dress, and
crimson silk girdle, rather startled me before I quite re-
membered where I was.

(I heard afterwards that he was a favourite and confi-
dential slave, who had belonged for many years to this
family.)

He poured rose water over my hands, and led me to a
court, where a genuine Arab meal was prepared for us,
consisting of boiled wheat dressed in butter and mixed with
minced meat ; some fine broiled fish, in a bed of very sweet
stewed apricots and rice;* and baked fowls, garnished
with tomatoes filled with rice and shreds of meat; a
dessert of grapes, dates, and sweetened starch stuck with
bleached almonds, followed. After coffee and pipes, we

* This itUUmge, which is very common, always reminded me of the
"hroUedfitk " and the ** honeycomb ** spoken of in Luke zziv. 42.

P

66 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

called our servants together, and at about five o'clock we
mounted and rode on towards Y&fa.

The sun was shining directly in our faces, and we
watched it gradually going down behind the low coast
hills which hid from our sight the Mediterranean Sea.

The crescent moon rose bright and clear, throwing
our shadows in long dark lines on the sandy road
before us.

We saw a little coihpany of Bedouin Arabs, sitting on
the wayside feasting. Directly we had passed they rose
up and started into a run, leaping and shouting vociferously,
and as we and the kawass slackened our pace to join the
servants who were behind, they passed us, nmning and
dancing along, snatching off each other^s white skull caps,
flinging them in the air, flourishing their stipks, throwing
handkerchiefs at one another, screaming and singing ; their
heads were shaved except just at the crown, where the hair
was allowed to grow very long, and was plaited (the plait
is generally twisted up, and quite concealed under skull
caps, tarbouches, or kefias, i.e. shawl head-dresses).

We soon found that these wild-looking men were quite
harmless ; they had only lingered on the wayside to enjoy
a heartier meal than usual, and had allowed their camels
to go on leisurely with two or three camel drivers, and
they were running to overtake them, which they very soon
did; they then pursued their way so slowly, that we
quickly passed them. Some of them were mounted on
the unwieldy looking animals, and their songs were
already subdued to harmonize with their monotonous
swinging pace, and chimed softly and plaintively with
the tinkling camel bells — ^thus

" Dear unto me as the sight of my eyes]

Art thou, oh, my camel !
Precious to me as the breath of my life

Art thou, oh, my camel !
Sweet to my ears is the sound

Of thy tinkling bells, ^h, my camel !
And sweet to thy listening ears

Is the sound of my eyening song."

DOMESTIC MPE IN PALESTINE. 67

Sometimes these wanderers pass several days without
taking substantial food, but* to make up for their abstinence
they eat voraciously and "make merry" when they have
the opportunity. It was dark in the bridle path between
the Y2l,fa Gardens, but the large and many glowing watch
fires within the enclosures showed that the abundance of
ripe fruit was well guarded.

We entered the gate of the town, where crowds of people
were lounging ; the broadest bazaar was bright with lamps
and lanterns ; but we soon merged one by one into dark,
narrow, crooked streets of stairs, and I was directed to
follow the kawass closely and carefully. His large full
white Turkish trowsers seemed to move before me by some
mysterious power, without support or suspension ; for the
black horse which he rode was quite invisible in the dark-
ness, and his red fez and embroidered jacket could hot be
seen, only now and then two shining eyes turned round to
see if I were safe. I followed my ghostlike leader cautiously
till we reached the British consulate down by the sea-side,
where we were welcomed by our friends Dr. and Mrs. Kayat,
and Mr. Finn, who had only arrived an hour earlier,
soon came to meet us. He had slept at Eamleh on the
previous night, and was surprised we had made the journey
from Jerusalem so easily in one day. Fireworks from a
ship at anchor attracted us to the oriel window which
overlooks the sea, and we sat for a long time watching the
waves as they rolled towards us, crested with white foam,
and with lines ♦of phosphoric light flashing from beneath
them, only extinguished by the breaking of each successive
wave on the rocks. The next day, Sunday, we went to the
Eev. Mr. Krus^'s house, and in company with Mr. Finn
and his party, and Dr. Kayat and his family, we heard Dr.
Bowen (the late lamented Bishop of Sierra Leone) preach a
most simple, earnest, and appropriate sermon ; a few Arab
children belonging to the missionary school, and Mrs.
Krus^ and her family, with the Eev. Henry Eeichart, of
Cairo, completed the Uttle cbngregatioru Some Arab ladies
of the neighbouring house watched us the whole time

f2

68 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINB.

through the open window, and seemed greatly amused.
The hymns were sung with much energy in Arabic, and
the liturgy (read in English) was responded to by the
little Arab scholars with vehemence and clearness. I
spent the remainder of the day with Mr. Finn and his
party, at the new and well-built house of an Arab friend ;
we sat on a sheltered terrace (sweet with pinks and
jasmine), overlooking the terraced house-tops and the
sparkling sea. Down on our left was the southern wall of
the town, and the deep dry moat ; beyond it was a sloping
stony plain, where horsemen were galloping about and
displaying their skill in the use of spear and musket ;
farther stUl was the large open cemetery with a cupola sup-
ported on arches in the centre ; children were playing and
turbaned smokers were resting under its shade ; a garden
of figs, palms, and tamarisks, on a gentle declivity, bordered
the sandy margin of the sea between us and the quaran-
tine station, and the white sheets or wimples of groups of
women could be distinguished among the trees; drifted
sandhills bounded the view. The sea, calm and brightly
blue, broke gently along the belt of rocks, fringing them
with foam. We watched the setting of the sun; the
hUls in the south grew rosy, violet, and grey ; the western
sky was covered with dark slate-coloured clouds, edged
with gold. The sunset-gun was fired, and we were led
by our host to a covered court on the house-top to
dine, by lantern light. For dessert, among other fruits
we had a dish of large ruby-coloured pomegranate seeds,
moistened with wine, and sprinkled with powdered sugar ;
bleached abnonds formed the border of this tempting-
looking dish.

The next day I was sitting in the oriel window at the
British consulate, with the Rev. Dr. Bowen, while Dr.
Kayat was engaged with an English captain and a number
. of Arabs in the lower part of the room ; black clouds came
travelling quickly from the west, over the lead-coloured
sea. Dr. Bowen observed (in the words of Christ), " When
ye see a clotid rise out of the west, straightway ye say^ ^ There

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PAIiESTINE. 69

cmsth a shower ^^ and so it ts,^* He had scarcely uttered
the words when the clouds spread and fell in a tremendous
toirent ; the sea swelled, and rolled heavily to the shore ;
the ships looked as if they would break away from their
anchors, and loud peals of thunder made the casemented
recess in which we sat tremble violently. The captain
hastened away, fearful for the fate of his struggling ship off
such a rocky coast.

When the rain ceased, and the sun shone again, I rode
out with Dr. Bowen to visit Mr. Jones, an American mis-
sionary, who lived in the midst of a beautiful garden, east
of the town. He had done a great deal of good in teaching
the Arab gardeners and agriculturists habits of order and
method, but he finds them very slow learners. It rained
violently at sunrise the next day, and did not clear off till
noon, after which I sat in my favourite window comer with
Nasif Giamal (Dr. Kayat's nephew). We saw just below
us, on the rudely constructed " parade," a crowd of men
and children assembled round a fantastically dressed man
exhibiting a goat, which had been tutored to perform some
curious tricks. It stood with its four feet close together
on the top of a very long pole, and allowed the man to lift
it up and carry it round and round within the circle ; then
the goat was perched on four sticks, and again carried
ahout A little band of music — fifes, drums, and tam-
bourines, called together the people from all parts of the
town to witness this performance. The goat danced and
balanced himself obediently and perfectly, in very un-
natural looking postures, as if thoroughly understanding
the words and commands of his master. The men who
watched the antics of the goat looked as grave and serious
as if they were attending a philosophical or scientific
lecture.

The assembled crowd had to make way presently for a
long procession, preceded by horsemen carrying long spears,
and firing guns ; two little boys, gaily dressed and decked
with flowers, rode one behind the other on a white horse ;
two large books, carried on embroidered cushions, were

70 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

borne by two attendants, women closely veiled walked by
the side of the boys, singing wildly, and making a peculiar
ringing noise in the throat not unlike the neighing of
horses, made slightly musical by modulation. Nasif, who
can speak English, told me the object of the procession,
saying, "The boys are Moslems; they have suffered an
infliction not observed by the Christians ; the Jews have
it, and also the Moslems." This explained to me that the
children had been circumcised, and were now being con-
ducted round the town in triumph- My brother made
arrangements with the owner of a little Arab boat to be
prepared to take us to Haifa, as soon as the south wind
rose. Two monks of Mount Carmel begged to accompany
us. We made our plans so as to be ready at a minute's
notice, and spent the evening with Sit Leah : she had quite
recovered, and proudly showed me her little Selim. I
found that every one addressed her and spoke of her as
" Um Selim," or mother of Selim, and the father was called
Abu Selim.

On Wednesday, 19th September,. I was roused before
sunrise, and informed that the Eeis (or Arab captain) had
sent for us, as the wind was favourable ; so with the two
monks and Nasif G. we quickly went down to the quay ;
in the meantime the wind had shifted, and the Eeis could
not undertake to steer against it ; but," he added, " it will
veer round to the south again by midnight, and then we
shall reach Haifa in eight or ten hours." It was still very
early ; we strolled leisurely through the town ; the people
were just beginning to stir ; the shutters of the shops in
the bazaars were being lifted up — they are like flap doors
attached by rude hinges to the beams above the shop-
fronts, and when opened and propped up, they form excel-
lent shades, which are easily dropped down and secured at
night. On my return to the consulate I found two of the
women servants making bread, sitting on the ground at a
low circular wooden board. One of them moistened some
flour with water, another added salt, and a small piece of
''eavened dough (to "leaven the whole lump"), and then

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 71

kneaded it vigorously in turn with her companion. It was
left to rise, and then the two eldest daughters of Dr. Kayat
divided it into portions, rolled them into little round loaves,
which were carried away to the oven on large round trays
made of reeds, boimd together with strong grass.

We prepared ourselves for the journey, and then went to
rest early, without undressing. At midnight the Eeis sent
for us, and immediately we went out into the darkness,
with Nasif and three or four lantern bearers. I noticed a
number of men, wrapped in lehaflfs, sleeping on low stone
platforms, or by the side of kneeling camels, in the streets
near the quay. The muetzelim, or governor, was parading
the place. Nasif told me that he did so at irregular
intervals, sometimes in disguise, so as to see the state of
the town at night, and to ascertain, by personal observation,
whether the guards did their duty. We met the two Carmel-
ite monks on the dark wharf, and the great water-gate was
opened for us. I was somehow dropped gently into a little
rowing boat far down in the darkness below, where I was
taken charge of by two brawny boatmen. After a deal of
shouting and jolting, we were all huddled together, and
skimmed over the water to the sailing boat, which awaited
us outside the rocky barrier. I found it was divided into
three parts ; the central portion being like an uncovered
hold, four feet deep and eight feet square ; the decks fore
and aft were encumbered with the ship's tackle, and
crowded with sailors, who were singing lustily. The hold,
lighted by two lanterns, was matted and set apart for pas-
sengers and luggage. Our portmanteaus and carpet-bags
served us for a couch, and the monks sat on their saddle-bags,
wrapped in their comfortable-looking hooded robes. Poor
Katrine, who had never been on the sea before^ was very
much alarmed; she rolled herself up in her cloak, stretched
herseK full length by my side, and was happily soon fast
asleep. Our kawass smoked his pipe in company with
the Eeis above ; and an Italian, who had smuggled him-
self and his baggage on board, in the Hurry and darkness,
kept aloof with the sailors. The sky was bright with stars.

72 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

the south wind was strong and filled the sails, and by fits
and starts I dozed till dawn of day ; then I roused myself,
and watched the little group around me, the hooded monks
sleeping soundly^ my brother at my feet, leaning against a
hamper, and Katrine so enveloped, that I could not distin-
guish her head from her heels.

The favourable wind had ceased, and the sailors were
busy taking in sail ; by the time the sun appeared above
the low coast hills the wind had shifted to the west, and
we were in danger of being driven on the rocks. It then
suddenly veered to the north, and blew so violently that
the Eeis was obliged to cast anchor, and we were tossed on
a heavy sea, near to a desolate coast, where there was no
possibility of landing. By nine o'clock the sun was very
powerful ; an awning made of the now useless sails was
thrown over the hold. We found our quarters far from
comfortable, but we were determined to make the best of
them. By noon the heat was intense and suffocating down
in the hold, so I climbed on to the deck, and sat on a coil
of rope, clinging to the mast : the strong wind and the
sea spray revived me.

• The coast, w^hich was every now and then concealed by
the high waves, was a range of drifted sand hills, traversed
by flocks of goats feeding on the scanty patches of pasture.
Not a human habitation, not even a human being, was
visible, and not a boat or ship was seen all day.

In the afternoon the wind ceased, but the ship rocked
lazily from the effect of the sea-swell, which had not yet
subsided.

My brother read St. Paul's voyage to me, as it is re-
corded in the 27th of Acts : it seemed more interesting
than ever. We were not far from Cesarea, the port from
which Paul embarked ; and he was tossed about by con-
trary winds in this sea for many days. It must have been
about the same time of the year, too, during the equinoctial
gales, when, as he said, ^* sailing was dangerous ;^^ it is
distinctly explained that it was after the great Fast of the
Atonement, which is held on the tenth day of the month of

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 73

Tisri, and corresponds with the latter part of our month of
September.

At sunset " the south toirid blew softly" The sails were
soon set, and in better spirits we sat down to our evening
meal, and shared our chickens and preserved soup with
the monks, who added their eggs, cheese, and cognac.

We passed a dreamy, restless night, " sailing slowly,"
and in the morning were nearly opposite Tant&ra. The
wind had changed to north-east, so my brother insisted on
landing, to pursue our journey on shore. We tacked about,
put out to sea, and then allowed the strong wind to drive
us towards the picturesque coast. Little islands of rock,
and mounds of ancient masonry, stood out before it, beaten
by the waves. With some manoeuvring, the boat was
brought safely to the beach, where there were plenty of
Tant&ra men to meet us, and carry us through the surf to
the smooth yellow sands.

I was delighted to find myself on firm land again ; and
I shall always remember St. Paul's advice to the centurion,
and vote against sailing in the Levant in the autumn.

The custom-house officer came to meet us, and, followed
by troups of men and boys, we approached the little town,
which comprises about thirty or forty rudely-built houses,
made of irregularly-pUed blocks of hewn stone, bits of
broken columns, and masses of mud or clay.

The custom-house officer, Ab4 Habib, guided us to his
house, which consisted of one low arge square room, lined
with clay, and roofed with tree branches blackened with
smoke. One half of the ceiling was concealed by matting,
and the other half was picturesque with pendant branches.
Small holes served as windows, and the roughly-made door
was a portable one. A mattress spread on the floor was
used as a divan. Jars of earthenware, and metal saucepans,
stood against the wall ; a cooking-place was built in one
comer, made of large finely-beveUed ancient stones and
burnt clay ; baskets of coarse salt from the searshore were
near to it. Hablb, the son of our host, prepared coffee
for us ; in our presence he roasted the berries, and then

74 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

pounded them in a stone mortar. A large box, like a
muniment chest, with ornamental lock and hinges of
wrought iron, stood near the door, and I perched myself
on it, to be as far away as I could from the mud floor, on
which I could distinctly see a numerous assembly of large
fleas dancing and hopping about The monks, with truly
monastic virtue, did not seem to mind them. Gaunt-looking
women, hiding their faces with tattered white cotton veils,
peeped at us, and dirty but pretty children came crowding
round,

Katilne made a tour of the town, and then took me to
the house which she considered the neatest and cleanest,
where I rested with her and refreshed myself

The women who welcomed me were dressed in tight
jackets and full trousers, made of washed-out Manchester
prints, patched all over without regard to colour or pattern ;
their heads were covered with mundlls (squares of coloured
muslin), their necks adorned with coins, and their wrists
with twisted silver bracelets.

They were exceedingly amused with my little travelling
dressing-case. They told me they had never seen a hair
brush before. They unplait their long henna-stained hair
about once a week only, and occasionally clean it with
fuUer's-earth (which is found near), and use small-tooth
combs of bone or wood.

After some delay, animals were procured. Fortunately
we had our saddles with us. We left our heavy luggage
in the care of the Eeis, and at two, p.m. we mounted and
took leave of Tantiira. We made a rather ludicrous pro-
cession — the kawass, on a shaggy mule, took charge of
our carpet-bags, and led the way; the two monks were
mounted on donkeys, so small that their sandalled feet
and heavy robes nearly touched the ground ; my brother
rode on an old white horse, whose head was garnished
with red trappings ornamented with shells ; I was put on
a little pony who had lost his mane and tail, and who
could not understand a side-saddle — but persisted in turning
round and round to investigate the mystery ; and Katrine,

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 75

on a stubborn donkey, had great difficulty in keeping up
with us.

We rode northwards along the shore, which was strewn
with blocks of marble and hewn stones.

Women and children were busy collecting in large
baskets the coarse encrusted salt, which settles in the
natural hollows and artificial basins of the rocks on the
beach below. Large herds of cattle and goats, the chief
wealth of Tantftra, grazed on the plain on our right hand
just above us, which was overgrown with thorns, thistles,
dwarf mimosa, and low brushwood. A little beyond Tan-
tiira stands the ancient Dora, or Dor, on a rugged
promontory, with ruined walls all round it, at the edge
of the cliff. From its centre rises what appeared to me
at first to be a lofty tower or castle ; but on approaching
it I found it was only the narrow southern wall of some
long since fallen building : it stands about thirty feet
high. This place is now quite abandoned, as the walls are
tottering and the cliffs are giving way; the stones are
gradually being removed to build up Tantiira. Opposite
to these ruins, the plain was concealed from us by a low
ridge of rocky hills, running close to the sandy shore,
which is here and there enlivened by a group of palm-
trees. We kept close to the sea till we came, in about one
hour and a half, to Athlite, or Castellum Pelegrinum, a
curious motley pile of ruins standing out on a rocky head-
land The foundation stones are so massive, that they have
resisted the storms of centuries, and tell of a time anterior
to the Eomans, who no doubt erected the fortress, buUt
the walls, and fashioned the columns which are now falling
to decay. The crusaders, too, have left some of their
handiwork here — the pointed arches and the ruins of a
Christian church still speak of them. Within the walls
of the church, and under the shadow of the fortress, modern
houses 'are rudely buUt, and inhabited by a poor Moslem
population. A group of women were resting by a well of
sculptured stone, just outside the walls. Opposite to this
interesting place we found a narrow defile cut through t>

76 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

rocks, leading eastward direct from the shore to the plain.
Deep ruts, for chariot wheels, were cut in the road, which
was just wide enough for two horsemen to ride freely
abreast. The white limestone walls rise abruptly on each
side, garnished with patches of fragrant herbs and amber-
coloured lichen ; lintels at each end of this passage show
that formerly it was protected by gates, and ruins of strong
fortifications surmount it.

We passed out of this curious defile into the fertile but
not very extensively cultivated plain, or "Vale of Dor,"
between the mountain range of Carmel and the rocky
coast-hills under whose pleasant shade we pursued our
way. We could see that the two chains of hills met at
an acute angle far away in the north. Now and then,
natural fissures in the rocks, or little valleys made fertile
by winter torrents, revealed to us the sun and the sea.

We stopped to water our animals at a little spring,
called Ain-ed-Dustrein, which forms a tiny lake, and then
finds its way between the hills to the shore. A group of
goatherds, with reed pipes, were assembled round a clay
trough, where their flocks of goats were crowding to drink.
The vegetation by this stream and fountain was wild and
luxuriant; oleanders, lupins, tall grass, and the arbutus
abounded. The monks soon pointed out, with delight,
the white convent of Mar EUas on the headland of
CarmeL

Pleasant sounds of voices, songs, and bells, and laughter
reached us ; and we saw an animated little party approach-
ing, mounted on camels, whose nodding heads and necks
were decorated with beads, shells, ciimson tassels, and
strings of little tinkling bells. I paused by the wayside to
watch them, as they slowly passed. There were thirteen
camels strung together, each carrying two or three women
and children, all in gala dresses, made chiefly of soft
crimson silk, with white Vandyked stripes on it. 0n their
heads they wore scarfs or veils, of various colours and
materials (silk, muslin, and wool), folded across theii* fore-
heads, just meeting the eyebrows, then thrown over the back

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 77

of the head, and brought forward again to cover their faces,
all but the shining eyes ; the fringed or bordered ends
were allowed to fall gracefully over the shoulders. Some
of the women had slipped these veils, or wimples, down
below their lips, so as to join in the chorus of the songs
improvised by the two professional singing-women who
accompanied them, My brother could perceive that it was
a bridal party, by these songs, which very much resembled
in style the " Song of Songs which is Solomon's." A
number of men were in attendance on foot, forming a
picturesque body-guard to the exalted women. They were
people of one of the villages of the plain or vale of Dor,
and had been to Haifa, to purchase dresses and trinkets,
&c. for two approaching weddings in a family of some
local importance. They were scarcely out of hearing,
when we met another noisy group, consisting of men and
boys, with a few camels, mules, and donkeys, clumsily
laden with the purchases for the weddings — cooking
utensils, baskets of rice, reed mats, bales of goods, and
two red wooden boxes, ornamented with gilt hinges and
strap-work.

The largest camel carried, high on his back, two little
wooden cradles, painted blue, red, and yellow; one for
each of the brides. This piece of furniture is regarded in
the East as the most important and necessary item of a
trousseau; and she is an unhappy wife who does not soon
see rocking in the gaudy cradle an infant son, whose name
she may take, and through whom she may become honoured
among women.

As we proceeded northward, the plain was so much
more narrow, that we could distinguish the deep caverns
and excavations in the limestone hills opposite, which
have, in turn, served as places of refuge or retreat for
prophets, saints, and anchorites, bandittis of robbers and
beasts of prey.

The village of Tireh was pointed out to me, surrounded
by cultivated fields and orchards. Groups of palm-trees
grew here and there, and the hill-sides were clothed with

78 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINK

dwarf oak, wild fig, and locust trees. The fruit of the
locust, when ripe, is like a large crooked bean-pod, brown
and glossy, filled with large seeds ; and it is so nutritious,
that the children of the poor live entirely on it, during the
season, requiring no other food; for it contains all the
necessary elements for the support of life — starch, sugar,
oil, &c., in proper proportion. I found it, when new, rather
too sweet to suit my taste ; but children seem to enjoy it,
and they thrive on it, eating the shell as well as the seeds.
When this fruit is stored, it becomes somewhat dry, and
less sweet ; but on being soaked in honey, it is like new
fruit. The Arabs all like sweet food, and of many a man
of Judaea and Galilee, as well as of John the Baptist, it
might be said, " His uneat " (for a season) " was locusts and
wild honey!' * **

Just before sunset, we reached the foot of the headland
which forms the southern boundary of the bay of Akka.
On its summit the convent stands.

It was too late, and we were all too tired, to go round to
the usual ascent on the other side; so we urged our animals
up the steep and pathless rocks, here and there overgrown
with brushwood, thorns, and thistles, fit only to be traversed
by goats and conies.

The monks, who had been our guests on the way, now
acted as our guides and hosts, for they were on convent
ground. They warned us to grasp the manes of our tired
steeds firmly, as they moimted the steep ledges ; and I
now found the disadvantage of being on a pony without
a mane. After about ten minutes' difllcult riding, we
reached a cultivated garden, on a plateau, in front of the
large, well-built convent.

Fr^re Charles, an old friend of my brother, came out to
meet and welcome us, and kissed him and the two monks
again and again.

We were about six hundred feet above the plain, with a
magnificent scene before us ; the sun was just going down,

* The Arabic name for the Locnst tree is '' Khardb," and the beans
are commonly called '' St. John's bread."

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 79

and the Great Sea was flooded with crimson Kght The bay
of Akka and the plain surrounded by the hills of Galilee
were on our right; the ruins of an ancient port and fortress
on the level strip of land below us ; and at about a mile
to the right of it stood the little town of Haifa — ^very inte-
resting to me, for it was there I was to make a home with
my brother, at H.B.M. vice-consulate.

We spent a pleasant evening with the good monks. It
was Friday; they did not let us fast, but sat by us, in
pleasant chat, while we enjoyed fish, flesh, and fowl from
their excellent cuisine. After dinner, we went to the divan,
or drawing-room; and I looked through the convent album,
which is quite a polyglot, containing the autographs of
many great and celebrated characters, testimonies to the
kindness and hospitaUty always met with here.

Three or four examples of misplaced zeal and intolerance
have called forth the satire, wit, and displeasure of less
prejudiced pilgrims ; and Frfere Charles pointed out to me
a few pages crossed, re-crossed, and interlined by indignant
conmientators. He remarked that they always seemed to
be particularly interesting to English people, provoking
laughter and anger by turns. The pages had evidently
been translated to him.

We gratefully rested that night in clean, comfortable,
neatly-furnished rooms, and on French mosquito-curtained
beds. In the morning, I heard the swell of the organ and
the chanting of the monks at an early hour. A servant
brought caf6 au lait to my room at seven, and told me my
brother had already gone down to Haifa.

Fr^re Charles and our fellow-travellers conducted me to
the chapel, which has a finely-proportioned dome and
marble floor, and a few sculptured figures in alabaster.

The ground-floor of the convent is occupied by the ofllces,
kitchens, pharmacy, and surgery ; and a large portion of it
is set apart for a place of shelter for poor pilgrims.

The first floor, consisting of a fine suite of lofty rooms, is
nicely furnished, and prepared for travellers, who are
expected to pay first-class hotel prices, but no dii'ect charge

80 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

is made. The second floor is reached by a narrow stair-
case, at the foot of which an inscription in Italian and
French proclaims that females are not admitted. The
monks told me that there was an excellent library of
English, Latin, French, and Italian books up there, as well
as a large refectory and a great number of cells ; and the
terraced roof made a fine promenade for the recluses.

Presently a kawass came, bringing a horse for me, and an
invitation to spend the day with Mr. Finn, whose tents
were pitched just outside Haifa ; so with Katrine, in her
blue shirt and white veil, by my side, and the kawass
leading the way, I emerged from the convent buildings
and gradually descended on the north-east side by a wind-
ing path almost like a rocky staircase. The upper part of
the hill was covered with wild flowers, fragrant herbs, shmbs,
artichokes, acanthus, and dwarf oaks, and on the lower
terraces a fine grove of olives and some fig-trees flourished.

The little town of Haifa was in sight, flags above all the
consulates were waving a welcome to Mr. Finn and my
brother ; I was quite surprised to recognise so many ; they
were French, Austrian, Prussian, .Greek, Dutch, and
American, and made the place look quite cheerful

We rode through a beautiful olive grove in the plain at
the foot of the hill, crossed several stubble fields, some
rocky waste land and young plantations, and found the
tents of Mr. Finn under a large terebinth-tree, near to the
sea-shore, not very far from the west wall of the town.

Visitors were coming and going all day, and coffee and
pipes were in constant requisition.

The view from the open tent, looking towards the north,
was very lovely. I will try to make you see it, as I saw it
on that sunny afternoon. Fancy a foreground of white
rocks and dark thorny bushes, then a stony bridle path
skirting a garden which gently slopes towards the shore, so
that the broad sands are quite concealed by its fruit trees,
and the blue sparkling sea looks as if it came close up to
the hedge of prickly pears below. On the left-hand side
of the picture the sea meets the sky ; but from the rigjrt P*

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTIKE. 81

range of nndulatii^ hills, tinted with crimson, purple,
and orange, extend more than half-way across it, termi-
nating in a bold white cliflf or headland, called Eas el
Abiod, standing out in strong contrast to the dark blue
sky and darker sea.

The opposite shore of the bay, nine miles distant, is
marked by a level line of white sand, which seems to
separate the sea from the green plains at the foot of the
hills ; and on a low promontory to the right of Eas el
Abiod, the proud-looking little city of *Akka is con-
spicuous, and forms the central point of the picture.
Above the clearly defined summits of the hills silvery
clouds are resting; Mount Hermon rises in the distance
pale and shadowy, till the sun is 'low, and then it is tinged
with gold and violet ; four ships are at anchor on the right,
and a vessel in full sail is entering the bay from the north ;
a man-of-war is cruising about far out at sea. A tall palm-
tree on one side, and an oak, and a seared, white-branched
fig-tree on the other, enclose this coup d'ceil. The bridle- **
path across the foreground was enlivened by passers-by,
such as troops of bare-footed boys, driving donkeys laden
with hewn stpnes, which had been taken from the ruins of
the fortress, and were about to be used in H&ifa, where
many new houses were in progress, and still more were
planned. Camels laden with grain and melons jolted by,
and a few townspeople passed backwards and forwards as
if to peep at our tents. At sunset there came large num-
bers of goats and cattle, led towards the town to be secured
there for the night, for it is not safe to leave them in the
open country, even in the care of the well-armed herds-
men.

Hsdfa is a walled town, in the form of a parallelogram,
pleasantly situated close to the sea, on a gently rising slope.
A steep hill (a spur of Moimt Carmel) rises immediately
behind it, and is crowned by a small castle, to which I
climbed with Mr. Finn, and thence looked down into the
town ; the houses are distributed irregularly ; those occu-
pied by consuls and merchants are large, substantial buUd-

G

82 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINK

ings of hewn stone, with central courts and broad terraces.
The poorer class of houses are of earth and rough stone,
and have no upper chambers. All the roofs are flat.

On each side of the little town there are fine fruit
gardens, where the pomegranates and figs especially
flourish. A grove of palm-trees borders the sandy shore
on the east of the town.

I returned to the convent to sleep, and after spending
the next day, Sunday, with Mr. Finn at the tents, I pre-
pared to enter Haifa for the first time, by moonlight.

CHAPTEE V.

ALTHOUGH the tents were very near to the town, Mr.
Finn laughingly insisted that I should not make my
first entry into H4ifa on foot ; so I mounted, and, with my
brother and a few of his Arab friends walking by my side,
traversed the bridle-path by the gardens, and approached
the embattled stone gateway; its heavy wooden doors
(covered with hides and plates of iron) were thrown open for
us, on their creaking hinges, by the sleepy wardens, whose
mattresses were spread on stone platforms in the square
vaulted chamber of the gate. They welcomed us with the
words, " Enter in in j[>eaceJ' We said, " May Ood preserve
you ; good night.'* And they answered, " A thousand good
nights to you ; " but their greetings were almost drowned
by the angry barking of a troop of dogs, roused by the
clanging of the great doors behind us.

Within the town, wherever there was space, flocks and
herds were lying down, crowded together in the moonlight ;
and in the narrow, tortuous, dirty, channeled streets we
met now and then a moaning, miserable-looking, sleepless
cow or stray donkey.

We passed a little belfried Latin chapel, shaded by a
pepper-tree (just like a willow), and a simple mosque and
minaret, with a palm-tree near it, and then came to a
pleasant opening close to the sea-shore, where a number of
camels, camel-drivers, and peasants were sleeping round
the red embers of a wood fire.

I dismounted at the entrance of a house overlooking this
scene, and passed under a low arched gateway, into a

02

84 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

roughly-paved open court, brightened by the lamps and
lanterns in the rooms all round it, the doors of which were
open, for their inmates, our neighbours, were watching and
waiting to see and welcome us.

I mounted a steep uncovered stone stairway to a broad
landing, dignified by the name of terrace, leading to two
square lofty airy rooms, with white-washed walls and stone
floors, where my brother had formerly lived for a year or
more ; this was to be our temporary home, and Katiine,
with the help of an upholsterer (an Arab Jew), had been
very busy making them ready for us.

At the end of the terrace was a little room, in which
were aU the requisites for preparing pipes, coffee and
sherbets; narghU^s, chibouques, tobacco-bags, coffee-cups,
and glasses garnished its walls; and Yflse^ our little
coffee boy, pipe-bearer and page, who, to his infinite satis-
faction, presided over it, came out, arrayed in all his best,
to kiss my hands, and evidently did his utmost to make a
favourable impression on hi^ new mistress ; he had on clean
loose white cotton drawers, a scarlet cloth jacket, a shawl
girdle, and a white quilted cotton skull-cap. Katrine was
quite content with her new quarters below, and she told me
she had imexpectedly found some cousins in HSifa ; I congra-
tulated her, guessing, however, that this was only one of
her curious delusions.

My brother's dragoman and secretary, Mahomed, his
Egyptian groom, and several candidates for service at the
Vice-Consulate, crowded round to welcome me, and solicit
my favour and protection, in words which were exactly like
quotations from the Old Testament.

An elderly Moslem woman, with an anxious time-worn
face, came, and, after saluting me, said, " If now I have found
grace in your sighU speak for me to my lord, your brother,
that he may take my son into his service ; speak now, I pray
you, a word for my son, for he is my only son, and I am a
widow,"

Mattresses, cushions, and pillows, newly covered with
chintz, placed nearly all round the rooms on planks, sup-

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE. 85

ported by roughly-made low wooden trestles, a few pieces
of European furniture, and a pretty well stocked bookcase,
made the place look cosy and comfortable ; and the boat
torn Taatftra arrived safely during the night with our
luggaga

The next morning, September 24!th, two men from
Nazareth came to welcome us, and gave me a fatted lamb ;
soon afterwards a little party arrived from Shefa 'Omar, with
a camel load of fine water melons ; and a peasant from a
neighbouring village brought us some goat's milk cheese.

I must explain that these offerings are generally paid for,
at a rate considerably above the market price.

Saleh Sakhali our neighbour, a Christian Arab, an intel-
hgent, thoughtful looking man, took breakfast with us ; he
told me that my brother was the only Englishman who had
ever resided in HSifa, and that I was the first English girl
who had ever passed a night within the walls of the town ;
he said that very strange notions and opinions were held by
the Arabs about English women and English society, and
a great deal of curiosity was expressed by his friends on
the subject ; they hoped now to have an opportunity of
judging for themselves by personal intercourse with us.

Saleh did not understand any European language, but
he was clever and very quick of comprehension, and fond
of study ; he kindly volunteered to teach and hear me read
Arabic every day.

On inquiry I found that the population of HS.ifa Was, in
1854, computed thus : —

MoslemB • . • . 1,200

Greek Catholics . . 400 ) - ,, j. * xi. t» %

T- . . ^Q f Adherents of the Pope, and conse-

Maronit^s '.'.'.'. SO) ^^^^^^^ ^^®' ^""^^ patronage.
Orthodox Greeks . 800
Jews 82

Makmg a total of 2,012 Souls.

In the year 1860, the population was reckoned at about
2,300 souls. We went out and took leave o? Mr. Finn,

86 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

who was on the point of starting for 'Akka; his tents were
all cleared away ; then we called at each of T;he Consulates,
for among the Levantines the new coiner is expected to be
the first caUer. The French Consul (who in early youth
had served in the ranks of the first Napoleon) received us
heartily, and introduced me to his wife, a Syrian lady, who
spoke French fluently. The Austrian Consul is a native of
one of theDahnatian Isles, and the other consulates were held
by lonians and natives of Scio, who showed us great courtesy
and kindness. The American consular agent is an Arab,
who can speak a little broken English. The ladies of these
families were all either Syrian or Greek ; but they most of
them spoke Italian, and welcomed me into their circle with
graceful cordiality; two other families, of French extraction,
engaged in commerce, completed the European colony of
HSifa. Their houses were built in Oriental fashion, round
courts (some of which were paved with black and white
marble), and famished with Turkish divans and French
mirrors, consoles, pictures, &c. I must not omit the little
caf4 called the Victoria Hotel, and kept by a Maltese.

Wednesday, September 26th, a party of women in white
izzars, or sheets, from the court below, came early and
brought me several flat loaves of bread, stamped with a
cross, formed of groups of sacred monograms, 10. XO. NI.
KL, &c., in celebration of the Greek Feast of the Holy
Cross.

Pres*ently the Greek bishop of 'Akka visited us. He wore
a long blue cloth dress, very flowing and open, exposing an
under robe of crimson silk, a crimson girdle, and black
pointed shoes. He did not remove his low, brimless, black
hat, which curves slightly and spreads towards the crown.

When he and his suite had retired, a letter was handed to
my brother, which caused him to rise hastily and go out ;
I watched from the front window, and soon saw evident
signs of a commotion in the town ; little groups of armed
men were standing about in the open place, and passing
hurriedly to and fro ; in a short time I saw aU the consuls
in a body,* preceded by their Elawasses, carrying their

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 87

•

swords and tall silver-headed sticks, going towards the
Governor's caiftle, which was in sight. My brother ran np
for a moment to tell me that Ttreh and the villages in its
neighbourhood had united to attack Haifa, and 300 or 400
of the peasantry were just outside the walls attempting to
effect an entrance, — we were actually in a state of siege ;
the two gates were closed and guarded, and wherever the
walls were very weak, detachments of impromptu volunteers
were placed. I sat alone watching and wondering what
would happen ; men were parading the streets, and making
a great noise, and armed with old guns, staves, and swords
of all shapes ; the boys followed their example, by march-
ing about with sticks, shouting lustily, seemingly half for
fan and half for fear. I could hear the firing of guns now
and then &om the back of the town, and the loud screams
of the terrified women and children.

Girls from the neighbouriDg houses and the court below
flocked into my room, with their mothers, crying and
trembling ; they wondered why Madama Inglesi (as they
called me) did not show any signs of fear. I tried to calm
them, saying, "JBe at rest, Allah is good;*' but they
almost nonplussed me by replying, ^* Allah is good I
Praised he AUahl hut the sons of Ttreh are had!'' and
they refused to be comforted.

A group of heavily-armed, mounted horsemen were
prancing about, as if to excite all the people to action.

The consuls returned from the castle, where a council
had been held ; they had drawn up a protest against the
Government, and signed it.

I was told that four of the most venturesome of the
attacking party had been shot under the south wall, and
some of our townspeople had been slightly wounded. The
Tirehites had retreated ; but as it was expected they would
renew the attack at night, preparations were made to resist
it, for the walls of HSifa are not very strong, and could
easily be scaled or broken down.

A messenger was despatched to 'Akka, by boat, to demand
assistance; and in the meantime my brother, at the

88 POMESTIC UFE IN PALESTINE.

Governor's request, procured guns and ammunition from
an English ship in the port Our room frajs converted
into an armoury, and our stairway and terrace were soon
crowded with applicants for arms, which were cautiously
distributed. A Government-secretary stood by, making a
list of the names of the volunteers thus supplied.

By sunset the excitement had greatly increased, and no
one seemed to think of going to rest. The consuls kept a
careful look-out on the walls, and men paraded the town
by moonlight, shouting, " Our swords are strong, and our
trust is in Ood;*' and the boys, with their sticks uplifted,
echoed the words at the top of their voices.

Several Arab women, my neighbours, came and sat with
me when my brother went out ; one of them brought a
favourite Arab dish of bleached and crushed walnuts and
vermicelli, baked in butter and sugar (quite hot). These
women all wore full trowsers and tight jackets; some
were made of coloured prints, and others of striped Da-
mascus silk ; Katrine's simple Bethlehem dress was quite
strange to them, they had never seen the costume before.
They smoked, and chatted, and laughed, and cried by
turns, and retired hastily, veiling themselves, when my
brother came in at midnight to tell me that fifty artillery-
men and thirty Bashi BazfLka had arrived fix)m 'Akka, in
consequence of the consular protest ; they were placed in
proper positions as sentinels and patrols, and 300 or 400
of the peasantry of a friendly village came to oflfer their
assistance: many of them were mounted on horses and
carried long spears, the rest had heavy guns ; altogether,
the little place looked quite warlike. Thus protected, we
filept in peace.

The next morning a large party of horsemen arrived
from Shefe 'Omar and dismounted at our house, for they
had come, they said, especially to protect the English vice-
consulate.

The Tirehites had now quite retreated, but our little town
was still full of excitement ; the assembled volunteers and
armed peasantry were galloping about, singing and shout-

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE, 89

ing, and now and then firing their guns; they seemed
quite disappointed at not finding any especial use for
them: the place was so well guarded that there was no
longer any fear of an attack.

Just before sunset I stroUed out with my brother through
the quadrangle or castle-court (which was occupied by the
artilleTy), out at the east gate, through the Moslem cemetery
to the fruit-gardens and the palm-grove. We were return-
ing homewards on the sands when the loud and angry
shouting of some herdsmen attracted our notice ; a large
number of cattle, some of which were said to be stolen pro-
perty, were being led towards the town, and they were the
subjects of the dispute. A crowd soon assembled, the
noise increased, and an angry contest ensued, till words
were followed by blows. I was led out of the way, and
stationed on an iembankment, thrown up years ago by
Ibrahim Pasha's soldiers. The disturbance was, naturally,
misconstrued by the gallant volunteers and defenders of
H^a, and a troop of mounted peasantry issued from the
gates, their long spears uplifted, the dust flying under the
feet of their galloping horses, while their long striped
cloaks and shawl head-dresses (kefias) streamed like flags
or banners.

The cattle and goats fled in all directions, and in their
fright they did not seem to see where they were going, but
blundered into thickets, against rocks and tombs, and into
the sea. I was very nearly thrown down by some of them.

More than a hundred men came out before they dis-
covered it was only a false alarm, and then, regretfully,
they retraced their steps. Saleh, who was with us, told me
to consider it as a little " fantasia," got up for my especial
entertainment.

After our evening meal my brother was called away. I
puzzled over my Arabic lesson for some time, and then
went out on the terrace, where two of the men-servants
were already sleeping. It seemed to me like a dream to
be standing there alone in the moonlight, the night-silence
only broken by the rippling of the waves on the shore, the

90 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

bleating of my tethered lamb, and distant sounds of shout-
ing and singing.

The next day the Pasha of 'Akka arrived. He visited
each of the consuls, and then held a council at the castle.
It was proposed that a force should march against Ttreh, in
order to arrest and punish the plotters of the late attack
on HSifa ; but it was soon made apparent that the Tlrehites
had friends at Court and protectors in the Council. Some
Moslems of influence in H§,ifa had personal interest in the
prosperity of Ttreh, for they had considerable property
there, and some of the Tlrehites were largely in their
debt ; so, through their interference and bribes, the aflfair
was allowed to pass by almost unnoticed, notwithstand-
ing the strongly expressed indignation of the consuls and
others.

A few days afterwards, I was invited to a wedding in
the Sakhali family. Christian Arabs of the orthodox Greek
community.

.At about eight o'clock a.m. I was led into their church,
a domed building, lighted from shoye, and gaudy with
highly-coloured, distorted copies of ancient Byzantine pic*
tures ; for the Greeks, though not allowed to have images
to assist them in their devotions, may have pictures, pro-
vided they are not too life-like !

The body of the church, unencumbered by stalls or
chairs, was already nearly filled with wedding guests, hold-
ing lighted (home-made) wax tapers; one was placed in
my hands.

In the centre of the crowd, at a lectern, stood a priest,
and, immediately before him, the bride, closely shrouded in
a white izzar ; a many-coloured muslin veil entirely con-
cealed her features.

The bridegroom by her side, who was only seventeen,
wore a suit of sky-blue cloth, edged with gold thread, and
a handsome crimson and white shawl girdle : he had only
once seen the face of the bride, and that was six months
before, on the day of the betrothal.

The service was in Arabic, and rapidly uttered in clear

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINK 91

but monotonous tones: the most important part of it
seemed to be the Gospel narrative of the marriage at Cana,
in Galilee. While the priest was reading it, bread and
wine were handed to the young man ; he gave some to the
girl, who, in taking it, was very careful not to expose her
face.

Immediately afterwards, she held out one of her henna-
stained hands, and a jewelled ring was placed on her finger.
Two crowns, made of gUt foil, were brought by the bride-
groom's-man and bride's- woman, and placed on the heads
of the now married pair, who joined hands, and with their
two attendants walked round and round in the midst of
the people, who made way for them and sprinkled them
with rose-water and other scents as they passed, singing,
and shouting good wishes. By the time the circuit had
been made seven times, the veils of the bride and bride's-
woman were quite saturated, and the two men submitted,
without the slightest resistance, to have bottles of scent
emptied on their tarbouches. As the excitement increased,
the sprinklmg became general, and I came in for my share.
Thus ended the ceremony.

While this was going on, a continual shriU screaming
accompaniment was kept up by the female friends of the
bride, who were crowded together in the latticed gallery
overhead. There were very few women in the body of
the church, and those were near relations of the bride or
bridegroom.

Presently the men formed a procession, and with the
bridegroom in their midst, walked out of church. A pipe-
bearer, carrying a handsome chibouque, was in attendance,
and he handed it to the bridegroom whenever the leaders
paused to dance the sword dance, or to sing some wild ex-
travagant love-song. Eose-water was poured on his head
&om the Toofe or windows of the houses under which he
passed

Etiquette required that he should look quite calm and
composed in the midst of the noise and excitement. I was
told by Saleh that he preserved his dignified demeanour

92 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

throughout the day, whUe his friends and feUow-townsmen
were feasting and making merry round him, and singing
bridal songs.

In the meantime, the bride, with her female attendants
and companions, all veiled, and shrouded in white, walked
very slowly towards her home — ^the home of her child-
hood ; for she was not to go forth to meet the bridegroom
till after sunset. I accompanied her. We all carried our
tapers, although it was the third hour, i.e. about nine
o'clock A.M. We paused now and then while one of the
professional singing women improvised a solo, suitable for
the occasion ; and all the women took up the words, and
joined in chorus, as we walked on again. One verse was
in allusion to the presence of a daughter of England at the
wedding; it was regarded as a favourable omen. The
chorus was a prayer for the peace and happiness of the
English girL

We mounted a broad, covered stone staircase, and, pass-
ing through a corridor, entered a large, many-windowed
room. The bride was led to a sort of throne, made of
cushions and embroidered pillows, and I was placed by
her side. Her white izzar and veil were taken off; she
looked dreadfully faint and fatigued. She was not more
than fourteen years old, with an oval face, rather large lips,
and black, delicately arched eyebrows. Her eyes were shut ;
for custom makes it a point of honour for a bride to keep
them closed, from the time she leaves the church till the
moment she meets th« bridegroom at night. She sat in
state, in a kneeling posture, resting on her heels, while the
palms of her hands wore placed flat on her knees, as some
Indian deities are represented. Her head-dress was almost
concealed by strings of pearls, festoons of small gold coins,
diamond (or paste) rosettes, and flower-sprays; and her
long hair, twisted with braid in nine plaits, hung down her
back, heavy with little gold ornaments and coins.

She wore a purple velvet jacket, very open in front,,
showing her crape shirt and her chest, which was actually
adorned with little bits of leaf-gold! Her necklace, or

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINH. 93

collar of gold coins, was very beautiful ; her skirt of white
and yellow silk almost concealed her full, yellow silk
drawers. Her hands and arms were chequered with deep
orange-brown henna stains; but what struck me more
than all was the glossy, shining lustre of her skin.

While I had been intently watching and observing the
bride, the company of women had quite transformed them-
selves ; they had thrown off their white izzars and veils,
and now appeared in all the colours of the rainbow, in all
sorts of combinations. The faces of many looked as glossy
as the bride's. Nearly all of them had very large dark
eyes, with the edges of the eyelids blackened with kohl.
Their mouths were rather wide, and revealed large, very
perfect white teeth, which glistened as the teeth of wild
animals do. Their complexions were generally dark, but
brilliant and clear. They came forward, one by one, to
kiss the bride's hand ; but she remained quite passive, and
did not answer any salutations. Dancing and singing com-
menced : a woman kept time with a tambourine, and two
or three dancers stood up in the centre of the room, and
attitudinized gracefully but voluptuously ; beginning veiy
slowly — advancing, as if reluctantly and timidly, towards
some imaginary object — then retreating, only to advance
again, gradually quickening both step and action. The
lookers on sat round on the matted floor, in a double row,
clapping their hands in harmony with the tambourine, and
singmg wUd, passionate songs, to melodies in a minor key,
in two-four time. As soon as one dancer was tired, another
stood up and replaced her; and four of them worked them-
selves up into such a state of excitement, that they looked
as if they were dying when, at last, they gave way. Some
of the younger girls wore white calico dresses, with small
gold spangles sewn aU over them in clusters ; others had
on white thin muslin skirts, over blue or red silk trousers,
and red or black velvet jackets ; and, when they danced,
they held in their hands embroidered shawls, which they
waved about gracefully. Sweetmeats, fruit, creams, and
various dishes, were served at midday.

94 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

After sunset, the mother and female relations of the
bridegroom came to fetch the bride ; and then she com-
menced crying and wailing bitteriy. This is expected
of her ; and, whether she feel regret or no, she must
show signs of sorrow on leaving her home, and must also
appear imwilling to go forth to meet the bridegroom. This
real or affected reluctance is sometimes carried to such
an extent, that the weeping bride has to be pushed
and dragged along very ungracefully. I have witnessed
ludicrous scenes of this kind. The veiled bride (whoser
eyes are still supposed to be closed, but she does peep
about a little) is generally lifted on to a horse; and though
her new home may be only in the next street, she makes
a tour through the town or village, riding very slowly,
attended by a large company of women and girls, carrying
flaming torches, and screaming and singing wildly.

I have often lent my horse to a poor girl, that she may
thus ride in triumph, lifted up among the crowd of torch-
bearers, to meet her bridegroom ; and very often, just before
midnight, I have been attracted to the window to see such
processions pass by.

Before the going forth of the bride, a party of men and
women convey her trousseau by torch-light to her new
home. A red wooden cradle and a red box are always the
most conspicuous objects ; and sometimes a small looking-
glass, in a gilt frame, is proudly displayed— pillows covered
with bright-coloured silks, a trayftd of scented soap, and
perhaps a mattress or two, and a lehaff, according to the
rank of the bride.

On subsequent and persevering inquiry among Arab
ladies, I found out how it was that the bride's face
looked so lustrous. I learnt that girls are prepared for
marriage with a very great deal of ceremony. There are
women who make the beautifying of brides their especial
profession !

A widow woman, named Angelina, is the chief artisU in
this department of art in Haiifa. She uses her scissors and
tweezers freely and skilfully to remove superfluous hair.

DOMESTIC LUTE IN PALESTINE. 95

and trains the eyebrow to an arched line, perfecting it with
black pigments. She prepares an adhesive plaster of very
strong, sweet gum, and applies it by degrees all over the
body, letting it remain od for a minute or more ; then she
tears it off quickly, and it brings away with it all the soft
down or hair, leaving the skin quite bare, with an un-
naturally bright and polished appearance, much admired
by Orientals. The face requires very careful manipula-
tion.* When women have once submitted to this process,
tbey look frightful, if from time to time they do not repeat
it ; for the hair never grows so soft and fine again. Per-
haps this is one of the. reasons why aged Arab women, who
have quite given up all these arts of adornment, look so
haggard and witch-like. In some instances this ordeal
slightly irritates the skin, and perfumed sesame or olive-
oil is applied, or cooling lotions of elder-flower water
are used.

The bride invites her friends to accompany her to the
public bath previous to the wedding day, and sends to
each one a packet of henna, two or three pieces of soap,
and two wax candles. Angelina is generally the bearer
of the message and of these articles, which are always
to be paid for. I have now and then accepted such
invitations.

Bridal parties assemble and sometimes pass three succes-
sive days in the luxury of the Turkish bath. Pipes, sherbet,
coffee, and other refreshments are served, and songs are
sung in honour of the bride, who is, of course, attended by
Angelina, and forms the centre of attraction. Her hair is
unbraided, she is slowly disrobed, and then, with her loins
slightly girdled with crimson silk, she is moimted on high
clogs, and led through halls and passages gradually in-
creasing in temperature, with fountains overflowing their

* Did David allude to this custom (which is evidently a very ancient
one) when he prayed for the physical prosperity of his kingdom, and said,
" May our daughters he cu comer stones, polished after the similUude of a
paiacef" It is only as brides or wives that they could be recognised,^
comer stones, helping to build up the nation, and it is then that their
faces are made .to shine.

96 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

marble floors ; she is placed on a marble platform, near to
a jet of hot water ; fullers* earth is rubbed on her head,
she is lathered with soap, and brushed with a handful of
tow ; then hot water is poured over her freely, she is
swathed in long towels, and by slow degrees conducted
back to a more moderate temperature, and lastly to a
fountain of cool water. Her companions in the meantime
undergo the same process. Then, shrouded in muslin, crape
or linen, they sit together, smoking, till they are rested and
refreshed.

The edges of the eyelids are blackened thus : — a little
instrument, like a silver bodkin, is- dipped in water, and
then into a bottle or box containing an impalpable powder
called hohl, made of antimony and carefully prepared soot;
the blackened point is drawn gently along between the
almost closed lids of the eyes. Poor people use soot alone,
and apply it with pins made of lignum vitse.*

The arms and hands, legs and feet, are bandaged with
narrow tape or braid, like sandals, crossing and re-crossing
each other ; then a paste made of moistened henna powder
(the pulverised leaves of the henna tree — LawBonia) is
spread and bound over them, and allowed to remain on
for several hours. When it is removed, the skin is
found deeply dyed wherever the tape (which is now un-
wound) did not protect it; thus a sort of chequered pattern
is produced, and when it is artistically and delicately done
(as Angelina can do it), the feet look, at a distance, as if
they were sandalled, and the hands, as if they were covered
with mittens of a bright orange or bronze colour.

Finally, early on the wedding-day, the bride is dressed
in her bridal robes ; her hair is braided (in what we call

• This process is probably referred to by Ezekiel xxiii. 40. " Ye have
sent for men to come from far ; for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst
thy eyeSf and deckedst thyself with ornaments." And it is written that
Jezebel " painted her eyes," or " put her eyes in painting." And Jeremiah
says in the fourth chapter and thirtieth verse, " Though thou deckest thee
with ornaments of gold ; though thou rentest thy face (or as it should be
written, thint eyes) with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair/' &a
So we may regard the use of kohl as a very ancient custom.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE, 97

the Grecian plait), small pieces of leaf-gold are stuck on
her forehead and on Ijer breast ; care is taken not to con-
ceal any of the stars or spots tattooed on her face or chest
in infancy ; a line of blue dots encircling the lips is some-
times seen, and a spot on the chin is very common. A
little rouge is added to heighten the colour of the cheeks
when considered necessary.

Angelina gets in sad disgrace with the clergy of Haifa,
for encouraging all this vanity (out of which she by-the-
by makes a good living), and she goes from one church
to another for absolution, sometimes reckoning herself a
Greek, and sometimes a Latin, and sometimes a Melchite,
according to the leniency of the respective priests.

The Arab women are very much wedded to the ancient
customs of the country, and they will not abandon them
notwithstanding the persevering efforts of the priesthood.

The Greek Catholic Church vainly pronounces ana-
themas, and threatens with excommunication those women
who tattoo themselves, and use kohl, and henna, and rouge ;
they will persist in it while they believe it adds to their
beauty, and to their powers of attraction, and in vain the
noisy processions at weddings and at burials are forbidden,
so long as the people believe them to be propitioua Their
respect for custom is stronger even than their fear of the
Church, and if the priests persisted in carrying out their
threats of excommunication for such offences, their congre-
gations would soon be scattered ; so they are lenient, and
thus Greek and Eoman forms of Christianity are blended
insensibly with ceremonies and practices so ancient that
their origin even is unknown.

This is not the only difficulty which the priests find to
contend with in the pastoral care of Arab women.

In 1859 a number of black silk mittens were sold in
H^a by a pedlar from Beirut. They were a novelty to
the Arab women, who were quite proud of this addition
to their toilette, and displayed their mittened hands
delightedly in church. The priest of the Greek Catholic
community actually denounced them from the altar, for-

98 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

bidding the adoption of gloves, mittens, or any new and
expensive luxury in their dress, and cautioned them also
against exposing any part of their ornamental head-dresses
in church !

I had a very interesting conversation a few days after-
wards with the utterer of this denunciation, and he
explained to me his reason for this seemingly strange inter«>
ference about the mittens. He said he considered it very
important to check, if possible, the inroad of Frank taste
among the Arab women ; for, if they were to adopt the
Frank dress, which requires many changes of apparel, and
alters its fashions frequently, a trotisseau would be so
expensive that young men would not be able to marry, and
early unions, which are so desirable in the East, would be
prevented The costly articles of a genuine Arab ward-
robe last a lifetime, and are heirlooms, whei^^as the gala
dresses of a Frank wardrobe must be renewed every year.
This priest spoke feelingly, for he was an Arab, a husband,
and the father of a large family of girls. It is quite clear
that in matters of fashion and custom, the priests have very
little influence ; but in towns where the Arabs have much
intercourse with Europeans, they gradually adopt some of
their manners, and imitate their costumes, by degrees
abandoning their own.

On the 1st of October the victories in the Crimea were
announced and celebrated in 'Akka; five times during
the day, twenty-one guns were fired, and at night the town
was illuminated, and bonfires were made on the hills which
encircle the bay. In H4ifa a great portion of the lately
acquired supply of ammunition was used iafeux dejoie, the
minaret and the consulates were lighted up, and we bor-
rowed lamps from the Jewish synagogue to deck the
English flagstaff!

At night the place was very animated We went out
with Saleh Sakhali, and Mohammed Bek, a distinguished
looking handsome Moslem, and two or three of his friends.
Ylisef led the way, with " a lantern for our feet." It
threw light now and then on such muddy pools, guttered

DOMESTIC UFE IN PAliESTIKE. 99

streets, and heaps of vegetable refuse, that it was quite indis-
pensable. We made our way to the narrow, ill-constructed
but well-supplied bazaar, which is generally deserted at
sunset, but that night the shops were all open ; pipes, red
and yellow shoes and boots, embroidered slippers, Man-
chester prints, Damascus silks, purple linen, shawls, jars,
lamps and cooking utensils, fruit, sweetmeats, and samples
of grain, were exposed by the light of a hundred lanterns,
and groups of Arabs in their f!te day dresses were on all
the counters ; and in the open ca^ and barbers' shops, story-
tellers and singers attracted earnest listeners. Showers of
sugar-plums were thrown from one side of the place to the
other, and boys were busy scrambling for them.

Mohammed Bek and Saleh and a few Arab friends spent
the evening with us: one of them inquired what kind
of stories of romances English people liked.

We had recently read "Jane Eyre," so my brother began
translating it to them, au courant, somewhat condensing
it, and adapting it to Arab comprehension. The listeners
were so interested that they came several successive nights
for an hour or two to hear it to the end. I mention this
because two years afterwards, when travelling in the inte-
rior, we heard this story, somewhat altered and modified, but
well told, by an Arab who did not know its source : we
soon traced it to some of our guests of that night. Perhaps
some future collector of Arabian tales may be puzzled by
hearing the Oriental version of this very unortental romance,
and may fancy he has found the origin of the plot of " Jane
Eyre," and rob the little imaginative recluse of Yorkshire of
the credit of her wonderful power and originality.

^sop's fables, freely translated in the same way, with
the help of iUustrations, gave great pleasure to our Arab
friends ; our maps puzzled them, and excited their interest
and curiosity, and they had faith in them, when they
found that by the assistance of a map of Palestine, I, a
stranger, could tell the names and directions of most of the
towns and villages for nules around.

The Moslem guests y^eie at first rather shy, and hardly

h2

loo DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

ventured to address me, for they are not in the habit of
seeing any women except their wives, slaves, and servants,
and they never see any Christian women.

I had been advised to avoid meeting my brother's
Moslem guests, for the sole reason that they seclude their
' female relatives, but we did not wish to imitate Oriental
exclusiveness unnecessarily, and I found much to interest
me in my intercourse with them ; they always behaved to
me with respectful and chivalrous kindness.

The Levantine ladies (who hide themselves from Moslems
almost as scrupulously as the native Arabs do) were rather
surprised, and they explained to me that it was quite con-
trary to custom, for Moslems to see females out of their
own families, and that the laws of their religion forbade
them to do so.

I took the first opportunity to make inquiry on the
subject, and when two or three of the most intell^ent and
learned of our Moslem friends were assembled one evening
at our house, I told them I had an important question to
ask them. I first reminded them that neither the customs
of my country, nor the voice of my conscience, forbade me
to see any of my fellow-creatures. On the contrary, I was
taught to love every one, knowing that we are all of one
family, the children of one God, and created by his wUl.
Then I said, " Is there any law (which you regard as sacred
and binding) forbidding you to see and converse with
women out of your own individual families? If there is
such a law, I wUl not cause you to disobey it, but will help
you to keep it, by hiding myself from you."

They seemed to be taken by surprise, but they clearly
explained and proved to me that there is no law of the
kind, and it is the law of custom only which immures
the women in their harims. Mohammed Bek said that
their women are now quite unfitted for society, and would
not know how to conduct themselves in the presence of
strangers. •'If we gave them liberty, they would not
know how to use it. Their heads are made of wood. They
are not like you, When you speak, we no longer remember

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 101

that you are a girl : we think we are listening to a sheik.
To live in the world knowledge and wisdom are necessary.
Our wives and daughters have neither wisdom nor know-
ledge. Give them wisdom, and we will give them liberty."

Satisfied on this point, I continued to see them, and I
never had reason to regret it I think I gave them some
new ideas on the capabilities and capacities of women,
which may in time be turned to account.

Yassin Agha, one of our most frequent guests, invited
me to visit his family. I went with my brother. We were
first received in a large vaulted room by the Agha and his
sons and a few Moslem gentlemen, then the eldest son was
desired to conduct me to the harim, that part of the house
especially occupied by women. He led me across a court,
and up an open stairway, into a large, handsome room
paved with marble, where a group of women waited to
welcome me. He introduced me to his grandmother, an
aged-looking women, almost blind, and to his own mother,
and then he left me. They wore jackets and full trowsers
made of common print They led me into an inner apart-
ment, where a younger wife of the Agha, gaily decked with
embroidery, jewellery, and flowers, was seated with a number
of children, slaves, and servants (the latter seemed to
occupy almost the same position in the establishment as
their mistresses, but some of them were very dirty, untidy,
and ragged). In an open brazier in the middle of this
room a charcoal fire was burning, and a little child sick
with fever was on a mattress in the comer. The air was
dry and hot, and I found it difScult to breathe, especially
when they all crowded round me. My dress was examined
with curiosity, and if I had not gently but firmly resisted,
I think I should have been disrobed, so eager were they to
see how my clothes were made and fastened. They patted
me, stroked my hair, and called me all sorts of pet names ;
they asked me if I were betrothed, and whether my brother
had a harim, and if he were fair and handsome. When I
took off my light kid gloves, one of the children began to
ciy, saying, "Behold, see, the stranger is skinning her

«>

1Q2 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

hands." Lemonade and sweetmeats were handed to me,
and cofiPee was prepared by a black slave, who crouched
down by the charcoal fire. Narghiles and long pipes were
passed from one to another ; the one which I smoked had
a very beautiful jewelled mouthpiece, sent up by the Agha
for my use. I explained to them I had learnt to smoke in
their country, and that in England ladies do not smoke.
They took me into a room well stocked with lehaflfs and
mattresses, some of which were covered with silk. They
asked if I could work, and were surprised when I an-
swered I could make all my clothes. They told me that
nearly all their dresses were made by tailors, and that their
mattresses, lehafiPs, and divans were covered and made by
upholsterers, so that they did very little needlework them-
selves. The eldest son, wha had been my guide, came to
fetch me, and took me into a smaU but lofty room, with
palm fronds at least twelve feet long in each comer, and
dates hanging up in rich clusters from the rafters.

I called afterwards on Mohammed Bek ; he only had one
wife, a pleasant young woman, who, with her infant
daughter, were under the especial duennaship of the Bek's
mother, one of the most dignified-looking Arab women I
ever saw.

The young wife, Miriam, was dressed in a dark cloth
jacket and pink cotton trowsers. She was very much
tattooed ; a row of blue dots round Jier large thick lips, a
star on her forehead, and a Kttle crescent on her chin. Her
eyebrows were strongly marked, and her lashes very long.
At her side, in her girdle, she had a gold crescent-shaped
box or case, embossed and chased ; it contained an inscrip-
tion in Arabic characters, and she regarded it as a potent
charm.

Her little child had on a green silk skull cap, to which
were fastened coins, strings of pearls, and a blue bead to
avert the effect of the glance of an "evil eye." Broad
bands of silver, with tinkling bells attached to them, were
fastened round her ankles, and she pattered about on the
matted floor with her little naked feet to make them ring.

.DOMESTIC LIFE Cf PALESTINE. 103

She had on a tight green silk jacket, and short full Turkish
trowsers, and a small red shawl for a girdle.

I liked these people very much, and often went to see
them. One day when I called (about two years after my
first visit) Miriam' told me that she feared her husband was
looking out for another wife ; some Moslem ladies, who had
heard the rumour at the Turkish baths, had told her. She
said, "I have lived iox four years with the Bek and his
mother, and I have been very happy, but I shall be happy
no longer if he brings home a new bride ; she will take his
soul from me. Speak to him, oh, my sister, that he may
not take another wife ; he will listen to you, for your words
are pearls and diamonds/*

I ascertained afterwards that the report was true, for
Mohammed was negotiating a marriage with a girl of a
tribe of the Metwalis ; this was, however, soon afterwards
broken off, for the family or clan to which the Bek belonged
became involved in a feud with the Metwalis, consequently
the marriage could not take place. Mohammed had never
seen the lady, so he was easily consoled, and Miriam
rejoiced exceedingly.

In a third harim which I visited I found four wives, who
seemed to live very contentedly together ; they were kindly
treated and very much indulged, and were often allowed to
go (well guarded) to the Turkish baths, and to visit other
harims.

Their husband, Sheik Abdallah, always had in his estab-
lishment the full allowance of four wives, and when one
died the vacancy was soon filled. Though still in the prime
of life, he had already had seven wives. I ascertained by
degrees from them that they held supremacy in turn, for
the space of a few days or a week, and the honoured one
was said to be " holder of the heysy' for during her tempo-
rary sway she is always in full dress, the mistress of the
reception-room, and the favoured one of the lord of the
harim, while the rest attend to the cooking and household
matters. This family seemed to be very well regulated,
and I never saw any signs of ill-feeling between the wives.

104 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE

although the youngest and prettiest had no children, while
the eldest, a lady of Nabulus, had three sons, and the two
others, who came respectively from Saida and Damascus,
had each a son and daughter.

The sheik always sought for wives in various and far
distant towns. After marriage the women rarely if ever came
in contact with their relatives ; thus, having no connexions
in H&ifa, they naturally sympathized with each other as
strangers in a strange place. There were no old quarrels
or jealousies to revive ; on the contrary, there must have
been subjects of novelty and interest to communicate, and
perhaps this was one of the reasons why Abdallah*s harim
was more homelike and harmonious than any other
which I visited.*

The chief room is long and narrow, with unglazed wooden
latticed windows on three sides of it ; a raised divan at one
end, and narrow carpeted and cushioned mattresses on the
floor close to the walls.

I had known this family about three years, when one
day as I sat in thai; loom,^ surrounded by the four wives,
their children, and slaves, the sheik himseK was suddenly
announced. All rose up at his coming. He took his seat
by my side on the divan. None of the women ventured to
sit in his presence until he invited them to do so.

They all vied with each other to serve him : one placed
a pillow for him cosily, another handed him sherbet, and

* It Beems to me that Sheik Abdallah thus carried out, in its most
extreme sense, the spirit of the injunction of Moses, not to take a woman* 8

f»

sister to tnfe ** to vex her in her life-time*

Abdallah would not even run the risk of marrying any two members of
one family, or even two girls from the same town or village ; he was shrewd
and clever, and understood the disadvantages of such unions. When Moses
gave the above law he was legislating for a people who, like the Moslems, prac-
I tised polygamy and recognized it as lawful. He in his wisdom may not have

approved of it, but he tried to mitigate its evils, and make the best of it ;
he had no doubt often witnesed (as I have done) the quarrels, disputes, aud
jealousies which arise in harims where the several wives of one man are
nearly related to each other. The more remote the connexion or relation-
ship among the women in a harim, the more chance there appears to be of
peace within its walls.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINl^. 105

the favoured one had the especial privilege of preparing
and lighting his pipe. He spoke very gently and kindly to
them all, and fondled his children lovingly. He was in
indoor costume, and wore a long gown, called a kftmbaz,
made of white goat's hair, striped with white spun silk,
and over it a bright blue cloth pelisse, edged with fiu*, a
very large white muslin turban, and yellow pointed slippers,
without stockings.

I asked him if he had any books : so he despatched one of
his little sons, with orders to bring to me all that were in
the house ; and soon a slave came with a pile of dusty folios,
consisting of MS. copies of the Koran illuminated pro-
fusely, books of medicine and magic ; but the favourite
volume was brought by one of the wives. It was a thick,
clumsy-looking quarto, and consisted of careful and de-
tailed interpretations of dreams and omens of all kinds ;
in fact, it was a MS. divination dictionary. The subjects
were arranged in alphabetical order, beautifully written in
large red letters, and the explanations were in black ink :
the paper was so thick, yellow, and glossy, that I at first
mistook it for vellum. As the sheik turned over the leaves
of this book, he said, " Lady, what was the dream of your
last sleep V I reflected an instant, and answered, " I was
walking by the sea-shore, near the river Kishon, and was
very tired, when suddenly a white horse, ready saddled, rose
and stood before me, as if offering his services, so I mounted
and rode on as if I were flying till I awoke." The women
cried out, " It is a good dream ! " and the sheik looked in
the dictionary for the words "white horse," and "sea-
shore," and, after some consideration, assured me that my
dream was a very good one, and that though great dangers
surrounded me, I should certainly escape from them. None
of the women could read a single letter ; but if anything
could induce them to learn, I think it would be their
desire to read that book, every line of which they listened
to most eagerly.

A tray of sweetmeats, nuts, fruit, and other dishes, was
brought in : the sheik ate with me, and then retired, for

106 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

none of the women would eat in his presence. I never
saw an instance of an Arab woman eating with men,
except' in families which had been strongly influenced
by European society.

These ladies were all very clever in making preserves,
marmalade, and sweetmeats, and in preparing meat dishes,
and seemed to be very devoted mothers. The children
looked happy, and the elder sons were fine intelligent
youths.

In spite of the good-natured cheerfulness of the women,
I felt there was something wanting: only the material
part of their nature was developed, and developed so dis-
proportionately, that the Moslems were right when they
said, that in their present state they are unfit for general
society.

In some of the harims the women live very unhappily,
and are only like spies on each other. In some cases men
who have two wives are obliged also to have two homes,
that peace may be ensured. The majority of Moslems do
not practise polygamy.

Disagreements frequently arise from jealousy about off-
spring : the wife who has only daughters looks with hatred
and envy on the mother rejoicing over an infant boy ; and
I can fully realize the passionate despair of Hannah when
provoked by Peninnah, and the muttered prayer and ex-
citement which Eli mistook for the frenzy of drunkenness ;
and I can fancy I hear her at last triumphing and exult-
ing over her son Samuel, in words of praise and prayer,
inspired by the strongest feeKngs of her nature.

I expected to find very large families in those houses
where there were two or more wives ; but, as a rule, this
was not the case ; and in the Jewish and Christian quar-
ters the children are much more numerous than in the
Moslem quarters. The Jews in Syria are permitted to
take ^ second wife, if the first has no hope of having any
children.
Early in October, on a pleasant afternoon, I went with
V brother into one of the fruit-gardens just outside

POMESTIO LIFE IN PALESTINE. 107

EHU&L We cautiously made our way, one by one, down
a short narrow lane of prickly pears, and passed a little
mud and stone hut, the dwelling of the gardener and his
family : they were Egyptians (who are considered much
more skilful than Arabs in the cultivation of the ground).
Fig-trees, pomegranates, almonds, elders, olives, pahns,
lemons, shaddocks (or, as they are called in Arabic, " le-
miin helft," sweet lemons), and cucumbers of many kinds,
flourished under his care. However, as everything is sold
in the market according to a tariff regulated by the govern-
ment, there is very L'ttle motive or inducement for emula-
tion among gardeners, and no attempt is made to improve
and perfect the delicious fruits and valuable vegetables of
the country, — quantity, without regard to quality, is the
consideration of the Oriental cultivator.

Under an olive-tree, in the middle of the garden, on an
old piece of matting, sat an aged Arab woman, her ragged
white linen head-dress arranged so as to shade her eyes,
which were afficted with ophthalinia; her cotton dress
was patched over and over again, and a heavy striped abbai,
or travelling cloak, was thrown over her feet. She was
latently mumbUng to herself, and slipping the beads of a
black rosary rapidly through her long thin fingers. Near
to her was a little nook made of piled-up stones and earth,
and covered with old matting : it was not much bigger
than the hood of a bassinette, but it was evidently in-
tended to shelter her head at night, for a roUed-up mattress
and some heavy wadded quilts were close to it. Old
clothes were hanging on the tree above her, not for the
sake of drying them, but the branch was her clothes-peg,
and the tree her wardrobe. Two basins were behind the
tree trunk, and the remains of a wood fire between two
blocks of stone : this was her kitchen. We greeted her
with " Peace be upon you" but she gave us only gloomy
answers, saying, " For me there is no jmice" and still con-
tinued fingering her beads, without raising her head. She
said an " evil eye " had looked upon her, and " destroyed
the power" of her life. A pleasant sound of faUing water

108 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTIKB.

attracted us up to the large square raised stoDe reservoir,
round which, seated on a low parapet, a party of Arabs were
smoking and chatting. Water was falling with some force
into this pool, from a duct supplied by large earthenware
jars, fixed with ropes, made of palm-fibre, to a large wheel,
which was kept in motion by a blindfolded mule, and as
it turned round it dipped into a well, and the jars were
filled with water, and in rising up again they emptied
themselves into the duct, and so on again and again, as
long as the mule kept up its monotonous round, urged on
by a little barefooted boy, stick in hand. A hole in the
lower part of the wall of the reservoir was every day un-
plugged for a certain time, and the water allowed to flow
into the little channels or furrows which traversed the
beds of vegetables and encircled the trees.

As we left the garden, a donkey, laden with the red
sheUs or rinds of pomegranates, passed us. I was sur-
prised to learn that the bright yellow dye used to stain
leather is prepared from them.

We were walking towards the sands, through the burial
ground : the sun had set. We had left behind us at some
distance aU the evening loungers about the town-gate, and
all the smokers by the well-side and the garden, when we
saw advancing towards us, in the twilight, a powerful-
looking black man, girdled with sackcloth, carrying a staff,
or rather the trunk of a slender tree, which still retained
two or three of its forked branches. The man was tall,
but his staff was high above him : he walked with an
unsteady gait, and we soon recognised him as an African
maniac, of whom some of the Europeans of Hfiifa had
complained to the governor, because he walked in the
streets quite naked : in consequence of this he had been
turned out of town. We passed him, and then he followed
close behind us, muttering and making strange noises. It
was not very pleasant to have such an attendant. We
turned sharply round and faced him, and then walked
towards the town : he turned also, and preceded us. We
were still among the tombs ; and, in the rapidly-increasing

DOBIESTIC UFE IN PALESTINE. 109

darkness, it appeared the dreariest place imaginable,-
rocky and desolate, with tombs of all periods, some in the
last stages of decay, falling and crumbling into strange
shapes and heaps, others partially concealed by small dark
evergreen oaks, and here and there was a newly-whitened
sepulchre, which seemed to shine with a light of its own.
The black man did not accompany us beyond this domain
of death ; and when I looked back, and saw him standing
there among the tombs, swaying himself and his sceptre
to and fro, I could not help thinking of the description,
in the gospel narrative, of that man who met Christ on
the shores of the Sea of Galilee, and ^^ which had devils
long timCf and ware no clothes, neither ahode in any
house^ hut in the tombs"* I did not suppose the poor
African maniac was possessed of devils, but I thought he
might very likely be seized with the spirit of revenge ; so
I was glad to be out of his reach, and safe vnthin the
gates of the town.

* Luke viii. 27.

CHAPTEE VI.

ON Saturday, October IStli, we made ready for a trip
to Nazareth (N&sirah), to meet Mr. Finn there ; we
started at about three o'clock in the afternoon, accompanied
by our friend Saleh Sakhali, one kawass, and an Egyptian
groom.

We went out at the east gate, crossed the burial ground,
approached the Carmel range, and skirted the base of the
hills, which are overgrown with low brushwood and ever-
green oaks ; we took a south-easterly direction, with the
terraced slopes on our right hand, and a marshy plain on
our left, all bright with lush green grass, tall rushes, and
reeds in full blossom.

We met strings of camels bringing grain from the Haurfin,
for the merchants in Hdifa and 'Akka ; the peasants and
camel-drivers were all fiilly armed, and seemed as ready for
attack as for defence.

Presently we passed a more peacefiil looking party, con-
sisting of a family belonging to the next village, — ^first
came a young girl, wearing a rather short open dress of
old striped crimson silk, made like a very scanty dressing-
gown, a long white shirt of very coarse heavy linen, and
a shawl girdle fastened low ; a purple scarf sheltered her
head and face (all but her large dark eyes), and fell over
her shoulders ; she walked barefoot, and carried her yellow
shoes in her hands. A woman with an infant son in her
arms followed, riding on a large white donkey, which was
urged on by a man who walked close behind ; we exchanged
greetings, and the strangers said to us, " May Allah lead
you in the path that is straight." In about forty minutes,
we reached the spring of Sa'adeh which supplies one of

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. Ill

the tributary streams of the Kishon ; it gushes out of a deep
cavernous recess in the steep cliff, and forms a large spread-
ing natural reservoir, where many kinds of ferns are fostered.
Saleh told me that Arab poets call a stream " a daughter of
the hiJls/* — ^he led the way where he knew there were firm
stepping stones, and we splashed through water, in some
parts about two feet deep, guiding our horses between
masses of rock and great stone boulders, surrounded by tall
reeds and water plants; our progress was somewhat im-
peded by a number of goats and cattle, which were being
led to the fountain.

Just beyond this we saw, high up on the hills on our
right, a picturesque-looking Moslem village, called Kefr-
esh-Sheik ; on the flat roofs of its white stone huts there
were little summer-houses, made of tree branches, long palm
fronds, and reeds ; most of the villagers in this district
make these pleasant shelters in the summer time ; it re-
minded me of the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles.

Busy groups were on the threshing floors ; ai man was
winnowing a heap of wheat, by lifting up as much as he
could at a time, and as he let it fall gradually, the wind
carried away the chaff; we lingered a moment by the old
stone well in .the oUve grove, near to it we saw a number
of strong masculine-looking laughing girls ; in a few
minutes we came to the little village of Ain-jftr, with palm-
trees and flouriishing gardens round it; at this point we
turned away from the hills, and made our way across the
fertile plain. A serpentine line of verdure marks the course
of the Kishon ; we approached it where it flows between
steep banks of rich loamy soil, nearly fifteen feet high,
bordered with fine oleanders, wild lupins, tall and blue, and
St. John's wort, covered with golden flowers. There was
not much water flowing, for there had not been any rain in
Galilee for a long time, but the muddy bed, which at this
spot is about twenty feet broad, seeined to me as if it
would swallow us up.*

I have seen this stream swollen and rapid, after heavy

* This river is called by the Arabs el-Mukutta', t. e, the Ford,

112 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINB.

rains, when the winter torrents of Galilee and Carmel flow
into it; then it is a river "with waters to swim in, a
river that cannot be passed over ; " and I can well imagine
the hosts of Sisera, his chariots and horses, struggling there ;
and how " the river Kishon swept them away, that ancient
river, the river Kishon." (Judges v. 21.) We crossed safely,
and rode on, due east, to traverse some rounded hills,
crowned with evergreen oaks, hawthorns, and seringas (I
have seen them in the spring-time full of blossom, when
the ground which they shelter is carpeted with hyacinths,
cyclamen, anemones, and narcissus). This is one of the
most extensive oak woods in Galilee, the oak leaves are
small and prickly, and the acorns large and long.

Here cheetahs are sometimes captured or killed (for the
sake of their skins, which are made into saddle-cloths),
foxes have their holes, and hyenas, cats, jackals, and wild
boars abound; the town Arabs are by no means enthusiastic
hunters ; a Nimrod is rarely met with now, except among
the European colonists.

In a little open glade we dismounted, and rested just
outside the solitary tent of a peasant, while we took some
refreshing fruit, then we h^tened on again ; these hills are
renowned for echoes, which are called by Arabs, "the
da'ughtera of sound;" my companions brought them forth,
by firing their guns and shouting, and they made the forest
ring with their songs ; at its eastern extremity the trees
grow so closely together, and the branches hang so low,
that I had to ride cautiously, to avoid sharing the fate of
Absolom ; when we came out of the wood, we found our-
selves on the brow of a high steep and terraced declivity ;
the smooth plain of Esdraelon Minor was immediately below
us, one half of it shaded by the hills on which we stood,
and the other half, as weU as the opposite hills, were in
bright sunlight. The little village of Nain was pointed out
to me far away on the right.

We descended by a pleasant winding road, the trees were
more and more scattered, and at the foot of the hill, only
low brushwood grew.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 113

We cantered across the plain, and ascended a low
rounded hiU, on which stood a village, literally formed of
dust and ashes ; the mud hovels looked like dust-heaps,
and their interiors were little better than dust-holes ; but
out of these abodes heaps of clothing crawled, scarcely look-
ing like human beings, till they slowly rose, assuming forms
of strange grace and dignity, and gazed at us with serious and
untroubled eyes. We saw a group of old women leaning
over a square hole dug in the ground ; Saleh told me this
was the village oven. The bottom of it glowed with red
heat; the fuel, composed of peat and dried dung,* was
partially covered with stones, upon which thin flat loaves
are thrown and quickly baked. When quite new, the bread
thus prepared is crisp outside and rather soft within ; but
when a day old, it is of the consistency of leather, and
very indigestive. The women in their dusky veils and
dresses, crouching round that primitive oven, reminded me
of the incantation scene in "Macbeth."

The children of the place were beautiful, though bronzed
by the sun, and smeared with dust and dirt ; some were
clothed in rags of aU colours, but the majority were quite
naked.

We looked back across the plain — the sun had gone dowii
behind the wooded hiUs, and red watch-fires gleamed here
and there on the terraces and in the plain, guides and
beacons for the shepherds and ih^fellahtn. Presently a
party of wild-looking Arabs met us ; their leader was the
son of a cavalry officer, who had just been dismissed from
Turkish service. He and his followers were desperate fellows,
noted for deeds of daring. They saluted us, and said they
had come on purpose to meet and escort us to Nazareth ;
this was quite an impromptu invention, for no one but
Mr. Finn knew of our intention to go to Nazareth ; how-
ever, they turned and accompanied us. They looked very
picturesque ; their large heavy cloaks were made of camel-
hah*, with broad brown and white stripes ; on their heads

* See Ezekiel iv. 15. '* Lo I I have given theQ cow*s dvmgi ^d th(n(
dialt prepate thy bread therewith."

I

114 ;D0ME8TIC life in FALESTTITI!.

they wore red and yellow kefias (fringed shawls), put on
like hoods, and fastened round the crown with double ropes
made of camel's hair ; their spears, adorned with ostrich
feathers, were twelve or thirteen feet long.

We paused at a spring, festooned with fems, and bordered
with mossy stones, and alighted for a few minutes to
water our horses. When Saleh was on the point of re-
mounting, his mare suddenly started off, and soon dis-
appeared in the dusky distance. Saleh was quite discon-
certed, for the animal was a favourite one, and so docile
that it was never considered necessary to tether her ; she
was accustomed to follow her master, and to obey his call
like a dog; but in a moment he remembered that the
village of which his mare was a native was about a quarter
of an hour's distance from the spring, and this explained
the cause of the flight. He immediately mounted a horse
belonging to one of the Arabs, and galloped away. He
actually found his mare standing quietly in the court of the
house in which she had been born, surrounded by her former
owners, who were marvelling greatly.

Saleh rejoined us, and we soon entered the hill-country
which encircles Nazareth. Our volunteer attendants rode
now before and now behind, singing and shouting. Higher
and higher we rose, meeting the fresh mountain air. It was
so dark that I could only just perceive the figure imme-
diately before me, and the loose white stones which clattered
under my horse's feet, and the smooth slabs of rock over
which he every now and then slipped and stumbled.

For about an hour I rode on silently, hardly knowing
where I was going, but following in faith the steps of my
leader. I was roused from a reverie by the words : " We
are entering the olive-groves of NazaretL" I could just
distinguish a range of lulls, forming an amphitheatre in the
shape of a horseshoe^ and the extent of the town could be
traced by the lights gleaming from the windows of the
houses which thickly dotted the valley below, and were
grouped here and there on the hillsides. The Arabs keep
lamps burning in their rooms all night to chase away evil

DOMESTIC MFB IN PALESTINE. 115

spirits. We descended abruptly between hedges of prickly-
pears, greeted by loudly barking dogs, and inhaling a close
sufifocating odour of dust and decayed vegetables. The
words, " Hold your horse's head well up, for it is very steep
here," prepared me now and then for a jerk down some
rocky ledge or dusty declivity. At last we were safe in the
valley, our escort disappeared, and we were led to the
roomy but half-deserted house of Saleh, where* he had
resided until the death of his father, a few months previous,
and where his brother and young sisters still lived. Two
empty rooms were soon swept and garnished by men
and boys, who brought a supply of matting, mattresses,
cushions, and pillows from another part of the house, and
we made ourselves at home. While we took supper, Saleh
told me that his father, the head of a large family, had,
during his lifetime, accumulated aoonsiderable sum of money,,
which he kept in a secret place, probably buried. It was
expected that he would some day tell his heirs where the
treasure was concealed, but unhappily he was on a journey
from Tiberias, " when the Angel of Death met him." He
was surrounded only by servants and strangers, to whom
he could not entrust the important communication, and
there was no time to send for his sons, so he died, and the
secret died with him. Saleh, the eldest son, caused carefid
search to be made in and under the premises, but up to this
time the property has not been ifound.

It is a very common practice, especially in the interior, to
secrete jewels and gold in this way, and ancient deposits of
great intrinsic value (and still greater interest as works of
art and iUnstrations of history) are sometimes found.

The law of treasure-trove in Palestine, I believe, awards
one-third to the finder, one-third to the owner of the ground
on which the property is found, and one-third to the
Grovemment.

There are certain men who spend nearly aU their lives
in seeking for (kanHz) hidden treasures. Some of them
hecome maniacs, desert their families, and though they are
often so poor that they beg tfieir way from door to door,

I 2

116 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

and from village to village, they believe themselves to be
rich. There are others, who are called ^'saJiiri'' — necro-
mancers — ^who seem to work systematically, and have a
very curious method of prosecuting the search.

They select certain sensitive individuals, who are believed
to have the power of sieeing objects concealed in the earth,
or elsewhere ; but the faculty is only active when roused by
the influence of necromantic ceremonies, which are under-
stood by the professional treasure-seeker. He properly
prepares the medium, and calls into full activity the
visionary power ; then, in obedience to his command, the
hiding-places of treasures are said to be minutely described.
On being restored to the normal state, the medium does
not remember any of the revelations which may have been
made. , The practice of this art is considered ** haram" —
t.e. unlawfaly and is carried on secretly and not extensively.
Those people of whom I made inquiries on the subject
spoke with fear and trembling, and mysteriously whispered
their explanations.

I knew an Arab family, of which all the female members
are believed to be seers (clairvoyants ?) ; they are all
nervous and excitable to a high degree, and one of them
is slightly deranged in intellect.*

Until a late hour visitors flocked in to see us, for our
arrival was soon known throughout the Christian quarter.

* Does this system of the Sdhiri throw any light on the history of the
"Zahuris" of Spain, who were said to have the power of seeing into the
recesses of the earth ? The name is evidently of Eastern derivation, for
** Zahur" is the Arabic for appeoflring.

In the 1st vol. of " The Cradle of the Twin Giants, Science and History,"
hy the Bev. Henry Christmas, page 344, the following passages occur : —

^Debrio, in his ' Disquisitiones Magicae,' edition of Mayence, 1606,
says there is a class of men in Spain who are called Zahuris. When he
was staying at Madrid, in 1575, a boy of that kind was there; these
persons were said to be able to spy out what was concealed in the earth,
subterraneous waters, metals, hidden treasure, or dead bodies. The thing
was generally known, and its possibility believed in, not only by poets but
by philoaophers.*'

" We quote the following, concerning a lady, from the Mercure de France,
of 1728. 'She perceives what is hid in the earth, distinguishing stones,
.sand, springs, to the dept)i of thirty or forty /athoms.* "

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 117

Fitst came Jirius el Yakftb, with his fat, burly figure, his
crisp grey beard and twinkling eyes shining from under
a large shawl turban. He is Mr. Finn's agent for Nazareth,
and is very proud of his ofiRce, and of the few words of
English which he can speak.

Saleh's pretty little sister, " Jalily," i e. " the Glorious,'' led
me to the room prepared for me. Her age was about eleven,
and her face the fairest I had seen in Palestine ; it was a
pure oval, with a straight nose, smaU weU-defined lips, long
dark lashes and delicately pencilled eyebrows. The edges
of her eyelids were strongly tinged with kohl, which gave
strange power to large melancholy grey eyes — her finger-
nails were slightly stained with henna, and her toe-nails
deeply dyed

She wore a violet-coloured muslin kerchief folded over
her soft brown hair, crossed under her chin and tied in
a bow at the top of her head. Her dress was green, edged
with yellow braid, and open at the throat, showing a neck-
lace of silver and coral ornaments.

(I think green is a favourite colour among Christian
Arabs now, because, until lately, they were forbidden to
wear it, for the Moslems regard it as their sacred colour.)

I awoke, and rose early, for a half-opened door, which I
had not noticed by the dim lamp of the previous night,
attracted my attention ; just within it were three narrow
steps, each higher than my knee. I climbed up, and turn-
ing sharply round, groped my way np three other steps,
still more steep, and then stumbled against a low cracked
wooden door, which I unfastened with difficulty; and when
it burst open I found it led to a terraced roo^ to which
there was no other access. The roof was high, and com-
manded % beautiful view of the town, with its mosque and
minarets, surrounded by taU dark cypress-trees, and the
convent buildings conspicuous in the Christian quarter.
The mists were gradually passing away from- the valley and
floating np the hill-sides. The houses are of white lime-
stone, square and flat-roofed, they look clean and cheerful :
the ancient " city was built on a hill/' but modem Naza-

118 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

reth, which is trnwalled, has gradually crept into the
valley, at the bottom of which all the newest and largest
houses are erected.

Little Jallly was in an open court below with some
women servants, who were making bread and chopping
meat. She saw me, and ran up to greet me, saying, " May
the day he white to y(mf' then she taught me the usual
answer, "Miy it he to you as milled

It was Sunday ; we went to the Latin Church of the
Annunciation. We made our way through the nave, which
is large and lofty. One side was crowded with men and
boys bareheaded, and the other side occupied by women,
kneeHng on the marble pavement in rows ;. their foreheads
and the lower parts of their feces were quite concealed by
folds of muslin and linen. As we passed by, they with
one accord raised their heads for a moment, and their
bright dark eyes flashed upon us from under their kohl-
tinged lids like a gleam of lightning, then they bent their
heads low and resumed their devotions.

The Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem was confirming a
number of children. Mass was celebrated, with more than
usual pomp, by some illustrious ecclesiastics and vii^tors
from Eome. The organ was well touched by one of the
monks, and the chanting was magnificent.

When this was over, we went down to see the Grotto of
the Virgin ; it is underground, just beneath the high altar.
On the broad stone stairs leading to it a troop of little Arab
girls, belonging to the convent school, were seated. They
looked full of animation and childish mischief, and the
nuns or sisters of mercy, in whose charge they were, had
great difficulty in keeping them in order. The children
were dressed in native costume ; and the nuns (who are
very superior, lady-like French women) wore white caps,
with broad plain muslin frills, and little black hoods over
them, and the plainest of plain black stuff dresses. They
looked very quaint, but cheerful and lovable. They are
most persevering in their schemes for proselytizing and
educating Arab girls. Some of their pupils speak a little

DOMESTIC LIPB IN PALESTINE. 119

French, but it is very difficult to secure the regular attend-
ance of children at the schools ; they are sad little truants.

One of the sisters is a careful doctor and skilful surgeon,
and thus obtains great influence over the natives, to whom
she distributes medicine supplied from France. A Hakim
(a doctor of medicine, male or female) can gain admittance
and respect almost anywhere, and a Eomish missionary staff
is never considered complete without a good physician.

The children, marshalled by the sisters of mercy, made
way for us, and we went down to the Altar of the Virgin ;
it is of pitre white alabaster, laboriously and elaborately
carved, but badly designed, rococo. Sweet basil bloomed
all round it, and tapers burned there brightly. Near it is
a part of a granite column, said by a monldsh tradition
(which is endorsed by the Church) to be a fragment
of the very room in which Mary stood, when the Angel
Gabriel appeared to her ; but the room itself was conveyed
by a miracle to Dalmatia, and afterwards to Loretto, where
thousands of pUgrims visit it. The kitchen of the Virgin
is still shown under the church at Nazareth. Women now
and then came down the steps and prostrated themselves,
beating their breasts and repeating Ave Marias, in Arabic,
as rapidly as possible ; then they kissed three spots indi-
cated by ornament on the pavement under the altar. The
walls of the church are hung with painted linen, which
produces exactly the effect of fine old tapestry, "and I did
not discover that it was only imitation till I handled it.
In the courtyard of the convent there are several fragments
of ancient stone carving introduced in the modem walla*
We went to the Protestant Mission House, and heard service
in Arabic ; some pretty children and a few intelligent-
looking men attended it. The pastor and school-teachers
are Germans, but connected with the Anglican Church.

All the Latins of Nazareth were in their gayest dresses
that day, to do honour to the visit of their Patriarch. We
met him walking with a little troop of monks and priests .

* They have been engraved in the Builder (No. 878) from drawings
which I made in the year 1858.

120 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

He is a most remarkable-looking man, and wears d pale
beard at least half a yard long, parted in the middle ; his
broad-brimmed hat, nearly three-quarters of a yard in
diameter, is trimmed with artificial coloured flowers and
glossy green leaves of metallic lustre. The people crowded
round him to kiss his hands and to secure his blessing.

The usual dress of the men of Nazareth is bright and
cheerful-looking, consisting of a sort of long dressing-gown,
made of a mixture of silk and cotton, in patterns of very
narrow stripes, commonly either red and purple, violet and
yellow, green and blue, or purple and white; this is girdled
with a shawl, or a broad red leather belt, lined and stitched,
with pockets and purses made in it. Eed and yellow kefias
(shawls with long knotted fringes) are worn in the town as
turbans, but are generally put on like hoods for travelling.
The women, who are very handsome, but rather bold-look-
ing, use a great deal of kohl for their eyelids ; they tattoo
their arms profusely, and their faces slightly.

Their head-dress is very peculiar. It is a tight-fitting
cap, made of cloth or linen, with a thick, firmly padded
roll, one or two inches in diameter round the front, just
covering the highest part of the head, and fastened with
strings, but not quite meeting under the chin. To this roll
silver coins are sewn, as close together as it is possible to
place them, except that a little space is left at the top of
the head, *and the coins fall, lapping one on the other,
down each side of the face, and a little below the chin : at
a distance it looks like a bonnet-front. Women wear coins
as large as crowns or half-crowns ; and children generally
have small ones, about the size of shillings. Muslin
shawls or veils, of various colours or black, are folded
across the forehead and over the lower part of the face ; so
that, out of doors, the eyes only are exposed. When in-
doors, the lower folds are slipped below the chin ; but the
forehead is nearly always concealed, except by very young
gu'ls. They wear loose trousers, white shirts, and long
dresses, open entirely in front, made of striped cotton or
Damascus silk, and girdled below the waist

DOMESTIC Linr IN PALESTINE. 121

" I went to Nazareth several times, and visited many of
the Christian women in their homes. I found, generally, a
great want of order and cleanliness among them. They
are very proud of their town^ and are constantly invoking
" El Sit Miriam "— " the Lady MaryP Their faith in, and
reverence for, relics is unbounded; in all their rooms I
saw holy pictures, little images, and small crystal or glass
cases of fragments of bones and rags. Eings are constantly
worn as charms.

I asked a little chfld, who had once visited Haifa, whether
she preferred HSifa and the beautiful sea, or NHsirah.
She answered directly, ^' H^ifa is not a holy place ; but
this town is holy : our Lady Mary lived here, and Christ,
and Joseph." But although Nazareth is reckoned a holy
place, it is by no means remarkable for its morality ; and
in this respect it strikingly contrasts with Bethlehem,
where the fathers and husbands are said to be severe and
rigid disciplinarians, and where dishonour is punished
with certain death. Nazareth had not a very good reputa-
tion in the time of Christ, and it does not appear to have
improved.

I find that the younger girls are beginning to dispense
with the coin head-dresses : they adopt, instead, the more
simple red tarbouche and* mundll ; so I expect that soon
these curious and weighty ornaments will only be found
in the smaller towns and villages of Galilee. Some silver
anklets were shown to me, and described as "old-fashioned ;"
but plain bracelets of silver, gold, or glass are universally
worn. I purchased one, formed of a twist of thick sUver,
with a very broad and pointed, clumsily made, jewelled
ring attached to it by a chain, also of wrought sUver. The
ring was intended to be worn on the fore-finger; but one
of my Nazarene friends told me that only the fellahin
would wear anything so barbarous and old-fashioned.

The change which is gradually being made here in the
costume of the women does not depend on direct European
or priestly influence, but simply on fashions introduced by
settlers and visitors from other Oriental towns, especially

122 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINB.

n&ifa, and by the display in the bazaars of jeweUery and
silk-tasselled caps from Stamboul, and coloured muslin
mundils from European Turkey and Switzerland, which are
worn commoidy in towns on the sea-coast of Palestine
and Syria.

On Monday, the 15th> t called, widi my brother and
Sal'eh, on a wealthy native of Nazareth, who had lately
built a handsome house of hewn: stone. He had just
returned from a trip to Marseilles, where he had been
purchasing furniture for it. The* terraces, courts, and cor-
ridors were tastefully bordered witti beds of rosea, pinks,
amd sweet basil, edged with broad stone copings; The
floors were of inlaid, marble, black and white. The surface
of the walls of ithe inner courts was very much decorated
with rudely carved, round patarse; of interlacing designs,
in low relief; and over the doors and windows, and in
other prominent positions, English-made willow-pattem
cheese-plates were introduced, imbedded in stucco, as en-
caustic tiles might be ! The owner of the house called my
attention to this novel application of cheese-plates. He
told me that he had himself designed the house and its
decorations. The new European furniture was almost as
singularly disposed of as the willow-pattem plates were.
His unsophisticated wife and daiighters marvelled exceed-
ingly at some of his purchases in Marseilles, and seemed
rather more perplexed than pleased by them.

His drawing-room, which was something like a French
salon, with its mirrors and marble tables, was frescoed by
a native of Nazareth, who had been tutored and employed
by the Franciscan monks in church mural decoration. On
the panels of the doors he had painted groups of flowers,
very carefully and laboriously; but they did not produce
a good effect.

Our host was the great man of his community after this
trip to Marseilles, and, owing to his wealth and this
famous journey, was for a time reckoned as a prophet, even
in his own country. But, notwithstanding the comparative
grandeur of his salon, those rooms of the house occupied

DOMESTIC UFE IK PALKSTINS. 123

by the women, and the cooking-places, were as untidy and
inconvenient as the poorest establishments in the town*
He was dressed in a suit of fine black cloth ; full- Turkish
trousers and tight jacket; a shawl girdle and polished
boots ; a small red cloth tarbouche, with a muslin kerchief
over it (a mundll), fastened smoothly round his forehead.
He wore a gold chain, as massive as an alderman's, outside
his dress, and several rings on his fingers. His wife, how*
ever, retains her Nazareth costume intact, and evidently
does not approve of innovations.

The Turkish governor of the town called while We were
there ; he confidentially told my brother that the people of
Nazareth were so proud and daring,* that he could do
nothing with them.

We rode out presently, in a northerly direction, to meet
Mr. Finn. Our host joined us, and a large party fbUowed,
including the governor, on a chestnut charger, decked with
purple trappings, adorned with mother-of-pearl. After a
pleasant ride, we met the consular party ; and' by simset
their tents were pitched, and the English flag was waving
over them in a pleasant olive-grove, just outside the town.

The next day, Mr. Finn invited us to accompany him to
Mount Tabor. We started at noon : it was oppressively
hot. Gently, and almost silently, we rode towards the east,
over hills sweet with wild thyme and dark with thorny
bushes — ^through valleys green with fennel, or rugged with
rocks overgrown with grey lichens and amber-coloured moss
—now and then we pass^ a clump of leafless bushes, every
branch of which was covered with smaU white edible snails,
which I mistook at first for buds. The only flowers I saw
were the crane's-bill, goat's-beard, and small Indian pinks.
Mount Tabor was fuU in view, like an irregular dark cone,
rising above the other hills. In about an hour, we entered
a hilly and wooded district ; the cool, pleasant shade of
trees, and the songs of birds, roused and refreshed us, and,
in groups of twos and threes, pleasantly chatting, we pur-
sued our way. Moimt Tabor, which had appeared to me
to be gradually retreating as we advanced, was now quite

124 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE,

out of sight; but after we had traversed some wood-crowned
hills, and the dry beds of two or tly'ee winter torrents,
we saw it lagain, in all its beauty and grandeur. We
hastened over a tree-covered slope, and down a fertile
valley, and reached its base at about two o'clock We gra-
dually ascended an easy winding path, pleasantly shaded,
till we were about half-way up, when rocks and steep stone
ledges, ancient masonry, and overhanging branches, obliged
us to look cautiously before us, and to follow the steps of
the leader carefully. Oaks (whence galls are procured),
arbutus, pistacia vera, pistacia terebinthus (which yields
what is called Venice turpentine), pistacia lentiscus (pro-
ducing gum mastich), and locust-trees abound; they were
wreathed with glossy-leaved creepers: but nearly every
plant or shrub which I touched was armed with thorns
as sharp as fine needles.

Looking down the steepest side, we could see the wide-
spread wings of eagles as they hovered just below us, or
swept rapidly through the air, and black and fawn-coloured
vultures, with their bright pinions perfectly poised and
almost motionless, supporting them in steady downward
flight in spiral circles ; as they rose again, their wings were
set in motion, and I felt the disturbance of the air now and
then when they passed near to us. In trying to watch their
circular sailing and heavenward wanderings I nearly reeled
from my horse ;, they rose higher and higher, spirally, till
they were quite indiscernible to the naked eye.

We alighted on the summit of the hill, at a quarter to
three, on a smooth plateau surrounded by large masses of
hewn stone and the foundations of strong walls : on one
side there is an archway called "Bab el How-a'' (Gate of
the Winds), and on the other, part of a ruined chapel and
an altar in an apse ; a limestone cave and a cistern hewn
in the rock, and two or three patches of ground cultivated
by a Eussian hermit, named Erinna of Bucharest, who had
lived on this mountain for fourteen years.

Once when I spent a long day here, with Colonel and
the Honourable Mrs. F. Walpole, I took his portrait, and

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE. 125

he told me the story of his life. His father, he said, was
an extensive land proprietor in the Crimea, where he was
born, but he went afterwards to Bucharest. One night
Erinna dreamt that an angel appeared to him and said,
"Arise and go into the land which I will show you."
This disturbed him very much, and all day the words
were ringing in his ears. The next night the angel, in
shining raiment, appeared again in a dream and repeated
the words, led him through the air and showed him a
mountain with a little cavern on its summit. On the
third night the angel led him again to the mountain and
told him that he was to dwell in the cavern. Erinna
was so impressed by these dreams, or visions as he calls
them, that he took leave of his family, and for twenty
years travelled in Eussia, Greece,. i^ypt and Syria to seek
for the mountain of his dream ; at last he recognised the
cave on Mount Tabor and immediately took up his abode
there, for he was convinced that it was the place indi-
cated by the angeL He was then eighty-four years of
age, and he said, " I thought I should soon die, but I am
now heartier than ever, and yet I am nearly one hundred
years old" One winter's night, as fie slept alone in his
«ave, he felt something soft and warm crouching by his
side ; he found it was a young leopard or panther : he gave
it food, made friends with it, and ever since then the animal
has shared his ceU and follows him about like a pet cat.

Erinna, like Eobinson Crusoe, after years of solitude,
fonnd " his man Friday " ; a fellow-countryman, a sturdy-
looking, rather sUent, middle-aged man, who has volun-
teered to superintend the little, field of wheat and barley,
to cut wood for firing, and to fetch water from the rock
cisterns. He calls himself the hermit's servant, and he will
•no doubt some day inherit the hermitage, the sheepskin
cap, the ragged mantle and the reputation of Erinna.

The priests of Nazareth, especially the Latins, are very
jealous of the influence of this anchorite, for he is regarded
by Christian Arabs as a man of peculiar sanctity, and is
supposed to enjoy the especial favour of God and His

126 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

angels ; by many lie is believed to have the power of per-
forming miracles, though he does not profess it. He told us
that the Latins were so strongly and perseveringly in-
triguing against him (representing him as a Bussian spy),
that he feared he should be banished from the country.
He occasionally visits the sick at Nazareth and the neigh-
bouring villages ; once he came to see us at Haifa. He
never eats meat ; his chief food is rice and oil, of which he
purchases a store once a year. He keeps a few goats for the
sake of their milk ; cultivates a little garden of herbs and
vegetables ; gathers wild fruit, and takes "honey out of"
the nests in " the rocks ; " see Psalm Ixxxi. 16. He made
us some excellent coffee, of which he generally has a supply,
chiefly for guests, i,e. Christian pilgrims and travellers.
He does not make the slightest attempt to render his cave
clean or comfortable ; rude niches in the rocky walls serve
to hold his few books and a little red earthenware lamp.
A mat of reeds, some heavy clothing and sheepskins on a
stone ledge form his bed. His compamon, who belongs to
the peasant class, occupies a cell close to it, which is used
as the kitchen or cooking place ; two very rough delf
dishes, two wooden bowls and spoons, and a metal stew-
pan may be seen there.

I asked Erinna if he had ever "beeu married ; he said
Mount Tabor was his only bride.

He and "his man Friday" assured me they were veiy
happy, and they looked so. They divide their days regu-
larly, and work, pray, eat, and sleep systematically, but
they seem to think ablution is not necessary, and they wear
the same clothes day and night Erinna is ruddy and
hearty, and though his bushy beard is quite white, he does
not look so old as he reckons he is.*

The view from Mount Tabor is very extensive, it over-
looks the plain of Esdraelon Proper, which is divided into
squares and patches of cultivated land ; it appeared from
the distance like a rude mosaic, of every tint of orange,

* Erinna died in 1859, much regretted by the peasants of the plain, and
by the poor of Nazareth.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 127

yellow, grey, green, brown and lavender ; not a house, tent,
or village could be seen to break its monotony, nor even a
tree to cast a shadow ; but the hills which surround it were
clothed with woods and dotted with towns, hamlets and
ruins. Mr. Finn said "Fancy Barak with his 10,000 men
upon this mountain ; people that plain with the chariots,
* even 900 chariots of iron,* gathered together by Sisera,
and see Sisera pursued by Barak unto Harosheth." He
read the landscape round for me, pointing out the range of
Carmel and the Mediterranean on the west ; the hills of
Gilboa and the villages of Jezreel, Endor and Nain in the
south; the hill-country beyond Jordan, and the mountains
which encircle the Sea of Galilee on the east, and far away
in the north Lebanon crowned with snow ; while nearer to
us we could see the Horns of Hattin — a rounded hill with
two distinct mounds or peaks on its summit. This is
called the Mount of Beatitudes, where tradition tells us
the Sermon of Sermons was preached. After exploring the
ruins and the deep cisterns, we remounted. The sun had
quite disappeared when we reached the foot of the hill
(on one occasion I walked down the steepest side of Tabor,
with the help of a stout stick ai;id a strong arm). We had
a pleasant ride back to Nazareth by moonlight.

The Kev. J. L. Porter says, that Tabor rises 1,400 feet
above the plain, and the plain is 500 feet above the level
of the sea.

We spent the evening 9A the Consular encampment,
and at a late hour walked by lantern-light to Saleh's
house.

The next morning I sat in the deep embrasure of a
window, sketching, while my brother was busy in the
midst of a group of Turkish Elfendis and Christian scribes.
They all carried inkhoms in their girdles, with cases
attached to them, to hold their reed pens ; they sat on the
floor and held single sheets of paper in their hands, and
wrote without any desk or support. The points of reed
pens are so delicate, that they would be easily fractured by
piessme on a hard table or desk.

128 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

The population of Nazareth is computed by Dr. Eobin-
son thus : —

Moslems . .
Greeks . . .
Latins « . .
Greek Catholics
Maronites . .

680
1040 who look to Russia as their protector.

goA [Adherents of the Pope, and consequently
^qqJ French protSgSs,

This gives a total of 3,120 : but the most recent and
careful inquirers assure me that this estimate is too low ;
they reckon the total at 4,000, and the Greek Church is
said to be on the increase. I never met a Jew either in
Nazareth or Bethlehem ! There is a small Protestant con-
gregation, which is rather fluctuating.

Khawadja Stephani, the son of the Greek Priest of Shefa
'Omer, came expressly to ask us and Saleh to return to
HS,ifa by way of his village, and to pass a night there at
his house. We arranged to do so, and started soon after
midday, riding for some distance over rocky hills, where
bees were busy among the blossoming herbs ; across plains
covered with tall thistles — ^their harsh stems, leaves, thorns,
and spiny flowers were bright with a purple bloom, like
that which we see on ripe plums, and from a distance a
plain overgrown with them looked like a calm blue lake. At
about two we entered a garden inclosed by a low stonewall,
situated at the bottom of a well-watered valley, where the
lemon-trees were laden with green fruit, and pomegranates
were plentiful. We dismounted and walked through the
garden to the streamlet which traverses it, bordered with
hawthorn, rose, and fruit trees ; its banks, steep and grassy,
were fragrant with mint and marjoram, and cresses grew
along the edge of the water ; under a wide-spreading fig-
tree, where tiny-leaved clover had made a smooth carpet,
we spread our saddle-cloths in a half-circle, and took our
seats. Soon a plentiful dinner was placed before us ; we
took it in primitive style, for we had neither forks nor
spoons, and our only plates were thin Arab loaves, about a
quarter of a yard in diameter and a quaiter of an inch
thick. Saleh made a drinjring-cup for me of tJUe large le«i.f

DOMESTIC lilFE IN PALESTINE. 129

of a water plant, which he knew to be harmless. Each one
of the party as soon as he had eaten, rose and washed his
hands at the stream, and then selecting another tree for our
shade, and a grassy bank for our divan, we rested^ telling
stories in turn, while the kawasses and servants made an
end of the provisions.

In this garden I saw some remarkable double fig-trees,
the trunks of which were twisted as perfectly and regularly
as if they had been carved ; I asked the gardener how he
managed it ; he said, "Allah Karim'' " God is bountiful,"
and then explained to me how tender saplings are planted
side by side and perseveringly entwined, or even plaited
sometimes ; he led me to one which he considered more
perfect than the others, the twisted trunk was about half
a yard in diameter, it rose six feet from the ground, as up-
right as a marble column, without any branches to break
its perfect outline, and then spread out its crooked arms in
all directions, clothed with green leaves, the largest I had
ever observed. This pleasant garden is near to the fountain
which was the gathering-place of the Christian knights
before the terrible battle of Hattin, and where the conqueror
Saladin encamped after he had in that decisive conflict
almost annihilated the Crusaders. Sephoris, or Sefurieh, is
just opposite ; it is a poor but interesting place ; Jewish,
Heathen, and Christian ruins are to be found there, and
tradition points to the house in which Anna, the mother of
Mary, was bom ; but the garden delighted me more than
the village did, and in the spring it is perfection. We
mounted at half-past three, and followed the course of the
stream ; it flowed between orchards, gardens of cucumbers,
and stubble-fields ; all the horses and their riders seemed
newly animated, they rode in circles displaying feats of
horsemanship, letting off their pistols while in full gallop,
therp long, loose, white Arab cloaks made of goat's hair flut-
tered behind them, and the almost flying figures represented
to my fancy the Templars of old, on their fabled white
winged steeds. When the horses were weU tired, the riders
grouped together, and we rode through an oak-wood talking

E

132 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

meat). The Eabbi and chief members of the Jewish com-
munity of Shefa 'Omer were also present, a few Moslems
and Druzes, and a number of Christian Arabs ; arrack was
handed round from time to time in the lower part of the
room, and songs of praise were sung in honour of the chief
guests. Saleh, who is no singer, but a very fluent speaker,
said, "Abrahim left his kindred, his home and his country,
he dwelt in a strange land among strangers, but he became
mighty in the land, his family increased, his name became
great ; even so may the name of Eogers be known through-
out this country, may his children and his children's
children dwell here in honour." The idea was immediately
taken up by the singers, and they improvised a song, the
burden of which was, " may his children's children dwell
here in honour."

Some graceful compliments were paid to me, with prayers
for my happiness : then the singing — of which there was
a great variety, became general. We heard Egyptian love-
songs beautifully and plaintively sung by a gardener from
the NUe, and a man of Bagdad gave us a curious ditty,
jerking out his words at first, and by degrees toning them
down into a languishing, drawling melody, in a minor key.
The Arabs sang a great many monotonous songs ; but one
was very sweet, the chorus of it was, " Oh Bedaweeya.'' (I
think this song would please English ears generally.)

Isaac, the Jew of Aleppo, was asked to dance for me ;
the lantern was moved out of the way ; he stood up at first
very shyly, the Arabs sitting round, singing aad clapping
their hands, keeping time; he had on very full white
drawers, a black jacket, yellow and white silk striped
waistcoat, and a shawl sash ; round his red tarbouche a blue
mundil was folded ; he bent his head down and raised his
arms above it ; by degrees his feet and hands were in slow
motion in harmony with the music, and his body swayed to
and fro. Soon the songs grew louder, the clapping of hands
quicker, and the movements of the dancer more decided, but
they were as monotonous as the tunes which inspired them :
during the whole of the dance he kept within a circle of

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 133

about a yard in diameter, at last he spun round and
retreated, hiding himself shamefacedly behind his friends.

Supper was announced, and many of the visitors retired ;
servants brought in a round stand, about five inches in
height, and covered it with dishes. While this was being
arranged, my brother begged to be allowed to fetch a certain
man, named Habib, to sup there; he had once been
Stephanies chief friend, but a misunderstanding had arisen
between them, consequently the two most influential
Christian families in Shefa 'Omer lived as strangers to each
other. Stephani readily consented to receive Habib, who soon
came, and the two long divided friends embraced (they have
lived in harmony ever since). Before eating, each one of us
had water poured on our hands over the marble basin ; for the
Christian Arabs, as well as the Moslems, "anrf all the Jews,
except they wash their hands, eat not'' This is particularly
necessary, considering they do not use knives and forks ;
but each one " dips his hand into the dish " with his neigh-
bour.

Stephani at first wished to serve us at supper, instead of
sitting down with us, for it is the Arab custom for the host to
wait on his guests as a servant ; we overcame his scruples,
and we ate together ; afterwards, water was again poured
on our hands, a servant stood by, holding native scented-
soap and an embroidered towel ; then we had coffee and
naighil^s.

An Arabic Bible published by the British and Foreign
Bible Society (a Boman version, by the bye) was brought
in, and Saleh read aloud the Sermon on the Mount. Bible
history is pretty well known in the Greek -community, it is
read in their churches in the vulgar tongue, and is not
withheld from the laity ; the bulk of the people, however,
cannot read ; the few who can do so, gladly obtain copies ;
but it is rarely to be met with, except in those families of
which one of the members is a priest or very studious, as
Saleh for instance.

The Greek priests must always be married men ; those
of the villages and smjdl towns are often very ignorant^

134* DOMESTIC LIITB IN PALESTINE.

and as they rarely receive a systematic ecclesiastical train-
ing, their expositions and definitions of the articles and
dogmas of their Church are very curious and conflicting.
Their bishops and higher clergy are generally foreigners, ie.
native Greeks and Bussians, and do not often learn Arabic,
so they make little or no impression on the Syrian branch
of their Church.

The Latin clergy, on the other hand, are often quite un-
familiar with the Bible, and always strongly oppose its cir-
culation, but are well grounded in matters of discipline
and doctrinal points.

The two Churches vie with each other in circulating
extraordiaary traditions and legends of saints and martyrs,
and they equally encourage pilgrimages to holy places and
reliance on relics.

Soon after supper the room was cleared of all the smoking,
turbanned, fezzed, and singing guests, slaves and servants ;
my brother and Saleh went home with Habib to sleep at
his house; I was left alone in the large guest-chamber,
where Stephani had caused a bed to be made for me. I
opened one of the heavy shutters, to see my friends pass
round on the side of the hiU, five lanterns gleaming before
them; I fastened the door. with a stiff clumsy lock (the
mechanism of which I did not in the least understand), and
I soon discovered that I was a self-made prisoner, for I
could not find out how to undo it again ; I was obliged to
resign myseK to my fate, making sure I should be set free
in the morning ; I fell asleep on a soft, crimson silk pillow,
under an embroidered lehaff, and did not wake till the sun
shone on my face through the*chinks of the ill-made shut-
ters. I was up and dressed when Stephani knocked at the
door, which he contrived to open; while the room was
swept and garnished I went with him to take coffee at the
house of Habib ; on my return to my quarters, the female
members of the famUy. their neighbours, and the women-
servants, came to look at me, but not till they were quite
sure of finding me alona They clustered shyly round the
door, and I had to play the part of hostess and invite them

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 135

to enter in. They were dressed in the same style as the
women of Nazareth^ and are quite as handsome, but more
simple and modest-looking. Stephani's wife, a tall, dark-
eyed woman, wore large heavy coins round her face, with a
yellow mundil folded across her forehead and tied at the
back of her head ; the open front of her red and white
cotton dress was trimmed with a double frill, edged with
braid. Her eldest daughter, a girl of ten, named Werdeh
{{. e. Rose), was very beautiful, with regular features, clear
bronzed complexion, eyes brown and sparkling, the lids
deeply tinged with kohl, and the hands and feet stained
with henna ; her thick, dark hair was combed down over
her high forehead, and cut straight across it just above her
arched eyebrows ; at the back her hair was allowed to grow
long, and was plaited ; she wore a headdress of coins, for
they are not yet going out of fashion in Shefa 'Omer ; her
open dress was of white calico, ornamented in front pro-
fusely with black, blue, and red braid ; the sleeves are very
long, and capable of concealing the hands entirely, but
when the arms are raised the sleeves still hang down, for
they are slit open as high as the elbow.

The room was soon crowded with women and girls:
then* dresses, though various in point of texture and con-
dition, were all of the same fashion ; from the crimson
and white striped silk dress of a young bride, to the
ragged cotton garments worn by an aged servant, whose
headdress was stript of all its coins. I was sketching
Werdeh and her mother, when suddenly they, and all the
rest, rose and scampered away, without saying a word,
veiling themselves hastily.* The entrance of the Turkish
Governor and my brother a minute afterwards explained
their flight

Little Daoud, the governor's son, came to see ma He
wore an olive-coloured cloth cloak, and a green muslin
turban. His features were regular, but his face was very
sallow. He tried to look dignified and composed while
I took his portrait, but could not prevent a snaile coming
now and then. Saleh, and Stephani, with his father, joined

136 Domestic life in Palestine.

us, and after lunch we went all together to the castle. On
approaching it, I perceived that it was already falling to
decay, although it was only built about 150 years ago.
The lofty gates and archways are slightly decorated with
fretted canopies, in the style of the Alhambra ; a two-
storied range of vaulted corridors and chambers surrounds
an extensive courtyard ; the ground-floor is well adapted
for stabling, and would lodge about 500 horses ; tottering
stone stairways led us to the upper floors ; the pointed
double windows, in deep embrasures in the outer walls,
command magnificent views in all directions.

The west windows overlook the plain of Akka and the
sea, with Mount Carmel and HS^ifa in the background on
the left. The north windows look towards Lebanon, with
the city of Akka on the left, and the little town of Abi-
lene in the foreground on the right, its tall white tower
standing conspicuously in the midst of olive-trees and
gardens. The banners of Eichard I. once waved there.
The southern and eastern views are bounded by hills and
moimtains, rising one behind the other.

While petitioners for protection crowded round my
brother, I wandered from hall to haU and from window
to window, with Sjdeh for my cicerone. We climbed to
the top of the embattled walls, and walked nearly all
round the building; but the stones are falling, and allowed
to remain where they fall, and scarcely any use seems to
be made of the place.

As we left the castle, the governor asked me to go
with him to see his wives. A glance from my brother
told me that I might accept the invitation. Of course,
none of the gentlemen could accompany me; so they
walked homewards with Stephani, and the governor
escorted me to his dreary-looking house. A gateway,
through which a laden camel could easily pass, led us
into an ill-paved guttered court, which was the only en-
trance to a square vaulted hall, with bare stone walls, and
four unglazed windows quite out of reach ; tha floor was
of earth, with smooth rock slabs here and thera This

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 137

was the governor's residence— his dining-room, withdraw-
ing-Toom, nursery, stables, and kitchen all together ! On
one side, just within the door, a mule was feeding ; a stone
bench, hollowed out a little, was his manger ; a patient
ass stood by him : on the other side, a tethered horse was
neighing; and on a heap of fodder two dirty, delicate-
looking children were kicking and crying out lustily.
There was a sort of oven, or cooking-place, in one corner
of the hall, and I could see the red glow of a charcoal
fire. On the left hand there was a broad wooden platform,
raised about two feet from the ground, with a low orna-
mental wooden railing at the edge of it Here mattresses
and lehaflFs were piled up ; I suppose it was the sleeping-
place of the lord of the harim. We went straight across
the hall, to a dais, in a broad arched recess, just opposite
to the door by which we had entered ; two crooked stone
steps led up to it, and two women — one old and the other
young — stood there ready to receive ma They took my
hands in theirs, and placed me on a cushioned seat on the
matted floor.

The governor introduced me to the younger of the
women, telling me that she was his wife, the mother of
his little Daoud. She was perhaps twenty, rather tall and
graceful-looking, with bright blue eyes and black hair, and
a brilliant though dark complexion. She had used kohl
and henna freely, and her chin and forehead were tattooed.
I think she was prepared for my coming, for she had on
a f§te-day dress : a blue cloth jacket, embroidered with
gold, very open in front, showing her tattooed chest, and
a white spun silk shirt ; her full trowsers were of Aleppo
sflk, white and straw-coloured. Her shallow red cloth
cap was decorated with rows of gold coins, pearls, and
everlasting flowers ; a long purple tassel hung down be-
hind, and a perforated, flat, crescent-shaped gUt ornament,
about five inches wide, was fixed on the top of the head-
dress. (Is this the " round tire " like the moon, referred to
in Isaiah iii. 18 ?) Her long hair was plaited, and inter-
woven with black silk braid to make it appear stni longer.

138 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

She told me that Shefa ^Omer was not a pleasant place
to live in, and that she was quite a stranger there. I
asked her what part of the country she came from. She
said, "Neby-Daoud is the place of my birth, and the
place I love." (She referred to a cluster of buildings
round the tomb of the Prophet David, or Neby-Daoud, just
outside the walls of Jerusalem, by the Zion gate.) She
was happy to hear herself called Um Daoud, that is, " The
Mother of David."

The governor interrupted her explanations, by telling her
to make some lemonade for me. Close by the two steps of
the dais stood a pair of high clogs, almost like stilts, made
of inlaid dark wood and mother-of-pearl, with crimson
leather straps. She fastened these on her henna-stained,
naked feet ; for the earth floor was very damp and dirty,
and water rested here and there in little pools. Her hus-
band followed her, and helped her to reach some green
drinking-glasses from a niche in the wall The other
woman, who looked very old and careworn, remained by
my side. When the young wife was out of hearing, I
exclaimed, " How beautiful she is ! ** She agreed with me,
and seemed to take a mother's pride and pleasure in her
beauty. I did not know that the young wife was her
rival, I fancied she was her daughter, till she said, " Um
Daoud is young, Um Daoud is happy ; she is young, and
is the mother of two sons ; " (she pointed to a cradle
hammock, suspended from the key-stone of the arch above
us — in it a little swaddled figure was securely and gently
swinging ;) " but," she added, " I have no sons left, my sons
are dead, and I am old, I am no longer handsome, / am
nothing, lam worthless*' Then she explained to me that
she had lived about twenty years with the governor before
he took Um Daoud for his wife. I said to her, alluding to the
little ones who had now crawled out of the fodder, " Whose
children are they?" She said, "They are sons of the
house" (that is, of the governor), and a slave, who stood
near the oven, was their mother.

Presently Um Daoud returned with the lemonade ; the

DOMESTIC LIFE IN FALESTDTE. 139

governor himself brought me a tiny cup of coflfee flavoured
with ambeigris. Young Daoud now came in and seemed
delighted to find me there ; he said, " Make my mother's
face in your book," and " Make my brother's face for me."
The baby-boy was lifted out of the hammock, he was about
six months old, his eyelids were black with kohl. I
asked why kohl was used for a child so young. " It will
strengthen the sight of his eyes, and make the lashes long
and thick," said the elder woman. I took leave of them,
and found my kawass just outside the house waiting to
take me to meet my brother at the Greek church. It is a
modem building, silk hangings and gaudy pictures deco-
rate the walls ; the font is of marble, I think it is formed
of an ancient Byzantine capital, hollowed out at the top.
In a school, adjoining the church, a number of boys were
noisily, but monotonously, intoning Psalms, echoing the
nasal twang of their teacher.

I find that the Psalter is the chief class-book in Christian
Arab schools, as the Koran is in Moslem schools. I have
often seen boys with these books in their hands, who
appear to be reading freely, when in reality they scarcely
know their letters, but who repeat, parrot-like, large portions
of them by heart. We afterwards went to the Jewish
Synagogue, where the chief Eabbi received us ; he showed
me several copies of the Law and the Prophets, wrapped in
crimson silk cases, which are kept in a recess behind an
embroidered curtain or veil

In the middle of the building there was a high circular
wooden platform, with seats of honour upon it ; it was built
so slightly that at first I thought it was only a temporary
erection ; but I found in all the synagogues which I visited,
raised central seats of equally slight construction.

The gentlemen then went for a ride ; I declined doing so,
hoping during their absence to see the women again, and
Kiawadja Stephani at my request sent his wife and children
to me. They took me to see the lower part of the house —
it was iU-arranged, untidy, and uncomfortable ; they re-
turned with me to my room ; I made a few sketches which

140 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

amused them greatly. Soon such crowds of women came
in, that one of the men-servants of the house who stood as
guard or sentinel at my door, entered, and very uncere-
moniously drove about half of them out of the place, and
they all withdrew when the gentlemen returned from
their ride.

We spent the evening at the house of Habib ; a large
party assembled to meet us in his spacious guest-chamber,
and all the culinary skill of Shefa *Omer had been employed
in preparing a supper for us. Songs, complimentary
speeches, and story-telling followed. I walked back to
Stephanies house, by the light of many lanterns, accompanied
to my door by my brother and nearly all the guests.

At sunrise the next morning we were mounted and
ready to start for HSifa ; Stephani, Habib, and a large party
joined us ; our Egyptian groom had charge of a beautiful
Syrian gazelle-hound which had been given to my brother.
We rode down into the valley and along a level road
leading to a large fountain- A number of the village girls
were already assembled there, some standing on the high
stone platform surrounding the well, and others grouped
round the base ; in the distance we saw a procession of
them, traversing, one by one, a narrow foot-path on the
hill-side, with their replenished jars perfectly poised on
their heads.

We turned out of the Akka road and entered an ex-
tensive olive-grove ; picturesque groups of men, women,
and children, in bright coloured garments, were busy among
the trees or hastening along the road. I had always seen
the oKve plantations so silent and deserted that it was
quite a surprise to me ; Saleh explained, that it was the
beginning of the olive harvest (the 19th of October), and
all of these people had been hired to gather the ftuit. The
men beat the trees with long sticks, and the women and
children pick up the berries.* We met a straggling group

* " When thou beatest thine olive-tree thou shalt not go oyer the boughs
again ; it shaU be for the stranger, the fatherieBs, and the widow.** Deut.
ToiY. 20.

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE. Ill

of figures which looked so unnaturally taU and dispro-
portionate that I could not make them out, till I was
told that they were Druze women; they wore tubular
horns, from one to two feet in length, bound firmly on
their foreheads, supporting heavy black or white veils
which almost shrouded the wearers, producing a very un-
graceful outline — (of these strange people I hope to speak
more folly on a fiiture occasion). Presently we came to
a rocky district, overgrown with dwarf oaks, thorns, and
thistles, and then reached the fertile plain of *Akka, traversed
by the blue winding Kishon and its many tributaries.

The large fields of cotton had a very pretty effect, for
they were in their full beauty ; the bushes are about two
feet high, the stems are reddish, the leaves are of the
colour of the maple in the spring-time, the blossom looks
as if it were made of butterflies' wings, white and spotted.
When these white wings fall, a green bulb, in a triangular
cup, is exposed ; this grows to about an inch in diameter,
and changes to a rich glossy chestnut colour, and gradually
becoming harsh, splits into three parts, when soft downy
cotton bursts from it Saleh gathered a branch for me,
includiQg specimens of the plant in these three distinct
stages. My brother told me that the Arabs do not cultivate
the long staple cotton (which is most valued in England),
because it requires so much care in picking ; for the pods
must be gathered as soon as they ripen, and as they do not
ripen all at once, the harvest necessarily extends over two
or three weeks ; whereas the short staple cotton gives the
cultivator very little trouble, for the pods are not injured
by being left on the tree after they are ripe, and the harvest
does not commence tiU nearly every pod is ready for
picking, the consequence is that it is very soon over. This
inferior cotton does very well for native use, and to fiU the
Arab mattresses, and lehaflfs or quilts; but it is not of
much commercial value.

If the plain of Akka were cultivated with skiU and
energy it would yield abundantly. Under the present
system the soil produces in winter, wheat, barley, bear

142 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

lentils, peas, and tobacco ; and in the summer-time cotton,
sesame, millet, and many kinds of cucumbers; poppy,
mallows, and various herbs enliven it, while all the hills
around are suitable for vineyards, olive-groves, and
orchards ; flax, asparagus, gentian, scammony, and many
other plants, valuable in medicine, grow wild there, and
the marshes of the plain abound with kali, the ashes of
which, mixed with olive or sesame oil, are converted into
soap. The villages of this district are inhabited by Moslems,
Christians, and Druzes, and a few Jews. They pay heavy
taxes to the government in wheat, barley, and money,
and are bound to furnish camels, horses, or mules when-
ever the Pasha requires them.

We crossed a spring, round which taU reeds and short
soft grass grew ; thousands of edible snails were clinging to
the stems of some straggling bushes ; wiry, long rooted
marram-grass and sea-holly {eryngium Tnarittmum), tama-
risks, and willows bound the sandy soil and kept it from
drifting. We passed over some sand-hills, on which were
a few scattered plants, with thick, downy, whitish leaves and
yellow blossoms. Here we took leave of our Shefa 'Omer
friends, and they returned to their olive-groves.

We were soon on the sea-shore : two English merchant
steamers were just entering the port of HSifa. We cantered
to the Kishon and crossed over it, by carefully keeping on
the bar of sand which encircles the mouth of the river,
sweeping out far into the sea. The water was above our
horses' knees, and now and then an advancing wave covered
us with spray.

We rode quickly along by the edge of the water, with
the palm-grove and the fruit-gardens on our left hand, and
the rippling waves on our right ; we entered the town at a
quarter to nine, just in time to receive two English mer-
chant captains, at the Vice-Consulate, where poor Katrine,
our soi-disant mother, welcomed us with tears of joy,
saying, "Praised be God, my children have returned to
me in safety."

CHAPTEE VII.

ON Tuesday, October 23d, 1855, a Turkish steamer from
Constantinople entered the port of H&ifa, bringing a
new Pasha for Akka, with his harim, and suite of thirty-
individuals, including an Armenian doctor; the chief people
of Akka came to meet him, and our little town was in an
unusual state of excitement ; my brother went to welcome
his Excellency, who afterwards called at the Consulate
with twelve attendants.

Newly appointed Pashas may sometimes be persuaded
into doing some good in their Pashalics ; and, at the comr
mencement of their reigns, choked-up fountains flow, broken
cisterns are repaired, and aqueducts are kept in order, but
only for a very little while. On the " new broom " principle,
the Consuls earnestly urged the new Pasha to give orders
for the cleansing of the guttered streets of HS^ifa, some of
which were little better than open sewers, and in a danger-
ously unwholesome state ; they also advised the removal
of the dust-heaps by the sea-shore, which had been allowed
to grow into broad barricades, where vegetable refuse and
all sorts of filth were thrown ; the appeal was favourably
heard, the work actually commenced immediately, and
Haifa underwent sweeping and scraping, probably for the
first time in its existence.

Men and boys ran hither and thither with baskets of
rubbish; Beks and Consuls bustled about giving orders,
and the dust-heaps were by degrees shovelled into the sea.

The Europeans and the upper class of Arabs rejoiced at
the prospect of living in a comparatively clean town, but

144 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

the majority considered the refonnatioii quite unnecessary,
and grumblingly prophesied that some harm would come to
H&ifa if such innovations were permitted.

Late on Thursday evening, Mohammed Bek came to the
Consulate, lamenting the loss of a gold chain, with his
signet ring on it. In the East, more importance is
attached to the impression of a seal than (o a signature,
and he feared some improper use might be mad§ of it
by the finder, so a declaration of the loss was drawn up
by Yusef Anton, the Governor's Secretary, signed by the
Bek, and attested by my brother. Mohammed told us
he had missed it in the bazaar, when surrounded by a
crowd of boys, to whom he was giving instructions about
the street cleaning. It was a very fine night, and, half in
joke, half in earnest, I offered to seek for the lost treasure.
He took me at my word, and we went out aU together ;
the town was perfectly stiU, the bazaar was deserted, and
as bright and clean as moonlight and the scavengers of
HS,ifa could make it ; but after all, I was not so fortunate
as to find the ring.

As we returned homewards, the silence was suddenly
broken by the wildly wailing and shrieking voices of
women, announcing that a death had just taken place ;
their shrill mournful cries rang in my ears all night.

On the following morning (October 26th), very early, I
looked from the window, and saw a bier close to the door
of a neighbouring house ; it was a painted wooden stand,
about seven feet by two, raised slightly on four legs, with
a low gallery round it, formed of uprights far apart, and
two cross bars ; two strong poles projected at each end
from the comers ; above it a canopy was raised, made of
freshly-gathered elastic palm branches, they were bent like
half-hoops, and then interlaced and secured lengthways,
with straight fronds. I sketched it, and presently I saw
the dead body of a man, handsomely dressed, brought out
and placed upon it ; his face was covered with a shawl.
Four men lifted the- bier from the ground, and resting the
poles on their shoulders, bore it to the mosque. After a

DOMESMO LIFE IN PALESTINE. 145

little while, it was carried slowly along, passing the Consu-
late on its way to the Moslem burial-ground, preceded by
about forty men, solemnly silent, and followed by at least
fi% women and children shrieking wildly, singing, and
screaming.

Between the palm-fronds I could plainly see the figure
of the dead man, the head was foremost ; and I could not
help thinking that, if a voice endued with power to awaken
the dead would tell the mother and the widow not to weep,
and order the bearers of the bier to stand still, and say to
the dead man, '"Arise" it would be in his fSte-day dress
that he would sit up imder the canopy of palms, and begin
to speak. (See Luke viL 11 — 15.)

I made inquiry about the deceased, and found that he
was a respectable Moslem, of about twenty-four years of
age, and had left a wife and two children. He had died
just before midnight, after a few hours illness, so violent,
that the Arab doctor pronounced it a case of cholera There
had been several very sudden deaths in H&ifa within a few
weeks.

In the course of the day I became very ill. Frfere Joseph,
the convent doctor, was sent for; he came and administered
powerful doses of opium. The next day I was worse and
very weak ; lie ordered emetics and bleeding, but I de-
cidedly declined both, and dispensed with his attendance.
My brother prescribed hot baths, and mustard and vinegar
poultices, and I slept, but grew weaker and weaker. At
three o'clock on Sunday morning (October 29th), he sent
his kawass to 'Akka for a doctor, as a last resource ; he
wrote to the Pasha, and ill as I was I could not help laugh-
ing at the letter, on hearing it literally translated into
English. It contained a request that his Excellency would
allow his private doctor, the Armenian, to proceed to H§,ifa
to attend the "girl brother of the English Vice-Consul, who
was attacked with a slight beauty, or prettiness." This is
the polite Turkish form of alluding to illness, when woman
is the subject of it.

Within a short time the doctor came, with strict orders ,

L

146 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

from tlie Pasha not to leave me tiU I was well ; he spoke
ItaHan fluently, as well as Turkish and Greek ; he was full
of persevering, quiet energy and goodwill, which inspired
me with confi.dence immediately. He administered small
doses of castor oU, well mixed with sugar, water, gum arabic
and magnesia, in equal proportions, and prescribed linseed
and mustard poultices. He prepared stiff, sweet starch and
some meal porridge with a little magnesia in it, and gave
them to me in small quantities now and then with lime-
flower water to drink. He did not leave the house for
three days and nights, and by Thursday, thanks to his skill
and Katrine's care, I was quite cured of my " slight pretti-
ness,'' which was of a dangerous kind, and said to be
cholera.

We met with great sympathy from our neighbours.
On the evening when I first left my room a company of
singers came on to the terrace to serenade me, improvising
songs of rejoicing, and praying that I might. soon "walk
forth in the gardens, to breathe the air with strength and
gladness of heart."

On the first of November I saw .an immense number of
swallows perched on the house-tops and on the ropes of the
flagstaffs. I was told that they had been gathering there
for several days. Before evening I saw them all assemble
and take flight towards the south. They looked like a
dusky cloud moving swiftly through the air.

Our friend, Saleh Sakhali, and his family also migrated ;
they went to Nazareth, for they feared the cholera, and tried
to persuade us to accompany them.

The most unhealthy period in Palestine is that which
occurs after the falling of the first few aoitumnal showers,*

* The ** early rain" spoken of in the Bible refers, I believe, to the
autwnmal shmoers, which are never very violent ; they fall gently, and by
degrees, and revive the parched and bnmt-up earth after the summer
drought, and enable the peasants to sow wheat and barley. In Deuteronomy
it is called the ** first rain;** and Joel says : "Be glad and rejoice in the
Lord yotur God, for he hath given you the former ram moderately."

The winter rain usually falls heavily during November, December, and
early in January ; and then it ceases until Ma/reh or AprU, when spring

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINB. 147

which usher in the rainy season, and it lasts until the
rain faUs regularly and in abundance. This interval does
not generally exceed two or three weeks, but when it
is prolonged (as in the year 1865, of which I am writing),
fevers or other epidemics prevail .

On November the second, a strong sirocco wind, hot, dry
and scorching, as if it came from a furnace, warped our
books, and split and cracked our olive-wood furniture ; we
closed all the wijidow-shutters on the eastern side of the
rooms, but we could not exclude the fiery air.

There were four English merchant ships at anchor in the
port, as well as several small Greek brigs ; the masters
complained, in no very gentle terms, of the injury done by
the fierce hot wind to the woodwork and fittings of their
vessels.

An English captain, on the point of embarking, came in
saying : " I hope you will give me a clean biU of health,
Consul** ** As clean as I can," he answered ; "but I must
state : ' 8ta> deaths within six days — sudden, and reported
cholera! "

After this the street cleaning was for a time abandoned,
and I noticed funeral processions almost daily, sometimes
going firom the mosque out at the east gate to the Moslem
burial-ground, .sometimes from the Greek or Latin churches
slowly walking towards the Christian cemeteries through
the west gata Moslems are always carried to the grave
in the open bier,, head foremost, and buried in ordinary
costume. I shuddered the first time I saw a body thus
committed to the earth, it looked so much like being
buried alive.

showers are eagerly looked for and welcomed, for "they give strength and
Tigour to the ripenmg crops : this is the " latter rain; " for it is written :
*' The Lord your Gk>d will cause to come down for you the latter rain in
the first month," which is the month caUed in Hebrew " Abib," or " the
month of young ears of com," and corresponds with the end of March and
the beginning of ApriL

"Behold the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth
and hath long patience for it, imtil he receive the early and the latter rain."

In the summer time, that is, from May till September, no rain is ever
seen in Palestine.

l2

148 DOMESTIC UFE IK PALESTINE.

Christians are interred in coffins. The coffin is usually
borne by four or six men, preceded by priests walking
under canopies, and surrounded by crowds of people,
chanting, bearing embroidered banners and a large cross,
and sometimes accompanied by surpliced boys, swinging
incense. At a little distance a troop of women follow,
singing and screaming wildly ; for the priests in vain put
their veto on the attendance of female mourners.

There was not one case of cholera in the Jewish com-
munity.

Deaths were most frequent in the crowded Moslem
quarter, but the Moslems did not seem to suffer much from
fear. Perhaps their reliance on the doctrine of fatalism
made them calm and apparently resigned. On the other
hand, among the Christians, a demoralizing panic quickly
spread.

By degrees nearly all the Europeans went up to the
convent, where they established a strict quarantine ; many
of the Arabs went to Nazareth and Shefa 'Omer ; altogether,
above a thousand people fled, and the Christian quarter
looked quite deserted. It was remarked that there was only
one hat left in the town fi. e., onlj/ one Frank), alluding to
my brother, who remained at his post endeavouring to
reanimate the people. He went from house to house, giving
advice and simple medicines, and as he was not quite con-
vinced that the epidemic was cholera he examined two or
three bodies immediately after death. Their appearance
confirmed the current report.

The Arab word for cholera, or the pesth, is " Hotoorel-
Asfa,'' which signifies the " yellow wind." Hags proclaim-
ing quarantine are yellow; is it possible that the colour
was selected on account of this name ? The Arabs told me
that the worst cases of cholera occurred at the change oi
the moon, and that people who were attacked then never
recovered ! The women seldom left their houses, except
to follow funerals ; and the men grew more and more dis-
pirited. Even our little tailor, Suleiman Shefa 'Omery, the
merriest of the merry, the drollest of the droll, was at last

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE. 149

infected with the general fear. His springing, self-satisfied
step became slow and cautious, and his voice was subdued
to a whisper. He had been in the habit of coming to the
Vice-Consulate, now and then, to show me his work —
embroidered jackets and trousers for the trousseau of a
bride, or a tobacco-pouch for a bek. He was one of my
many self-constituted teachers, and was at the same time
profoundly respectful and deferential, and yet amusingly
impertinent. He was the beau ideal of an Oriental tailor,
and looked as if he had just walked out of one of the pages
of the " Arabian Night^' Entertainments " — good-lookiig,
and quick in every movement ; always ready, unasked, to
do a service — flight a pipe, trim a lamp, pick up a pencil,
smooth the pillows and cushions of the divan, feteh a glass
of water, or proffer an opinion. He looks with a quick and
critical eye on every one's costume, and values each article
of apparel unhesitatingly, as if speaking half to himself
and half to the wearer.

I used to learn a greater number of Arabic words from
him in an hour, than from any one else in a day. He
could neither read nor write, but his memory was acute.
He remembered perfectly the promiscuous vocabulary which
he taught me ; and he used to ask me, each time he came,
the words he had told me on previous occasions ; and at
every successful answer from me, he glanced round the
room, expecting a look of app2X)bation for himself, and one
for his pupU. He showed me how to do all sorts of Syrian
needlework. He made very beautiful designs for embroi-
dery, chiefly conventional fpliage. He first stiffens the
cloth or sUk, by sewing thick paper at the back of it; then,
with a piece of hard, white native soap, rubbed to a fine
pomt, he draws, with a firm hand, a few graceful lines and
intersecting circles within any given space. He completes
the design, in the course of working it, with gold thread,
and he never by any chance makes two patterns precisely
alike. He seemed thoroughly to enjoy his work ; but now
even he was changed — ^his brave, self-confident spirit had
left him ; he no longer took delight in his needle or gold

150 DOMESTIC LIFB IN FALESTINU

thread. He told me, regretfully, that some of his best
embroidery was in the burial-ground ; for men and women,
Moslems and Christians, are often shrouded in their bridal
robes or fSte-day dresses. Suleiman was one of the few
Arabs who seemed to think this was a very great pity.

When costly garments are buried, the grave is generally
watched for some time, for fear it should be rifled.

One day we rode up to the Conrent. Two hundred of
the people of H^ifa had taken refuge thera The gardens,
which had before looked so quiet and monastic, were
enlivened by little groups of Arabs, smoking under the
trees, or strolling about. All the rooms were occupied.
The French Consul came to meet us, but carefully avoided
contact, and led the way to the reception-room, where
pastUes were burning. His wife and children came to
see us, but remained at a distance. They said that, while
people were dying of cholera in H§ifa» they, the voluntary
exiles, were almost expiring of ennui and fear on Mount
CarmeL

By degrees, the health of HMfa somewhat improved, and
a large proportion of cholera cases were cured. Powdered
charcoal, made of bread burnt in an open crucible, was
taken by many people as a preventive ; and, as far as I
could judge, it seemed to be efifectuaL A teaspoonful, or
less, in a cup of sugarless coffee, was the usual daily dose.

On November 14«th, we went for a trip in the interior,
with Colonel and the Hon. Mrs. Walpole. He claimed my
brother's aid in seeking for winter-quarters for his regi-
ment He kindly invited me to go too ; so, accompanied
by his Bashi-Bazouks, and furnished with a circular letter
of recommendation from the- Pasha to all the governors in
his pashalic, we went to Shefa 'Omer, Nazareth, round the
lake of Tiberias, and along the valley of the Jordan, up
to the Anti-Lebanon, exploring all the old castles and
ruins ; but we did not come very much in contact with the
natives. The interest of the tour is chiefly archeeological
and architectural, so I will pass it over here. We returned
to Hfiifa on the 10th of December.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 151

M. Zifo, the Prussian Consul, called to welcome us ; he
said he was the " only hat in town," and he was detained
by business, much against his inclination, for cholera and
typhus-fever prevailed. All the people were praying for
rain. For three dftys after our return, there was not one
death in the town, and some of the refugees came from the
Convent. The French Consul was one of the first arrivals ;
but, unhappily, his youngest daughter, the pet and play-
thing of the family, who used to lisp out Arabic and
French so prettily, was immediately attacked with cholera^
and died after twelve hours' suffering. On the 15th the panic
was revived ; hut a curious circumstance suddenly restored
tranquillity to the minds of the Arabs. On the night of
Sunday, the 16th of December, a woman dreamt that she
saw four malignant imps ; each one held a stone, with an
inscription on it, in his hand. She said to them, " What do
you want ? why are you here to trouble me ? " They said,
speaking as with one voice, " We have come to throw four
stones." Then she said, "Hasten to throw your stones,
and go in peace." One was thrown at her ; the others flew
in different directions. She told her dream the next day,
and seemed very much alarmed. The imps of her dream
were said, by the interpreters thereof, to be " imps of the
yellow wind'' The majority of the people believed that there
would be only four more deaths in HSifa from cholera.
On the 18th, fourteen individuals were attacked ; but only
two died, one of whom was the dreamer. On the 19th,;
there were two more deaths, the last which were reported.
The people were reassured, and flocked back from 'Akka,
GaUlee, and CarmeL But the wished-for season of rain
had not set in ; provisions were dear, and milk was very
unwholesome, on account of the scarcity of herbage.

Several ships from Yafa had taken refuge in the port of
Haifa. The winds were so wild and contrary, that two
ships were wrecked off 'Akka, and two boats lost in the
bay. The west wind was so strong for a day or two, that
it filled the mouth of the river Kishon with sand, so
that it could be crossed easily on foot. Then suddenly the

152 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

east wind rose, and swept the bar of sand quite away, so
that the river was twelve feet deep at the usual place of
fording, and consequently impassable.

At Christmas, the rain came ; but it was rain such as
I had never seen, except in strange 61d pictures . of the
Deluge. The town was traversed in all directions by rapid
streams of mud and water ; rain came in at the ill-made
windows, and our shutters and doors were wrenched from
their hinges by the wild wind. Fortunately, the house for
which we had been waiting was now ready, and weather-
tight; and we managed to move in during the short inter-
vals between the torrents. I had to ride there, although it
was only at a very short distance. Most of the Arabs
went about barefooted, with the water far above their
ankles.

During the wet season, there were about three days of
nearly continual rain, and three days of sunshine, alter-
nately.

Our new house, the rooms of which were built round a
corridored court, was next door to the French consulate.
The Consul's wife (a Syrian lady) kindly initiated me by
degrees into all the mysteries of Oriental housekeeping.

Furnishing was a very simple affair. In one of the large
empty rooms a native Jewish upholsterer was set to work
to take to pieces aU the mattresses, cushions, and lehaflfs ;
then, with a little machine, he separated the cotton which
had become hard and close; he tore it and combed it till it
was transformed into a fleecy cloud.

He quickly re-made the mattresses, fitting them to the
iron bedsteads and divans, and cleverly qmlted a stock of
coverlets (lehafifs). His naked feet were almost as busy as
his fingers; they served him to hold his work; and when
he wanted to wind a skein of cotton he always fixed it on
his long, pliant, toes, and used them as pegs when he doubled
and twisted the thread ; in fact, in many ways he made them
useful. In the meantime an Arab carpenter was engaged
in sawing planks and joining them together, ready to place
on low trestles round the rooms. On the rude benches thus

BOMESnC UFE US PALESTINE. 153

formed, mattresses, about a yard wide, and cushions covered
with chintz or Manchester prints, were arranged ; deep, full
borders sewn on to the outer edge of the mattresses, quite
concealed ihe rough woodwork underneath. This is all the
mystery of the grand Turkish divans. Two native Jewesses
assisted me with the mosquito and window curtains.

Eeed mats, to cover the cemented and stone floors, were
made for us at 'Akka according to measure. I furnished one
little room as nearly in English style as I could under the
circumstances, but the rest of the house was semi-oriental.
There were no fireplaces in any of the rooms ; in the
kitchen there was a row of cooking stoves fit for stewing
and baking ; similar, probably, to " the oven and ranges for
potSj'* referred to in Leviticus xi 35.

There was a good well in the comer of the court, and a
little bell tinkled merrily every time the bucket was in
motion. The former occupants of the house were Arabs,
and they had left for my benefit a fine henna-tree (lawsonia).
It is very like the privet, but the blossom is more yellow
and deUcate, and the scent is rather oppressive. The green
leaves (which produce the dye) are dried, crumbled to a
fine powder, and carefully preserved.

The stocking of the storeroom was the next considera-
tioa It soon contained provisions for the winter : a case
of maccaroni, a basket of Egyptian rice, two sacks of
wheat, one of which I sent to be ground, by mill-stones
moved by cattle. Afterwards I had the meal sifted at the
house, the smeed was set apart for white bread, &c. and
the remainder was stored for niaking Arab loaves for
the servants.

The large terra cotta jars, glazed inside, and rough
without, ranged round the room, often made me think of
Ali Baba and the forty thieves. One held the smeed,
another held flour, another bran, a fourth oil, and some
rather smaller ones contained olives and goats'-milk cheese
preserved in oil, and a store of cooking butter. Oranges
and lemons garnished the shelves; dried figs strung on thin
cord, and pomegranates tied one by one to ropes, hung in

154 DOMESTIC XIFB US PALESTINE;

festoons from the rafters, and the bundles of dried herhs of
Carmel smelt sweetly.

My kind neighbour taught me how to add to my stores
at the right seasons, to make fruit preserves, to concentrate
the essence of tomatoes, and to convert wheat into starch (by
steeping it in water, straining it, and drying it in the sun)
for making sweet dishes, as well as for the laundry. The
Arabs do not starch or iron their clothes, so I had a little
difi5culty at first in procuring help in the '* getting up " of
fine linen. However, an Arab youth, who had once lived
with a semi-European tailor, and professed to know how to
handle an iron, though he acknowledged that starching was
a mystery to him, volunteered assistance, and did his best.
Subsequently a yoimg Arab girl in our service was taught
the art by an Abyssinian slave, the servant of a European
neighbour, and she became very skilful.

Arabs only use starch for making a sort of blancmange,
and they shrink from the idea of stiffening linen with it,
for they have a strong respect for wheat in any shape. If
a morsel of bread fall to the ground, an Arab will gather
it up with his right hand, kiss it, touch his forehead with
it, and place it in a recess or on a wall, where the fowls of
the air may find it, for they say : " We must not tread
under foot the gift of Ood*' I have seen this reverence
exhibited constantly, by all classes of the people, by
masters, servants, and even by little children, Moslems and
Christians.

I was so busy that I had no time to feel my strange
isolation. The mornings were devoted to household arrange-
ments and lessons in Arabic, afternoon to visiting or visitors,
and in fine weather a ride or a stroll with my brother before
sunset, and pleasant evenings with him and his friends.
When we were at last alone together we used to compare
notes of our several occupations, observations, and adven-
tures of the day. His long residence in the East enabled
him to explain some of the intricacies and seeming contrar
dictions in the characters of the Arabs, and to guide me in
my intercourse with them. In outline during the winter

DOMESTIC LIFE IN t>AL£STINE; 155

one day nearly resembled another, but the details were
always pleasantly varied,

Abrahim Sakhali, my brother s secretary, and also my
writing-master, an energetic, clever young man of the
Greek church, went to 'Akka like many others to avoid
cholera. 'Akka was over-crowded, and smaU-pox broke
out; poor Abrahim caught it, and died suddenly on the
16th of January, 1856. His death threw a gloom over
H^ifa, for he was a general favourite among Christians and
Moslems.

On the 17th, early in the morning, Khaltl Sakhali (the
father of Abrahim) called on us. He was a very stout,
tall, robust-looking man, and wore a long robe or open
pelisse, and a large white turban; his features were regular,
and his beard long and white. He looked grand in his
grief, and his lamentations for his dead son were solemn
and dignified. He, with my brother and the chief people
of our town, went towards 'Akka to join the foneral cortege,
for it was arranged that the body should be brought to
H^a for burial All the horses ^and donkeys were in
requisition, and nearly all the shops were closed. I walked
out to witness the wailing of the widow and her com-
panions. They were outside the East Gate, near the burial
ground ; about fifty or sixty veiled women surrounded the
chief mourners. I was led almost imconsciously by little
Katrine Sakhali through the crowd to an open space in the
midst. In th^ centre of this space the widow, young and
beautiful, knelt on the ground; she was unveiled, her head
was only covered by a little red cloth cap, her long hair was
unbraided, and fell over her green velvet, gold-embroidered
jacketi She swayed her body to and fro, tossed her head
back, raised her hands as if passionately pleading, then
threw herself forward with her face to the ground, but
suddenly started to her feet, and with her dark eyes
uplifted, and her arms raised above her head, she com-
menced shrieking wildly, and aU the women joined in the
piercing cry. Presently she fell down as if exhausted, and
there was silence for a moment Then a, few of the women

156 DOMESTIC LUTE IN FiXESTINE.

in the inner circle rose, threw off their veils, and danced
round her, singing, and making a rattling, tremulous sound
from the throat, while the rest of the women joined in
chorus. Professional mourners kept up the excitement by
demonstrations of violent grief, and the professional singers
improvised appropriate songs. This lasted for three or four
hours, and the crowd gradually grew larger. I made my
way through it with dijficulty, for some of the women had
worked themselves into fits of frenzy and hysterics.

I observed that the men who passed by kept quite
aloof from this group of mourners, and made no attempt
to look upon the unveiled widow. My kawass stood afar
off, waiting for ma On emerging from the crowd, I could
see the funeral cortige approaching along the sands. I
was informed by a forerunner, that the body of Abrahhn
had been interred in the 'Akka burial-ground^ as it was
considered dangerous to convey it so far as H&ifa. When
the procession was nejtr to the town, I went up on to the
low roof of the custom-house to see it pass. First came
the kawasses of some of the Consuls, carrying their long
silver-headed sticks or poles draped with black; then a
large party of young men, dressed in various colours,
solemnly silent, walking four abreast At a little distance
from these, Abrahlm's horse, without a rider, was led by
two men slowly and carefully. Some of poor Abrahim's
well-remembered garments were on the saddle.

The three brothers of Abrahlm followed i^ a line ; tihien
came his nephews and cousins, among whom was our friend
Saleh, all looking thoughtful and sacL The next mourner
was the mother. She sat cross-legged on a horse, sup-
ported by two men. Her face was veiled, but her drooping
head expressed her grief, — she had lost her favourite son.
My brother, who had a great respect both for her and the
deceased, rode by her side. Mohammed Bek followed, on
a splendid white horse, surrounded by a group of Moslems ;
then came the 'Akka mourners, headed by the Giammal
family, all on foot. Last of all, the father, looking heart*
broken, rode slowly towards his bereaved home.

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE. 157

When all the men were out of sight, the company of
women entered the gates, shrieking and singing. My
kawass retreated hastily, and a yonng Greek of Scio, who
was by my side, said : " You can remain here to see them
pass, but it would not be proper for me to do so — ^men
do not watch processions of female mourners ; " and he
retired.

First came a group of dancers, only slightly veiled,
making slow and graceful movements, and waving scarfs
and kerchiefs, pausing now and then in strange attitudes,
resting for a quarter of a minute at a time like statues,
and then singing and shrieking wildly, all the company
joining in the chorus. The young widow walked alone,
followed by two attendants who carried the orphan chil-
dren. This group was surrounded at a little distance by
the nearest female relatives of Abrahtm ; an irregular
crowd of women and girls closed the procession, loudly
echoing the songs of the leaders. Thus they went slowly
through the town ; and there was loud wailing and mourn-
ing in the house of Sakhali for seven days. Sut to the
silent grief of the mother there was no limit She lived
next door to the Consulate, and I often saw her. She was
completely changed. Her firm step had suddenly become
faltering, and her head drooped. She seldom spoke, and her
only words were words of lamentation and despair. Little
Katrine, the daughter of our friend Saleh, touchingly de-
scribed her great grief, saying, — " I think our aunt will die.
She has no thought but for Abrahim. She does not wish
to see any one but Abrahim. Always she is kissing his
coat, his cap, and his gun. Always her face is wet with
tears, and she will not be comforted. She cannot eat, and
at night she is awake; only a little in the daytime she
falls asleep, tired of crying and of folding and unfolding
aU his clothes. No one can make her glad now."

Little Katrine's fears were realized. The mother of
Abrahim died on the 13th of February, fretting to the
last for her dead son. I attended her funeral the next
day. At an early hour I saw the procession form. Men

158 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

carrying banners, embroidered with sax^red emblems and
monograms, led the way. Then came the Greek priests ;
one of them bore a large, gilt, wooden cross. The body
was in a dark cofiin, on which three white crosses were
conspicuous ; it was supported by six men. The male
mourners were headed by the widower and his three sons ;
and the women followed afar off. A large number of
people lined the road aU the way to the church, and fell in
with the funeral cortSge as it passed.

The bell was tolling as I entered the church. I went
up into the women's gallery, which is very high, and op-
posite to the altar. I was led to the front of it, where a
block of wood was given to me for a seat ; the women, all
veiled and in white sheets, sat around on the matted floor.
I looked down into the church, through a sloping wooden
lattice, at an angle of about twenty degrees with the ceil-
ing, and so arranged that a view of what was going on
below could only be obtained by leaning forward over
this lattice, and with the face nearly close to it. Thus
positioned, I could see easily.

The chancel was already crowded. A few European
gentlemen, in dark clothes, looked conspicuous among the
Arabs in their many coloured garments. The chief female
mourners, shrouded in white, were grouped altogether on
one side. The coffin, raised on high trestles, stood in the
centre ; a narrow space was left round it. A priest stood
at its head, slowly swinging a censor, while two others
chanted Psalms, and read the Service monotonously and
mutteringly : the people responded loudly.

Wax candles were distributed by the younger members
of the Sakhali family to every one present. There were
about 300, and a strange effect was produced when all the
candles, as well as the tapers fixed round the coffin, were
lighted. Some looked pale and spirit-like in the sun-
shine, others were obscured in clouds of incense, .while
the rest illuminated dark comers, made darker by the
dense crowd.

EJialll Sakhalin the widower, and his three sons, sat

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINIT. 159

together in a conspicuous position near the door of the
sacristy : every one else was standing.

In obedieSe to a signal from the chief priest, an
opening was made in the crowd towards them. After a
few minutes of perfect silence, the widower walked unob-
structed into the centre of the church. He placed his
hands solemnly on the coffin, pressed his broad forehead on
to the head of it, pronounced a blessing, kissed a little
Byzantine picture of Christ which was placed there, and
then, returned to his seat, bending his head low. After
another silent pause, the three sons followed his example ;
and all the nearest relatives came forward to kiss the
picture. After the youngest child of the family had been
lifted up to take this farewell, the rest of the congregation
crowded round, and with less emotion and more haste per-
formed the same ceremony.

By degrees all but the chief mourners withdrew, and
then I went down into the church with the women. . One
by one they kissed the picture, muttering a short prayer
for the repose of the soul of the deceased.

Presently the procession re-formed and went out at the
West Gate to the Greek burial-ground, the women followed
afar ofif singing and crying wildly; and again for many
days there was mourmng in the house of SakhalL

But the widower did not reject consolation. About a year
afterwards he sent messengers to Nazareth to seek for a wife
for him, and when all was rightly arranged, he went there
to be affianced. But a monetary difficulty arose and the
contract was annulled ; so another bride was sought and
quickly chosen, for Khalil said he was determined not to
be disappointed nor to be a laughing stock in HS^if a ; and
he was after all actually betrothed on the very day first
fixed for the ceremony, and the marriage took place soon
after.

The bridegroom was about seventy, and the bride a^ven-
teen ! I called to welcome the young wife to Hllifa. She
was very good-looking, but quite of the peasant class. She
had a bright face, the forehead and chin were tattooed.

160 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

Her eyebrows were naturally black and well arched, and
her eyelashes very long, so that no kohl was necessary
(this peculiarity is expressed in Arabic in one word,
" khala"). Her countenance was ruddy, and the women said
of her : " The wife of Khalil is fair, roses grow upon her
cheeks ; she does not buy her roses in the bazaar." This
is also said of the women of Shefa 'Omer, who are generally
bright and healthy in appearance, and use rouge but
rarely.

Khalil was comforted ; his three sons and their wives,
with their little ones, dwelt with him under the same roof,
and there was rejoicing in the house when a son was born
to him in his old age.

EUas SakhaH, the eldest son of Khalil, was studious,
thoughtful, clear-headed and logical, and universally liked
by Christians and Moslems. He was employed in the French
Consulate. He came very often to see us, and was eager to
obtain inf6rmation about the English constitution, and the
progress of civilization generally. He always had some
amusing story or impressive parable to tell me when he
found me alone. Many of them were original; I carefully
chronicled all.

He often spoke to me on the subject of the government
of Syria. He said that there was no opportunity for the
people to rise out of their present condition, while they are
ruled by oiB&cers who have no sympathy with them, no
love for the country, and no object but to enrich themselves.
The Arabs, under the present system of irregular taxation,
do not attempt to cultivate the land as they would do if
they were encouraged and protected by the government.
In many parts of the country a man will not run the
risk of improving his estate. He will not plant new olive
trees, nor extend his orchards and vineyards, nor employ
many labourers, for fear of exciting the rapacity of the
governor of his district ; for if a man is supposed to be rich,
excuses are readily invented to impoverish him ; debts are
coined, or false accusations are made against him, and he
is thrown into prison till he pays the supposed debt or a

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 161

laige fine. In one particular instance, the governor of a
certain Moslem village, having exceeded even the usual
bounds of exaction, a united complaint was made to the
Pasha by the indignant villagers. The Pasha, for the sake
of appearances, immediately appointed a new governor.
He tried and imprisoned the offender for a few days, but
soon made arrangements with him and set him free, after
having accepted as a bribe a large proportion of the
property which the ex-governor had so unjustly obtained.

I have heard of many similar transactions, and some-
times the actors have been well known to me, so that I
have had an opportunity of hearing both sides of the story.
Nearly all the Turks with whom I came in contact Seemed
to glory in successful intrigue, and were generally shrewd
and clever. They had little or no sympathy with the Arabs,
and apparently no true patriotism. There are very few
Turks in Palestine, except civil officers and their emphyia,
military officers, and soldiers ; they are looked upon always
as foreigners.

Pashas and governors do not remain long or for any
fixed time in one place. Wherever they go, they, with few
exceptions, "tread upon the poor, and take from them
burdens of wheat ; they afilict the just, and take a bribe."
They naturally favour the Moslems, but money is their
chief consideration. They not only injure the people they
are appointed to protect, but they rob the Government
they are employed to serve.

If appointments were given with appropriate salaries, to
men of honour and energy, fitted for office, instead of being
sold to speculators^ there would be hope for Syria. Crime
would be punished and innocence protected, in spite of
patronage and piastres.

Elias severely felt the disadvantageous position of his
countrymen. They live in a land overrun by Bedouins,
where there is no security for property, no encouragement
for agriculturists ; where there are no roads and very few
modem books ; where offices are purchased, laws tampered
with, justice disregarded, and industry and commercial

M

162 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

enterprise cheeked. I could not help sympathising with
him, especially as I by degrees became better acquainted
with the capabilities of the Arab mind, and the wonderful
fertility of the country. Under more favourable circum-
stances and better cultivation each would flourish. Elias
admitted that oppression had demoralized the people to
a lamentable extent. Their powers and talents were
misapplied, their ingenuity and inventive faculties were
displayed in artful cunning and clever intrigue. Their
powers of endurance and self-sacrifice had grown into
seeming apathy and indifference, their love of poetry and
of the marvellous had been trifled with by teachers of
strange doctrines and conflicting traditions, and their
imaginations were encumbered with wUd superstitions.

When EKas spoke thus despocndingly, no such man as
Fuad Pasha had been in Syria to inspire the hope of a better
state of things. EUas was always ready to answer patiently
and carefully my many questions. During nearly three years
I was in the habit of seeing him frequently. In August,
1858, he went to Beirut on business ; he was not well
when he left home, and on Wednesday, the 1st of Sep-
tember, news was brought to H&ifa that he was dead, and
had been buried at Beirftt. This was a new and terrible
affliction for the Sakhali family, for Elias was looked up
to as the ruler and manager of the house. Khalll, the
aged father, felt the loss acutely, and the widow was quite
prostrated ; grief bewildered and almost stupefied her —
she could not even weep. " Call for the mourning women,
that they may come ; and for such as are skilful in lamen-
tation, that they may come : and let them make haste, and
take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with
tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters." And again
there were seven days of weeping in the house of Sakhali
(See Jeremiah ix, 17, 18.)

I joined the mourners on the third day. Directly I
entered the house, I heard the minstrels and the loud cries
of the people. (See Matt. ix. 23.) I was led into a large
long room. Women were sitting on the floor in rows on

DOMESTIC LIFE IN TALESTINK. 163

two sides of it ; an open space was left down the middle to
the end of the room, where the widow sat apart, with her
two youngest children lying at her feet. Her hair was
dishevelled, and she wore no covering on her head; her
eyelids were swollen with weeping, and her face pale with
watching : she looked as if she had suddenly grown old.
Her dress was rent and disordered ; she had not rested or
changed her garments since she heard the tidings of her
husband's death. She kissed me passionately, and said :
" Weep for me, he is dead : " and then pointing to her
children, she said : " Weep for them, they are fatherless/'
I sat near to her. One of her children, who was about
three years old, crept into my lap, and whispered : ** My
father is dead.'' Then he closed his eyes, and pressed his
chubby little fingers tightly over them, saying: " My father
is dead like this — he is in the dark''

The waUing, which had been slightly interrupted at my
entrance, was renewed with vigour. The assembled women
were all in their gayest dresses, soft crimson silk with white
stripes on it prevailing. There were many women from
Nazareth and Shefa 'Omer and other villages. They had
uncovered their heads and unbraided their hair. They
looked dreadfally excited, their eyes were red with weep-
ing and watching, and the air of the room was close and
heated, for the widow and chief mourners had remained
there for three days and two nights without rest, receiving
guests who came to mourn with them. The room was
always filled, for as soon as one set of people left another
set came in. During my visit there were seventy-three
mourners present, without reckoning the children who
glided in and out.

Three rows of women sat on the matted floor on the
right-hand side, facing three rows on the left. They
were all clapping their hands or striking their bosoms
in time with the monotonous melody which they mur-
mured.

Presently an especial lamentation was commenced, to
which I was invited to respond

m2

164 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

m

I was still seated at the end of the room, near to the
widow. The women on my left hand (led by a celebrated
professional mourner) sang these words with vigour and
energy : —

** We saw him, in the midgt of the company of riders, -
Biding brayely on his horse, the horse he loyed ! "

Then the women on the opposite side of the room answered
in a lower and more plaintive key, beating their breasts
mournfully : —

** Alas ! no more shall we see him
In the midst of the company of riders,
Riding brayely on his horse, the horse he loyed."

Then the first singers sang :—

"We saw him in the garden, the pleasant garden.
With his companions, and his children, tiie childrMi he loyed.**

Then the second singers answered : —

''Alas ! no -more shaU we see him
In the garden^ the pleasant garden, ^
With his companions, and his children, the children he loyed. '

Chorus of all the women, singing softly: —

" His children and his servants blessed him !
His home was the shelter of happiness !
Peace be upon him t "

First singers (loudly and with animation) : —

'' We saw him giying food to the hungry,
And clothing to- the naked ! "

Second singers (softly and plaintively) : —

" Alas 1 no more shall we see him
Giye food to the hungry.
And garments to the naked f "

First singers : —

" We saw him giye help and succour to the aged,
And good coimsel to the young.'

Second singers : —

,»*'

''Alas .* no more shall we see him
Giye help and succour to the aged,
And good counsel to the young."

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 165

Chorus of all the women, singing softly : —

" He suffered not the stranger to sleep in the streets :
He opened his door to the wayfarer.
Peace be upon him."

After this, they started to their feet and shrieked as
loudly as they could, making a rattling noise in their
throats for three or four minutes ; while the widow knelt,
swaying her body backwards and forwards and feebly
joining in the wild cry.

Some of the women reseated themselves on the floor
quite exhausted, some retired, and a number of guests
from ' Akka came in and took the vacant places. A minstrel
woman began slowly beating a tambourine, and all the
company clapped their hands in measure with it, singing : .
" Alas for him ! alas for him ! He was brave, he was good,
alas for him ! '* &c. Then three women rose, with naked
swords in their hands, and stood ai two or three yards' dis-
tance from each other. They began dancing with slow and
graceful movements, with their swords at first held low and
their heads drooping. Each dancer kept within a circle of
about a yard in diameter. By degrees the tambourine and
the clapping of the hands and the songs grew louder, the
steps of the dancers were quickened, they threw back their
heads and gazed upwaids passionately as if they would
look into the very heavens. They flourished their uplifted
swords, and as their movements became more wild and
excited, the bright steel flashed and bright eyes seemed to
grow brighter. As one by one the dancers sank overcome
with fatigue, others rose to replace them. Thus passed
seven days and nights. Professional mourners were in
constant attendance to keep up the excitement, and dances
and dirges succeeded each other with intervals of wild and
hysterical weeping and shrieking. I remained about two
hours in the room, and occasionally I watched from a
window which overlooked it. I could see that the leader
had a powerful influence over all present ; a certain tone
of her wild wailing voice drew tears from the eyes and
produced hysterical emotion in some cases.

166 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.-

There are girls who have a morbid taste for the excite-
ment thus produced, and are celebrated for the facility
with which they fall into fits of uncontrollable weeping.
The real mourners and the amateur actresses in these
scenes are usually ill afterwards, but the professional
assistants do not appear to suffer from the fatigue or
excitement, and they do not lose their self-control for a
moment.

Poor Khalll Sakhali never quite recovered the shock
caused by this death. It became an epoch from which
to reckon events throughout the district where Elias had
been so well known and so much respected. It was usual
to say, " Such an event occurred before or after the death of
Eliasr And there was a sayiag current in HS,ifa to the
effect that "the men of the 'Sakhali famUy die always
among strangers and av/ay from home ;" but I suppose the
spell is broken now, for Khalll, the old man, died in his
own house, in January, 1860. I was not in H&ifa at the
time, but I was informed that Khalll had been staying
at 'Akka and was very iU there. On his way back to
Haifa in a very weak state, while riding along the sands,
he was thrown from his horse and so much injured
that he was carried home and died in three days. My
brother went to the funeral, and in a letter to me he spoke
of it thus : —

"I never in this neighbourhood saw a funeral so nume-
rously attended. The church as well as the court without
was completely crowded. Seven priests (four of whom
had come from a considerable distance for the purpose)
chanted the appointed psalms, and the burial service was
performed as usuaL After the Epistle, Gospel, and Absolu-
tion had been read, the chief priest said to the congregation,
*Dear brethren and children, Khalll Sakhali was a man
who lived very long in this world. He has had a great deal
of business and hgis been in communication with a great
number of people. It is possible that in certain trans-
actions he may have given cause for offence. Some people
may have felt themselves insulted, some may have been

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 167

grieved or offended, either with or without reason. This
now is the time for pardon, and I hereby beseech you all
present, and by the blessing of God I implore you all, to
pardon him fully, to forgive him all offences as youhope to
be forgiven.' The whole congregation then answered: ^May
Ood pardon himV^^

This ceremony of asking pardon of the living for the
dead is observed in a slight degree at all burials among the
Greeks, but it is not generally so emphatically expressed or
so enlarged upon as in the case of Khalll. He was a man
of great, influence. He was the founder of the Greek Church
in H&ifa ; and the only good houses in the town belonged
to him or to members of his family.

CHAPTEE VIII.

THE history of the Sakhali family has led me away
from my own. I will return to the time when we
hastened into our new house on account of the commence-
ment of the winter rains— Christmas, 1855.

On the 30th of December, after three days and nights of
almost incessant rain, a bright sunshiny afternoon tempted
us out. We passed through the west gate, and the sudden
change which had taken place in the appearance of the
country surprised me exceedingly. The ground, which had
lately looked so brown and parched, cracked into fissures
by the summer heat, w^s now carpeted with vividly green
grass and tiny leaves. Many large slabs of rock, which had
before been concealed by earth, were now laid bare. The
tombs in the Greek and Latin cemeteries, the broad stone
threshing-floors on the sloping plain, the masses of rock
around and on the terraced hill-sides, washed by the recent
torrents, looked brightly white.

We climbed the castle hill, just behind HHifa. White,
yellow, and purple crocuses were growing round the roots
of the trees, under the shelter of rocks, and in the midst
of leafless thorn-bushes ; * while the glossy green leaves of
flags, arums, squills, and cyclamen were unfolding and
shooting up everywhere.

We looked down on to the town ; thousands of birds, chiefly
sparrows, were on the house-tops (the flat roofs of which
are composed of massive beams of wood, crossed by planks,
poles, and brushwood, overspread with earth and small

* '* The lily among thorns," Song of Solomon, il 2.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINK 169'

stones, rolled firm and smooth). In preparation for the
winter rains the roofs had all been newly covered with
mortar made of earth, brought from the common or unin-
closed land of the hills, well mixed with straw. The newly-
disturbed earth, rich in bulbs and grass, and wild-flower
seeds, had naturally attracted the birds, and as I watched
them pecking and twittering there, I felt the significancy
of the expression in the Psalms, which refers to the
** sparrow on the housetop"

On the 30th of January, soon after sunrise, several little
boys came with large bunches of the ^'narojus," ie. the
yellow narcissus, a favourite flower of the Arabs. The boys
asked for " backshish," and said, "We have brought these
flowers because they are called by the name of the Consul."
Then I understood why many Arabs, especially children,
called us " Narojus," instead of Eogers, In the afternoon, I
went on to the hills, where narcissus and wild hyacinths
were growing in profusion ; goats were leaping and skipping
from rock to rock, and enjoying the plentiful pasture. I
looked down on to the town ; its appearance was perfectly
changed. Out of the lately-made roofs of earth, fresh green
grass had sprung, so that every house-top looked like a grass
plat, and on some of them lambs and kids were feeding.

But these grass- grown roofs are rarely sound enough to
keep out the rain ; we often heard our neighbours complain^
ing of water pouring in torrents into their rooms, and I have
sometimes been roused in the night by an unexpected
sprinkling. Patches of fresh eaxth are added from time to
time, and the roofs are roUed occasionally with a heavy
stone, like a common garden-roller. One is usually kept on
the top of each house or block of houses.

When I went out on the 11th of February, I saw
labourers busy in the plain, at the foot of the Carmel Hills.
Large patches of land were being ploughed. The rich
brown earth was thrown up by clumsy-looking plough-
shares, dragged by oxen. Boys were employed in gathering
out stones from tracts of land, round which men were
building low rough stone walls. New hedges of prickly

170 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

pears were being planted round gardens and orchards,
thus : — A stone Wall, about a quarter of a yard high, is
made, and then- quite covered with earth. Along the top
of the bank thus formed, portions of the cactus stems are
planted, about a foot apart. These stems are green and
broad, and so flat and jointed that they loek lifce large
rounded leaves joined together. In some places the *ain
had washed away the earth, and I could see the roots
shooting out from the edges of the stems. The growth of
this species of the cactus (Opuntia) is so rapid, that a bank
thus planted beoomeSi in the course of one season, a very
formidable hedge. Its blossom is yellow, and it yields the
pleasant, cooling fruit, called "prfckly pear," or "Indian
fig." The Arabs call it " Suhber," i.e, *' patience" on account
of the care and patience required in gathering and peeling
it; for it is covered with spines and fine stinging haits, and
the plant is armed everywhere with large sharp thorns ; in
spite of this, the camel feeds on it freely. Even in the driest
seasons, the stems are juicy, andj when- pierced, moisture
oozes out plentifully. It is the natural home of the cochi-
neal insect ; but the cultivation of this valuable article of
commerce is, unfortunately, neglected in Palestine:

The blossoming arum, the blue iris, squills, and daffodils
were growing so abundantly in the burial-ground, that the
sides of the tombs were quite concealed. Oa the un-
ploughed land of the plain, and on the hiU-sides, I found
anemones, ranunculuses, marigolds, ground-ivy, cyclamen,
and many other wild flowers. The thorn-bushes, which
during the summer and autumn had been so dark and
bare, were clothed with delicate green sprays of finely-
serrated leaves, which almost hid the sharp, cruel-looking
thorns. They were sprinkled with litile round buds — when
they opened, they threw out silky tufts of crimson, crowned
with golden-coloured powder. The seed-vessel is round,
and divided into four quarters ; at first it is almost white,
but gradually becomes pink ; and at the apex there is a
little green tuft, in the shape of a Greek cross. When the
seed is quite ripe, it is about half an inch in diameter, and

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 171

of a deep sliining red colonr. I had been told it was of
this thorn that the wreath was made which once crowned
the head of Christ. It may be so ; and I have never seen
a plant of which so beautiful, and at the same time so
cruel, a crown could be composed. This thorn is the
Poterium spirmsum^

About Easter, it is seen in all its beauty, the leaves
glossy and full-grown, the fruit or seed-vessels brilliantly
red, like drops of blood, and the thoHis sharper and stronger
than at any other time. No plant or bush is so common
on the hiQs of Judaea, Galilee, and Garmel as this. It is
used extensively for fuel, especially for the bakers' ovens,
and " the crackling cf thoims under a pot " may often be
heard in Palestine.

The gardens and orchards looked very beatitiful. Almond
trees were ftdl of blossom. Lemon and shaddock trees were
laden with fruit. He winter rains were over ; « flowers
appeared on the earth, the time of the singing of birds had
come, and the voice of the tuirtle was heard in the land."
And again the appearance of the town of Hlifa was per-
fectly changed ; the last few days of warmth and uninter-
rupted sunshine had qtdte withered and burnt up all " the
grass on the house-tops,*' so that there was not a green spot
left. Boys and girls were gathering the short yellow hay ;
but there was very little of it, for the grass had not had
time to grow up fully, or put Ibrth its seed ;• and the
harvest on the house-tops was mere child's play, " where
the mower filleth, not his handy nor he that birideth sheaves
his bosom^ (Psalm cxxix. 6—8.)

On the 19th of February, early in the morning, a young
Bedouin brought me a large wooden bowlful of clotted
cream, and announced the coming of four men of his tribe.
While he spoke, they entered. They were rejoicing, on
account of the abundance of milk which their flocks yielded,
now that they were at pasture on the Carmel range. They
were very dark, and wore long white cotton shirts with
wide sleeves; and loose, heavy camel-hair cloaks. They
seemed to be rather taken by surprise by the looking-glass,

172 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINB.

in which they could see themselves at foU length. The
one who seemed to be the chief of the party invited me to
visit him, with the Consul, at hie tents, at an hour's dis-
tance from H&ifa. In answer to imy questions, 'he told me
that there were several women at the encampment, and
that they were busy making stores of cooking butter. The
cream is shaken in goats' skins, and afterwards boiled;
and when the milk and whey are completely extracted, the
butter will keep good for a very long time (at this season
the markets are always well supplied by the peasantry and
Bedouins together, and during the spring, housekeepers
refill their butter jars with a store for the summer and
autumn). One of these Bedouins carried a lance, about
twelve feet long ; at the top of it there were two round
tufts of black ostrich feathers, about one foot apart. The
upper tuft was fringed with little white feathers. Between
the tufts, strips of scarlet cloth were twisted. The lance
was so heavy that I could not lift it ; it was of wood, with
a metal barb. All the men wore large red and yellow
silk striped kefias (i.e, fringed shawls) on their heads,
fastened round the crown with a thick rope, and put on
like hoods. They all had high pointed red leather boots,
which, however, they took off at the door. One man dis-
played a heavy silver ring on his finger; a name was
roughly engraved on it. The wearer said, "Salute the
Consul ; may Allah keep all sorrow far from him ! " Then
he and his followers went away.

I had just dismissed the bearer of the bowl of cream
with a backshish, when two little girls of the Sakhali
family came to me, saying : " Oh> Miriam, peace be upon
you ! We have thought you must be sad and lonely, now
that the Consul is away from HSifa. May he return to
you soon, and in safety ! " I invited my friendly little
neighbours to take off their izzars (the white sheets in
which they were enveloped), and to remain with me to
breakfast. Hey wore dark cotton trousers, made very fall
and long, and cloth jackets, closely fitting and fastened up
to the throat. Their mundils, or bright-coloured muslin

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 178

kerchiefs, were put on like shawls over the head, crossed
under the chin, and the ends tied on the top of the head.
Their hair was braided, and hung in long plaits over their
shoulders. Their finger-nails and toe-nails were rosy with
henna-dye. They left their yellow shoes at the entrance of
the room. They were very much interested in turning out
the contents of my work-box, and in looking through books
of pictures, about which they asked many questions, and
made curious comments, not only teaching me, uncon-
sciously, Arabic words, but showing me the spirit of
Oriental ideas. They were amused to hear about English
children, and laughed heartily when I told them that in
England a few camels are kept as curiosities, in a beautiful
garden They could not understand how we could live in
a land where there are no camels to carry burdens. I tried
to explain to them the use of carts and railed roads ; but,
as they had never seen a wheeled carriage of any kind, it
was very difficult to convey the idea, even with the help of
pictures. They were very clever, quick children; and,
though only eight and nine years old, they could already
make bread, and prepare many simple dishes. They were
surprised that I had not been taught how to cook ; it is the
chief point in the education of an Arab* girl.

While 1 was occupied with my amusing littie guests, our
Egyptian groom Mohammed arrived, leading a beautiful
white mare, and bringing a letter from my brother, inviting
me to go immediately to Shefa 'Omer (about three hours*
distance), to meet him there, and to return with him to
H&Lfa the next day. The children said : " We are glad you
will to-day see the Consul; but we are sorry you are going
away from us ; go in peace." I was soon ready, and
mounted on the white mare; her long mane and tail were
deeply dyed with henna (bright orange colour); it is said to
be a pieventive of disease. A large glass bead of sapphire
blue himg from the neck of the animal. I asked the groom
what it was for; he said: "It will avert the effect of a
glance from an evil eye; this mare is so beautiful tha,t she
is in danger of being looked at with admiration and envy

17* DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

by those who have power to destroy her and her rider even

by a look." He said he dare not suflfer me to ride such an

animal without this precaution. Many of my friends,

Moslems and Christians, walked by my side as far as the

gate, and " Go in peace, and return to us in safety," rang

in my eai?8 as I rode along the sands, attended only by our

trustworthy groom Mohammed, and under the protection of

the sapphire bead. I asked him if my want of confidence

in the charm would destroy its eflScacy. He answered

solemnly : " Its power cannot he destroyedypraised he Allah I "

It was noon; the sun shone, but not too fiercely; the wind

blew, but not too roughly; and the waves rippled round the

feet of the mare, and of Mohammed's sturdy little donkey.

We crossed the Kishon cautiously and safely on the bar far

out at sea; the river was rather deep and dangerous that

day. We turned away from the shore and traversed the

drifted sand-hills, where tall trees and shrubs were half

buried ; but grass was springing up plentifully where the

land was firmer, and the rain jested here and there in quiet

pools, bordered by the iris, blue and yellow, rank grass and

blossoming reeds. Advancing a little farther into the plain,

we came to a perfect paradise of flowers. The ground for

a mile or more in every direction was completely carpeted

with anemones, scarlet, crimson, white, blue, puirple, pink,

and lilac, with patches of clover and mallows here and there,

and buttercups and cyolamen. I had never seen such wealth

of wild flowers, or such vivid colouring, and there seemed

to be no one to enjoy it. We were quite out of sight of

human beings and human habitations. The only building

to-be seen was the dome over the fountain of Jethro, a

retreat for ablution and for prayer, with a few troughs round

it for watering cattle. It is just half-way between H&ifa and

Shefa 'Omer. I paused a moment to enjoy the scene and

the silenca My mare began cropping the thickly growing

mallows. Mohammed exclaimed ; " Ya Sittee, cows thrive

on mallows, but to running horses they bring death." As

we rode on again, I asked Mohammed if his parents still

lived in Egypt ; he replied ; " God knows 1 It is more than

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE, 175

twenty years since I left my mother. She was a widow,
peace be upon her ! and I have never heard of her since.
It is too late now ; no letter would reach her, for she is poor
and unknown in the land. When the poor leave their
parents, they leave them for ever. That is the reason why
mothers weep and refuse to be comforted when their sons
go away from their homes. Letters can be carried for the
rich, and for people who are known."

He was surprised to hear that in England all houses are
named or numbered, and that letters directed to the poorest
people in the country are taken as much care of as those ad-
dressed to the most wealthy. Mohammed had lost the use
of one eye. In answer to my inquiry, he told me that his
mother had purposely destroyed the sight, by the application
of poisonous leaves when he was young, to render him unfit
for service in the army, for he was her only son. This
practice was very eommon in. Egypt until Ibrahim Pasha
put an effectual stop to it by ordering a regiment to be
formed entirely of one- eyed men, and every one who had
lost the sight of an eye, either .by accident or design, was
compelled to join it. Mohammed, among others, was
enrolled, and this Cyclopean regiment became the most
formidable in Egyptian service,* We passed between large
fields where wheat and barley were springing up vigorously,
and over fallow ground garnished with blossoming weeds.

• I could not understand what aort of leaves Mohammed referred to,
but they were gathered from a shrub which grows in gardens on the banks
of the Nile. On homoeopathic principles I suppose that this eye-destroying
leaf should also have the power of renovating injured sight. Several
Arabs (Christians) confessed to me, that when they were schoolboys, thqy
resorted to aU sorts of schemes in order to avoid attending school. They
used sometimes to rub their eyelids with freshly gathered fig-leaves, and
the milky juice which exudes from them soon causes the eyelids to swell
so much that they can scarcely be opened for two or three days, but no per-
ceptible injury is done to' the eye. When fig-leaves were not to be found,
they used stinging nettles instead. The boys said they cheerfully suffered
this self-inflicted pain for a few days, for the sake of the holiday which
neoetssarily accompanied it, and the temporary escape from the monotonous
duties of school, and the thick stick of the schoolmaster. However, where
Arab boys are kindly and intelligently taught, they learn eagerly and make
wonderfully vapid progress.

176 DOMESTIC LIFE IN I*ALBSTINE.

Now and then we overtook a land tortoise, leisurely making
its way across the country. They are very common in the
plains of Palestine. Mohammed told me that Christians
of the East eat them, especially in Lent, and the peasants
catch and carry them to market towns in great numbers,
I afterwards heard this confirmed, but I never saw the dish
anywhere. When we reached the hill country I could
scarcely recognise the valleys and the hill-sides, which I
had traversed in October, and again in November. Every-
thing was changed and beautified by spring. There was no
bare earth to be seen, it was all concealed by vividly green
vegetation. The periwinkle was conspicuous, and in the
hollows of the white rocks and between the stones tiny
flowers were flourishing. The evergreen oaks were gar-
landed with wild clematis, and a creeper with lilac bell-
like blossoms travelled from tree to tree in graceful festoons.
The "pastures on the hills were clothed with flocks, and the
valleys were covered with com:" Here we saw some human
beings, the first we had met on our way. There was a veiy
old man, with a long staflf in his hand, sitting under a trea
He rose up when he saw us coming. He wore over his long
shirt a short pelisse made of sheep-skin, and an old shawl
head-dress. Some youths came forward as we approached.
They were bronzed and weather-beaten. They had nothing
on but long coarse cotton shirts, girdled with leather belts.
Long clumsy-looking guns were slung over their shoulders.
Their heads were hooded in old red and yellow shawLs
(kefias) ; the herds and flocks upon the hills were in their
care. The old man raised his hand to his forehead as we
went by, and he said : ** God direct you." One of the young
shepherds was sitting on a rock playing on a short flute,
made of a reed; he placed the end of it in his mouth, and
produced soft but clear musical sounds. I could only detect
five notes. Mohammed pointed out a black tent, made of
camel-hair cloth and branches, pitched under a large tere-
binth-tree. It was no doubt the portable home of the
herdsmen. Here we were n^et by an African horseman, as
black as ebony. He was dressed entirely in white and

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 177

crimson, and was riding at fall gallop. He paused to greet
us, and said to Mohammed, " The English Consul is near at
hand ; he is coming forth to meet his sister, but my eyes
have seen her first; I will hasten to give him joy, and tell
him that she is well and on her way;" and Mohammed
answered, "Gk) in peace: blessed is the bearer of good
tidings." We were soon in the olive-groves of Shefa
'Omer, and there to my delight I met my brother. Saleh^
Habib, and Stephani joined us; they handed blossom-
ing almond branches to me, in token of welcome. We
rode up the steep hiU on which the town stands, and
alighted at the house of Habtb; he led me into his
guest-chamber, a large, eight-windowed, square room.
On two sides of it mattresses were placed cm the floor,
covered with Turkey carpets, and cushions eased in silk
and satin were leaning against the walls. On one side
a handsome carpet was spread, with a small silk-covered
square mattress, and pillows arranged for one person
only ; this he said was intended for me. Egyptian matting
covered the rest of the floor, and in one comer was a
raised bed-stand, with muslin mosquitoe curtains. We
went out on to the broad terrace, which overlooks the sea
and the plaiii, and rested there, exchanging news. I re-
ported the visit of the Bedouins. My brother explained to
me how the townspeople, the villagers, and the peasantry
dread the approach of these wanderers with their flocks and
herds, for, he said, "they not only spoil the pasture-land,
but the crops are endangered. There will be no real safety
for cultivators and agriculturists in Palestine till these
incursions are put a stop to. The Bedouins come fix^n
beyond Jordan, every year, just after the winter rains are
over, when the grain is springing up, so that people do not
venture to cultivate more land than they hope to be able tp
protect That is one reason why there are so many waste
places in the country, and why some portions of the most
fertile plains are abandoned by the peasants of Palestine,
and only cultivated by wandering tribes, who pitch their
tents in a favourable spot, plough, sow, and reap, and then

N

178 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

perhaps re-cross the Jordan, and return no more till the
following spring."

According to Judges, sixth chapter, third and sixth verses,
these wanderers used to commit just such depredations in
Palestine three thousand years ago, and at the very same
season ; for it is written : " When Israel had soton^ then the
Amalehites, the Mtdianites, and the children of the East {i.e.
from beyond Jordan) came up against themy they destroyed
the increase of the earth and left no sustenance for Israsl ;
they came with their cattle and their tents, and they and their
camels were without number, and Israel was greatly im-
poverished." This is one of the chief causes of the present
poverty of the country. When the sun went down, we
entered the guest-chamber ; large lanterns were lighted and
placed on two small stools in the middle of the room.
The Grovemor, Abu Daoud, and his little son arrived to
greet me. Soon afterwards Salihh Agha came, in his large
scarlet cloak, edged with gold lace and embroidery. His dark
face was deeply shaded by his lilac and sUver shawl, worn
like a hood, bound round his head by a thick white cord of
camel-hair. His eyelids were kohl tinged, and he looked
rather fierce on the whole. He and his brother, the cele-
brated AMel Agha, are the most powerful and formidable
people in the Pashalic of 'Akka. They came originally firam
Morocco, and are now in the service of the Turkish Govern-
ment ; they have three or four hundred armed horsemen
under their command. They may be regarded as the
mounted patrols of the hills and plains of Galilee, for it is
their duty to keep the roads clear that people may travel
in safety. To a considerable extent they succeed, and
thanks to their energy, highway robbery and murders are
rare ; but they cannot of course keep aU the wanderers out
of the country. Over some tribes Akiel Agha has great in-
fluence, but with the Kurds and other hostile hordes he
sometimes comes into collision, and warfare ensues, and
then all the tribes friendly or in alliance with him naturally
come to his assistance. But, notwithstanding these out-
breaks, it is certain that without the Agha's somewhat

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 179

irregular guard, affairs in the PashaKc of 'Akka would be
veiy much worse, and travelling would be attended with
more danger.

Aklel Agha's regiment is a motley crew, formed of
desperate men from all parts of the country, reminding one
of the four hundred over whom David made himself a
captain (1 Samuel xxii 2). They are distinguished by the
name of "Hawara," i.e. *' destruction,'* and are, in fact, a
tolerated tribe of marauders, empowered by the Govern-
ment to keep other tribes in check.

Salihh Agha told me that he had served on the Danube
for a short time during the previous year, but he did not
like to be so far away from his children ; his tents were
now pitched at Abilene, about three miles from Shefa 'Omer.
He sent his lieutenant to fetch his youngest son for me to
see, though it was a dark night and long past simset.
Supper was announced, and we were conducted to another
room. Water was poured over oui* hands as we entered,
then we, seven in number, sat on the matted floor, round a
circular tray, raised about six inches from the ground, and
literally crowded with food. A very long, narrow towel was
placed in front of the guests, and reached all round, resting
on our knees, and its fringed ends met and crossed where
I was invited to take my seat. There were six round dishes
of heaped-up rice, boiled in butter ; six dishes of boiled
wheat, mixed with ininced meat and spices ; a few plates
of fowls and lamb, and bowls of lebbeny or sour cream, and
a good snpply of sweet cream, cheese, olives and salad. A
cake of bread was before each person. Directly Salihh
^ha was seated, he began eating silently and (as it seemed
to me) voraciously, quite in Bedouin style, making pellets
of the hot rice or wheat in the palm of his hand, and with
a skilful jerk tossing them into his mouth. He divided the
fowls with his fingers, and did me the honour to pass the
most delicate morsels to me. At this rate the contents of
the dishes soon disappeared, for all the gentlemen followed
the example of Salihh Agha, and as, one by one, they were
satisfied, they roge and washed their hands. "We then

n2

180 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

returned to the large room, where many visitors had
assembled. Coflfee and pipes were served. Songs were
sung in praise of the Agha and of the Vice Consul, and
other guests. The songs which called forth the greatest
enei^ were descriptions of contending armies and of the
chase. Arrack was handed round to the singers, but none
of the Bedouins partook of it Little Nimhr, the son of
the Agha, arrived ; he was about seven years old. He came
bounding into the room, and was soon wrapped in the folds
of his father's scarlet cloak and covered with kisses and
caresses. I was struck by the change in the somewhat
stem aspect of Salihh Agha. He was full of tenderness and
demonstrative affection for his little sou, an ugly boy, but
of that piquant description of ugliness which is sometimes
so attractive. The lieutenant wished him to go and have
supper with him, but he said archly, "Did I come here to
have supper or to see the English Sit?" i.e. the lady. He
came and nestled by my side ; took my hands in his, felt
my dress, and said it was nice and soft. He showed in
every action that he was accustomed to be noticed very
much, and to be lovingly treated. WresUing was proposed,
and he immediately challenged EUas, the son of Stephani,
a slightly made, very pretty boy, also about seven, who
deliberately took off his little brown braided and hooded
pelisse, while Nimhr threw down his loose camel-hair
cloak. They each wore scarlet cloth jackets, with hanging
sleeves Kke the hussars', wide-sleeved long white cotton
shirts, and very full scarlet trowsers. They took off the
latter and their shoes. Little Nimhr {Le, the Leopard)
looked proudly impatient. Young EUas, quietly in eamesi
made a spring on Nimhr and threw him down. The men
clapped their hands and shouted. The wrestling was carried
on for nearly half an hour; Elias was, almost in every
instance, the victor. At last Nimhr, with a mortified look,
after many falls, ran to his father and hid himself in the
folds of tiie scarlet cloak. Elias looked quite calm and
unexcited by his success ; he sat quietly by my side.
I find that wrestling is a very conmion exercise in the

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE. 181

Bedouin tenta Salihh Agha's elder boys, of fifteen and
sixteen years of age, were present They behaved with great
deference and respect to their fetther, and did not sit, or
take coffee, or smoke in his presence without his permission ,
(but since that time the eldest son has distinguished him*
self in warfieire, and has killed an enemy of his tribe with
his own hand, so he now enjoys the dignity and privileges
of manhood and equality with his father). The room was
cleared of the numerous guests at an early hour, and then
the wife of Habib (my host)„ and four women came to see
me. One of them offered to sleep in the guest-chamber with
me, thinking I should be frightened. The Arabs are very
timid at night, and always congregate together to sleep, and
bum lamps to drive away evil spirits when under a roof.
They were 'surprised that I could dare to sleep in darkness
and alone. The next morning Habib's wife came tapping at
my door early, and with curiosity examined my garments.
The room would soon have been full of women to assist and
inspect my toilette, if I had not decidedly expressed a wish to
dress before I received visitors, so only my hostess remained,
she afterwards led me to her room on the ground-floor. It
was spacious, but very low ; beds, bedding and carpets were
piled up on a raised stone bench, on one side, and on
the other, cooking utensils, dishes, jars and stores were
arranged. At the end of the room, opposite the door, a
carpet was spread, and there I was invited to sit down to
breakfast In a comer a woman was preparing meat 'for
cooking, and a large charcoal brazier stood near the door,
where a girl was roasting coffee-berries. This room was
evidently the parlour, bedroom, kitchen and all A charcoal-
cellar and the stables occupied the other part of the ground-
floor.

The mother of my host was busy, superintending the
baking of the loaves she had made that morning, so I went
to the baking-house at the end of the street to see her. Stacks
of wood, tree-branches and thorn-bushes were piled up just
outside the entrance to it. I peeped inside the low, stone
buUding. It was Uke a furnace. The flat loaves were placed

182 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

on large sheets of iron, which were heated from beneath by
a glowing and crackling wood fire. Several women, whose
faces, all but the kohl-stained eyes, were veiled, were wait-
^ ing to take their cakes of bread in to be baked. They held
them on round trays made of wicker-work and straw. A
poor little boy, who looked very hungry, came with only
one small loaf, and watched anxiously for his turn, A
white, semi-transparent lizard rah out from between the
stones by the door. I stooped forward to examine it ; the
women around shrieked out. exclamations of horror and
disgust In answer to my questions, they said, "Ya sittee,
that is an evU reptile, he crawls over bread or other food,
and breathes his poisonous breath upon it, so that he who
eats that corrupted food may die, or be as one smitten with
leprosy." Mohammed, our Egyptian groom, who approached
at the moment, leading the white mare, said, " Crod preserve
us 1 The words of the women are true words."

I hastened to prepare for riding. A gazelle hunt had
been arranged for that day by Salihh Agha, and he had
invited us to accompany him. The kawass and grooms,
and the Agha's people had charge of some fine gazelle-
hounds. We met the rest of the party down by the fountain.
Three of them were on foot leading boar-hounds, they soon
left us, and entered the lull country of Carmel to seek for
boars. Little Nimhr was riding with the lieutenant on a
chesnut horse, whose pedigree they say could be traced
back to the time of Solomon ; his defence against fascina-
tion was a white shell, called wadat, festened to a cord hung
round his neck. We were joined by Habib and Stephani,
and our friend and fellow-townsman Saleh SakhaLL The
latter said to me, '*Tou must take notice to day, ya sittee
Miriam, of the great difiference between the vision of people
who live in towns and of those who live in the open country
in tents." I soon had an example of this, for Salihh Agha
scanned the horizon, and he and his people discerned in the
distance a horse at full gallop. Before we townspeople
could distinguish that the horse had a rider, SalUih
Agha could describe his dress and even his features.

DOMESTIC UFE IK PALESTINK 183

thongli he was a stranger to hinL EUs words were entirely
verified when the rider came within the range of oni
vision.

I congratulated Salihh Agha on the possession of such a
facully, and told him how much it astonished me. He said,
" You also have a power which is a marvel to me. I have
seen the vmting in your book (he referred to the note-book
which I invariably carried and frequently used) ; the
strokes and figures in it are so fine and small and so close
togelher that it made my eyes ache to look at them." The
Agha could not read or write his own huiguage even.

Saleh Sakhali remarked, ^' The good gifts of Allah are
divided; praised be AllaL" One of the Bedouins said,
"Men who live in towns accustom their eyes to look only
&om one street to another and from one wall to another,
but we who live in tents see to the ends of the earth.
When I am within walls I am as one struck blind, or as if
a veil were held before my eyes. There is no space for
sight vsrithin the towns." We rode on quietly along the
base of the MQs among- low brushwood, thistles, and
flourishing thorns. The grooms had great difficulty in
keeping the hounds in, so violently did they struggle to
escape.

We traversed a well-watered valley, where the mallow
was growing extensively, to the height of one or two feet,
with lUac, pink, and sUvery grey blossoms, and large, thick
leaves. Men and boys were busy cutting it and rapidly
fiUii^ their basketa This plant is very much used by the
Arabs medicinally ; they make poultices of the leaves to
allay irritation and inflammation; lotions are prepared
irom them also. '^ Khubazi " is the Arabic word for mal-
lows, and the little, flat, round seed-vessels, so well known
to English children as *' cheeses** are by the Arabs called
'* Khubiz," that is, " loaves" for the Arab bread is always
flat and round.

While Stephani was explaining this to me, I saw five
gazelles leaping one after the other from a thicket of
thistles. They disappeared behind some juniper-trees. We

184 DOMESTIC LIFE m PALESTINE.

directed the attention of the now scattered huntsmen to the
spot;^ they came galloping recklessly over bushes and
rocks. The dogs were set free and soon started the gazelles.
I rested in my saddle with Saleh Sakhali by my side,
watching the graceful bounds of the startled animals, the
racing and leaping of the hounds, and the skilful ma-
noeuvres of the horsemen. They missed the gazelles but
they succeeded in capturing four fine hares. Then there
Was a start in another direction, where a troop of antlered
gazelles had been seen. I followed in the rear With the
lieutenant and his little charge !N^imhr, and from a dis-
tance we observed the chase for some time ; then we rode
across the plain between cultivated fields and gardens of
wild flowers. We paused at the fountain of Jethro, which
had been fixed upon as the place for meeting after the
hunt. There we found the Agha's people preparing dinner.
They had dug two broad, shallow pits in the ground, in
which they had made fires of wood and thoma In one a
lamb was being baked whole, and over the other a caul-
dron of rice was boiling.

In a short time the whole party was. assembled. The
panting dogs rolled themselves in the grass, the horsemen
dismounted, and with difficulty the frisky and loudly
neighing horses were tethered. Some were fastened to iron
stakes or pins driven in the ground. Grooms and horsemen
generally carry them when they journey in places where
there are no trees or rocks to which to bind the animals.
All the men, however, had not been equally provident
Heavy stones were sought for and halters fastened to them,
but not quite securely; the consequence was, that two
horses escaped and galloped away. I could not help being
amused with the chase after these runaways, through
marshes and tangled masses of vegetation. I preferred it
to the pursuit of the swift-footed, poor little frightened
gazelles, whose escape gratified me more than their capture
did. The horses were caught at last, together, by the
banks of a stream. When we reassembled we took our
seats in the shade of the dome of the fountain, with acres

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 185

of wild flowers round us. Dinner was ready. Two men
brought the lamb on a large metal dish or tray, two others
carried a mountain of rice, yellow with butter. Boys ar-
rived with bowls of sweet clotted cream and new milk and
dishes of lebbeny. These provisions were arranged on a
carpet of clover and mallows and grass. We washed our
hands, the servants pouring water over them from earthen-
ware jara. Large Bedouin cloaks and saddle-cloths were
spread for us, and we gathered round the smoking and
savoury fare.

Each one of the Arabs on preparing to touch food
uttered the words : " In the name of God the most bounti-
fiiL" The lamb was soon skilfully dissected by Saleh with
Ms hunting-knife. A servant handed a flat, thin, large,
leathery loaf to each of us. The lamb was stuffed with rice
and minced meat, almonds, raisins, walnuts and spice;
Salihh Agha placed some on my flat loa^ which served me
as a plate, and he gave me a lump of meat in my handa
He had separated it from the bone with his short hunting-
dagger. The Arabs cook their meat so thoroughly that it
is very tender and easily pulled and torn to pieces.

The men made deep depressions in the pyramidal monn-"
tain of rica But each one carefully helped himself from
that part of the dish which was nearest to him, and did not,
if he could avoid it, disturb the rice near to the hole made
in it by his neighbour, except when by way of courtesy he
placed a delicate morsel of meat into it now and then. A
roasted hare was added to the feast and soon distributed.
The cream was eaten voraciously by dipping pieces of bent
bread into it and scooping it up as with a spoon, so the
spoon and its contents disappeared together. Scarcely a
word was spoken by the Arabs during the meaL One by
one they retired, saying, " God be praised," and went to the
fountain to wash their hands and mouths, uttering an invo-
cation to Allah.

We afterwards rested for a short time, coffee and pipes
were prepared. I took the opportimity of putting the Agha,
his little son, and his attendant Khalil into my sketch-book.

186 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

The latter seemed rather alarmed when he saw what I had
done, and begged of me not to show his portrait in certain
districts, for a price was set upon his head and men songht
after him to kill him. In the meantime the servants and
people so far emptied the large metal trays or dishes that
I could plainly see the Ambic sentences engraved on
them — extracts from the Koran and words of praise and
prayer. Then most of the men covered their faces and
slept; while I wandered about gathering and pressing speci-
mens of all the flowers I could find, little Nimhr good-
naturedly helping me. Besides the ranunculus and anemone
and others as familiar, I met with many flowers which
were strange to me. One was pink and shaped very like a
primrose, ^th pointed succulent leaves g^wing two by
two up the stem (the pink colour always changed to blue
after pressing). This plant would be a welcome addition to
our gardens in England, where I have never yet found it
I made a drawing of the dome over the pleasant fountain,
and when the sleepers woke they said, "Mashallah, the
English girl takes no rest — God gives her strengtL" We
.took leave of the Agha and his people, and our Shefa 'Omer
friends, and rode with Saleh and our servants towards
HSifa, carrying one gazelle and two hares. We saw many
groups of horses and camels grazing under the care of the
Agha's men on the uncultivated portions of the plaiiL
Tortoises met us and paused as if alarmed ; they looked
about them for an instant and then drew their heads under
their homy shields. Hundreds of small birds fluttered out
of the tall grass, disturbed by our approach, and flocks of
wild ducks and geese now and then flew across the plain
towards the marshes, and sea-gulls flapped their wings
above us. We crossed the drifted sand-hills and cantered
along the smooth seashore towards the Kishon. Men were
standing on its banks, throwing large floating nets, assisted
by boys in a little boat in the middle of the river. The
fishes of the Eishon are rather small, but abundant, and
delicate in flavour.

There were seven ships off HSifa — Greek, French, and

BOMESTIO LIFE m PALESTINE. 187

Turkish. The sun was low when we went, one after the
other, over the sand-bar. We hastened onwards by the
watei^s edge, letting our horses' feet just touch the fringe
of the sparkling waves, startling hundreds of small white
and sand-coloured crabs. Their black eyes are fixed on
the points of moveable pinnacles, which are thrust out fix)m
the round eye-sockets, and stand upright. They scampered
hither and thither nimbly, to get out of our way. Their
rapidly-moving forms were repeated on the shining wet
saads, till shape and shadow were lost under the coming
wave. I have often caught and examined these curious
little crabs ; they are always very light in colour — ^white
or sandy, and they vary from one to three inches in length.
I think they must be of the kind called " Cancer Volans;"
they make holes in the sand, near the sea, and seem very
timid when disturbed. They sometimes, however, resent
interference. I have seen our gazeUe-hound, "Etsheh,"
amuse himself by running after them, tormenting them as
a cat does a mouse, or peering into their burrows. When
they had an opportunity, they used to cling to his long
delicate nose or lip, and he had some difficulty in
shaking them off; but I never saw him destroy or injure
one in any way. Fishermen use these crabs for bait^ and
make traps for them in the sand, in imitation of their
burrows. .

There were many friends to greet us as we entered the
gate of HMia ; for it was the hour of sunset, when people
flock into town after an evening stroll. There was the
Muetzellim, surrounded by his suite, walking slowly, with
his silver and coral rosaiy in his hand, and his pipe-bearer
by his side. A little group of Jews were there too, some
wearing broad-brimmed hats and long gabardines, others
with dark shawl-turbans and short cloth or silk pelisses
lined with fur. Apart from these were companies of quite
unrecognisable women, shrouded in white sheets from head
to foot. They looked like moving pillars, for they took
such short steps, scarcely lifting their feet from the ground,
that their progress should be called gliding instead o^

188 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

walking. Even their little children seemed unnaturally
demure and stately.

Short sturdy-looking oxen, fat sheep, with long, broad,
heavy tails, and black, glossy-haired goats, led by the
herdsmen, were returning from the pleasant but unpro-
tected pastures ; to seek shelter within the town walls for
the night.

The Christians were at the same time entering in at
the opposite gate, for they almost always walk towards
the western hills and plains, perhaps because their ceme-
teries are west of the town; while the Moslems prefer
the eastern suburbs, where they bury their dead.

The call to prayer was echoing clearly through the town
from the balcony of the crescent-crowned minaret ; while the
vesper beU was ringing fixjm the little belfry of the Latin
church. Some- of the people paused from their work, or
stood stiU in the streets, to cross themselvei^ and to mutter
an " Ave Maria " in Arabic ; while the rest were declaring,
" There is one God, and Mahommed is his prophet"

On Sunday, my brother always read the Church Service
in Arabic, in the drawing-room of the Consulate, at nine
o'clock. When British vessels were in port, we had
service at eleven, with such of the captains and sailors
who could attend ; and English travellers passing throtigh
the country occasionally joined us. Saleh Sakhali was in-
variably present at the Arabic service, and no one was
excluded from it We generally mustered about six or
seven ; people came perhaps the more readily, because
they were not pressed or even invited to come. Curiosity
induced many to pay one or more visits ; for the Arabs,
and especially the Christian Arabs, could not understand
how we could have religion without a Friest/ solemnity
without an Altar; how we could worship without a Church/
or realize the presence of God without the elevation of
the Host: but they were always quietly and earnestly
attentive, while listemng to portions of the Old or New
Testaments. After prayers, Saleh Sakhali often read, by-
request, several chaptera, selecting some history or essay

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 189

complete in itself. Women of the Greek or Latin
Clmrches came occasionally, and remained unveiled when
only Christians were present; but if a Moslem were an-
nounced, they retreated immediately.

The Moslems always expressed themselves much pleased
with the service, on account of its simplicity and rever-
ence. I find that, besides the Koran, they regard al Tora,
the Pentateuch, a' Zah^, the Psalms, a' NahiyeA, the
Prophets, and al Anjili, the New Testament, as holy or
inspired books ; and people who receive any one of these
are to be tolerated.

The new governor, Saleh Bek Abd-ul-Hady, an Arab,
came now and then. He said that if there were an Eug-
lish college in the country, he would immediately send his
boys to it. Many of our neighbours wished to send their
little girls for a few hours every day to my care ; but I
could not undertake the charge, though, whenever I had
time to spare, I encouraged children to come to the
house — ^the only condition being that they should be clean
and neat.

Moslem boys do not generally play with Christians, and
even the Christian children are divided amongst them-
selves ; for those belonging to the Greek Church have their
street games apart from those who belong to the Latin
Chittch, and they only unite to persecute the poor little
Jews.

A gentle-looldng little girl, of about six years of age,
whose father was a much respected European, and mother
an Arab, surprised me very much one day, by saying
in Arabic, without any provocation, and with a gesture
of scorn, to a Jewish workman, " Go, thou Jew, and he
crucified!' The chUd, naturally good-natured and affec-
tionate, shuddered when she partially understood how
cruel and unjust her words were. By my wish, she begged
pardaa of the Jew ; and then, by her own impulse, and to
his great wonder, kissed his hands, while tears stood in
her eyes.

It was with the hope of checking, as far as I could, this

190 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

spirit of hatred, intoleraaice, and persecution, that I en-
couraged the little ones of HSifa to meet together in my
room. I prepared entertainments for them, played with
them, told them stories about England, showed them
pictures (avoiding reference to their various creeds), and,
by making them happy together, I hoped they would learn
unconsciously to love one another.

I used sometimes to leave the children to amuse them-
selves alone, while I retreated to the end of the room,
whence I could see and hear all that was going on, without
throwing any check on their natural impulses. At such
times, I have heard girls of seven and eight years of age,
and younger, discussing the comparative value of the
wardrobes and jewels of the ladies of H^a. One child
would say, " Sit Haflfi has the largest pearls and emeralds,*'
and " Such a one has the greatest number of diamonds,"
and " Um Elia has the handsomest dresses and embroidered
jackets." They could tell how many coins the women from
Nazareth, who lived in HS-ifa, had. on their head-dresses.

On Sunday, February 24th, a Moslem, of considerable
influence and learning, asked permission to attend the
Morning Service. We welcomed him; and he. Prayer-
book in hand, followed every word attentively, evincing
unusual interest, or eurbsity. He even abandoned his
amber rosary for the time. Directly after prayers, how-
ever, the beads were to be seen again, rapidly slipping
through his well-shaped, carefally-trimmed fingers. A
Moslem does not appear at ease, unless he has a pipe in
one hand, and a chaplet in the other.

When the Christians had gone, I said to him, "Will
your Excellency tell me the use of the rosary; is it simply
a toy, or is it a help to reckon prayer or praise?"

Without showing the slightest unwillingness, he ex-
plained its use, saying, "The attributes or characteristic
excellencies of God are manifold; but there are ninety-
nine which should be learnt, and remembered continually,
by all men. These rosaries consist of ninety-nine, or thirty-
three beads, on which to reckon the attributes, thus " — he

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE. 191

took the chaplet out of my hands^ and, while passing bead
after bead through his fingers, he said, with unusual slow-
ness and solemnity: " Grod the Creator — God the Preserver
— Grod the most Bountiful — Grod the Deliverer — God the
Eternal — God the Ever-present — God the AU-seeing — God
the most Merciful — God the AU-powerfiil — God the King
of Kings ** — ^and so on, till the chaplet had passed three
times through his hands ; for it consisted only of thirty-
three large egg-shaped beads of clouded amber.

When he found how much pleased I was> he took pains
to teach it to me.

I said to him, " Now that your Excellency has made me
understand the solemn and beautiful words of the rosaiy^
I shall always be sorry to hear them said quickly and
thoughtlessly." He answered, " You are right, O my sister;
God is to be approached with reverence." But I could
perceive that he found it much more difficult to repeat the
attributes leisurely, than to utter them, as usual, rapidly.
After a pause, he said, " To every man who is not hateful
or erring, one of these Diviue attributes especially belongs,
and influences his life. The date of the birth of an indi-
vidual, in conjunction with his name, properly reckoned,
discovers the particular attribute." As an example, he cal-
culated mine, and always afterwards called me " Miriam
the Intercessor.** I asked my Moslem teacher in what
sense the word ''Intercessor" was used as an attribute of
God. He regarded it simply as mercy and goodness, and
readiness to pardon. (Another Moslem told me, one day, it
was mercy pleading with justice.) He acknowledged to
me that he did not regard fasts, and forms, and ceremonies
as important. He thought that doing our duty to man, and
giving thanks to God, were all-sufficient. But he added,
'' K I did not keep the fasts and feasts, and perform certain
ablutions and prayers three times a day, my voice would
not be heard in the Medglis {i.e. the Council), and I should
lose all my influenca" He assured me that there were
many enlightened men who felt as he did on the subject,
but they Idd the thoughts of their hearts.

192 DOMESTIC LIFE m PALESTINE.

My brother scarcely ever spoke to Moslems about their
religion, and warned me to be cautious how I did so;
consequently, I never introduced the subject, directly or
indirectly, except when I found myself with any one of
superior inteUigenoe and judgment, and then only carefully,
and as an inquirer , never as a teacher or proselytizer. I
invariably met with good-natured, if not satisfactory answers,
and gained some interesting information. I was satisfied
that I did not give offence, by the fact that my society was
most sought for by those whom I had thus questioned — ^veiy
likely on account of the novelty of the circumstance.

In the afternoon, all the Europeans then in HMa
assembled, and walked in procession to the Latin church,*
to witness the christening of Jules> the infant son of the
French Consul. Kawasses led the way. The child was
placed on a crimson silk piUow, and carried by his nurse,
Helw^, an old woman of Nazareth. The father (Mons,
Aumannj conducted me. He said there had never before
been such a procession of Europeans thro^h those naxrow
and crooked streets. It was formed af Consuls, and
Captains (whose ships were in port), monks from Mount
Carmel, and merchants of HMfa ; and. two elderly Greek
ladies, with large black lace shawls folded over their red
cloth caps. The godmother was of Greek birth, but she
wore Arab costume, and was shrouded in a white sheet
We entered the httle square church. Near to the highly
and gaudily decorated altar, a number of bare-headed men
(Arabs) were prostrating themselves or beating their breasts.
And behind them a group of women and girls, almost
shrouded in white sheets, knelt languidly, with mother-of-
pearl rosaries in their henna-stained hands. Their many-
coloured mundlls (muslin veils) were thrown back over their
heads, and bright everlasting flowers, and jewels, and brighter
eyes in dark settings of kohl, were exposed. I^e men (Arabs)
carefully avoided looking towards the women ; but some
of the latter seemed to expect to attract the admiration of
the less scrupulous Europeans, and were not disappointed.
On a table near to the font, sacred oil and salt, and other

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 193

necessaries for the ceremony of christening, were arranged
on a white embroidered cloth. The parish priest read the
baptismal service in Latin ; but the little hero of the day
somewhat disturbed and disconcerted him by screaming
lustily; he strongly objected to the taste of the salt, and to
the application of the water to his head, and of the oil to
his chest, &c. It was a relief to every one present, espe-
cially to the priest, when the ceremony was over, and the
" newly-made little Christian " (as they all called him) was
comforted in the arms of his nurse. We returned to the
French Consulate. There was a large gathering in the
marble-paved saloriy where the happy mother (an Arab
lady) received the congratulations of her neighbours, for
Jules was her only son. It was quite a f§te-day in H§.ifa>
especially among the Latins. Oranges boiled in sugar and
spice, lemons cut up and preserved in honey, aU sorts of
Oriental confectionary, made of sweetened starch and gums,
and French bonbons and liqueurs, were distributed I took
leave of the assembled guests, and strolled with my brother
out at the West Gate. The declining sun was brightening
the green slopes, the trees, and white rocks of the Carmel
range. A small pink flower had sprung up plentifully in
the stony places of the plain ; each blossom was in the
form of a foliated Greek cross, and the small, green leaves
were heart-shaped.

We sat on the mossy trunk, and in the lengthening shade
of a large locust-tree, discussing the events of the day, en-
joying the scene and the silence, for we had wandered quite
out of sight of the town. We were in the midst of a grove
of fig, locust, and olive trees; the ground was caipeted
with wild flowers. The hills, fragrant with aromatic herbs,
rose behind us; and the broad sea, red with the rays of the
setting sun, was before us. Our tite-h-tite was interrupted
hy the approach of our kawass, who came to announce the
arrival of a special messenger from Jerusalem. The mes--
senger himself soon appeared. He was a tall, powerful-
looking African, very black and bony, clad simply in a coarse,
unbleached cotton shirt, girdled with a leather strap. A

o

194 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

large white turban protected his head and shaded his face ;
his wide, pliant feet were bare. He had walked all the way
from Jerusalem in three days, and was the bearer of impor-
tant despatches from H.B.M. Consul, Mr. Finn. He drew
the packet from his bosom, and^kissed my brother's hands
as he presented it, and then stood resting on his long, thick
staff.

I found that the letters contained directions for my
brother to proceed immediately to NabUis, to report the
state of affairs there, and to ascertain the true cause or
causes of the disturbances in the town and in the mountam
districts around. A letter from Mrs. F. advised and invited
me to accompany him as far as NabHis; that an escort might
meet me there, to take me on to Jerusalem, to spend Easter
with her. Eumours had reached HSifa every day for some
time past of skirmishes, and even pitched battles, between
the supporters of Mahmoud Bek Abdul Hady, the newly-
appointed Governor of NablAs, and the partizans of his
predecessor in office. A tour through the Jebel Nablus
district was in consequence considered rather hazardous,
and rain would be sure to set in in a day or two. How-
ever, I consented to go, on the condition that my brother
would promise to travel exactly as if he were alone, both
with regard to the selection of the route and of the halting-
places, and the length of each day's journey. This settled,
he proved to me that he understood I was in earnest by
saying, " Then we will start at sunrise to-morrow, for that is
what I should do if I were going alone." This was a
sudden change in our plans. Till past midnight I was
busy packing portmanteaus, and providing for the safety of
the house and furniture for an indefinite period, and
guarding against the intrusion of rats and mice, moth and
rust.

In the meantime my brother was in his office, in earnest

• consultation with his agent and our governor, Saleh Bek.

The latter asked to see me; I went to him, and he said,

"My sister, you have a brave heart; you are going on a

difficult journey, but you have no reason to fear any one, for

DOMESTIC LTPE IN PALESTINE. 195

you have no enemies. After a day or two you wUl reach
my town, Arabeh, and there you will find rest, and my
wives and my children wiU welcome yon, for they are stiU
there; I have prepared to receive them here, and have
sent for them several times, but they have not courage to
travel, now that war has broken out. If you reach Arabeh
in safety, and they see you, perhaps their hearts will be
made strong. God be with you, and protect you ; may you
find rest at Arabeh, and peace whithersoever you go 1"

o2

CHAPTER IX.

AFTER a few hours of perfect rest, I rose before the
sun, on Monday, 25th of February. Katiine, who
had begged to accompany us, had packed up her bundle
of clothes, and was rejoicing at the thought of spending
the Festival of Easter in Jerusalem, for she was an earnest
devotee. She had newly dressed her eyes with kohl for
the occasion. I told her of the difficulties of the journey
She assured me she had no fear, for she had made a pil-
grimage to the Chapel of the Madonna on Mount Carmel,
and wore round her neck a potent charm, which she had
obtained there, believing it would preserve her from all
danger. It was a scapulary, that is, a rudely-printed
picture of the Virgin and Child, on a piece of linen, one
or two inches square, said to be a portion of the smock
which the blessed Virgin left on Mount Carmel when she
graciously appeared in a vision to one of the monks of
old. This smock must have been a very large one, for it
furnishes an unlimited number of scapularies, which are
sold by thousands to pUgrims from aU parts of Europe.
All the native Christians of H^ifa wear them, and most of
the Europeans do also ; I only know two or three excep-
tions. Some scapularies are enshrined in crystal lockets,
or adorned with spangles and beads ; others are simply
bound or lined with sUk, or embroidered at the edges.
Once, when I was ill, poor Katrine put one secretly round
my neck whUe I slept ; and now, in preparation for the
journey, she tried to induce me to avail myself of its
protection.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 197

The court was crowded with well-wishers, who came to
say, " God be with you," and to express their regrets at
our departure. The general impression was, that we were
fioing on a perilous expedition. Town Arabs, especially
L ChristiJ, are generSly rather timid ; and being some-
what deliberate in their movements, they were, wondering
at the rapidity of ours. All articles of value were depo-
sited at the French Consulate, the perishable stores were
distributed, and, very soon after sunrise, we were mounted
and ready to start. A guide, fully armed, furnished by
our governor, with our kawass, Hadj Dervish, led the way.
I followed, with my brother and the French Consul's Arab
secretary, who had begged to join us; then came the
muleteer, with the luggage and canteen, Mohammed, our
Egyptian groom, Katrine, shrouded in a large camel-hair
cloak and mounted on horseback, and the tall AMcan
messenger on foot. We had advised him to rest a day or
two at H&ifa, but he declared he was not tired, and he
said that riding would be more fatiguing to him than
walking, for he was not accustomed to it. When we had
taken leave of our friends at the gate of the town, and
had passed the Moslem cemetery, Katrine had disappeared.
On inquiry, I heard that, in spite of her scapulary, her
courage had failed her, and she had turned back, saying to
the groom, timt she thought it would rain^ so she would go
home ogam ! Our agent, who was riding with us a short
distance on our way (receiving final instructions), under-
took to protect her during our absence. The hills around
were capped with black clouds, and before we had passed
the gardens of EElifa a heavy shower commenced We
drew our hooded cloaks over our heads, and rode on re-
gardless of it. When we reached the rocky spring of
Sa'Ideh, the rain-clouds suddenly travelled away in all
directions, leaving a bright bit of deep blue sky just above
us ; but on the mountains and over the sea the rain still
fell, — dark heavy curtains seemed to be hanging from the
heavens, and they were torn and swayed by the change-
ful breezes. The spring among the rocks and reeds had

198 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALE8TINR

considerably increased in force and extent since I had seen
it in December. We crossed it cautiously and in safety.
Many a tree had been torn up by the roots by the winter
torrents ; and large stone boulders, which a short time
before were firmly imbedded in the earth, had been under-
mined, and stood tottering on the hill-side, as if ready to
faU on us. The rain-refreshed grass and trees and flowers
glistened in the gleams of sunlight, and filled the air with
sweet odours. We left the Nazareth road and took a
south-easterly direction, along the borders of the almost
dry bed of a branch of the Kishon. We entered the
" Wady-el-Milh," the Valley of Salt. Among other wild
flowers on the wayside, I recognised with strange deUght
patches of " crimson-tipped " daisies. It was midday ; we
were beginning to feel hungry, and told the guide to pause
at the nearest spring, that we might alight and eat. We
met a few camels grazing on mallows and clover ; they
were branded with marks which told us that they did not
belong to the peasantry. " These camels proclaim that
Bedouins are in the neighbourhood ; we will seek them
out, and take our dinner with them to-day, for wherever
we find them we shall also find a fountain of good water,''
said my brother. When we had rounded the next hill, we
saw a number of square black tents, high up among the
rocks and trees on the opposite side of the vaUey. We
crossed the deep and stony river-bed, and scrambled up
the pathless hill-side, over rocks and tangled brushwood.
A group of Bedouins, in their large, heavy, white and
brown cloaks, and red and yellow fringed shawl head-
dresses, came leaping down to meet us, and to guide and
welcome us to their encampment, in the midst of which
we dismounted. There were fifteen tents altogether. We
were led towards the sheik's tent, which, like all the rest,
was formed of very coarse black and brown " curtains of
goats' hairy' ^ supported by slender trunks of trees and
strong reeds from the banks of the Jordan. A rude paU-
sading, of interwoven branches, divided the tent into two

* See Exod. zzxv. 26 \ xxzvi. 14.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 199

parts: in the lesser compartment some kids and lambs
were guarded ; and a group of women hastily retired from
the other part, that it might be prepared for us. A little,
half-naked, bronzed Bedouin boy swept the floor of earth
with the leafy branches of a " box " tree ; and a weather-
beaten old woman, in tattered garments, but with large
silver bracelets on her shrivelled arms, came forward and
spread a rug or carpet for us. It was made of very coarse
wool, and looked something like crochet-work, or close
knitting, and was evidently of Bedouin manufacture. We
were soon seated on it ; and the sheik and a number of
men, smoking long pipes, took their seats opposite to us,
in a half-circle, on the ground just outside the open front
of the tent, thus completely inclosing us. There were
between sixty and seventy people altogether in the en-
campment. They had large flocks of sheep and goats
under their care ; and, as we anticipated, they were near
to a " fountain of sweet water."

The sheik wished to have a kid killed for us. We
declined, as we were in haste ; but though we were pro-
vided with bread, my brother explained to me that eti-
quette obliged us to partake of theirs, and he said, " Go
and find the women, it will be a good opportunity for you
to see the process of Bedouin bread-making." I went to
the other end of the encampment, — the glow of a red fire
between the trees guided me. Two women were skilfully
stirring and spreading burning embers on the ground with
their hands, as freely as if fire had no power to hurt them ;
another was kneading some paste. The rest of the women
and girls came crowding round me caressingly and won-
deringly. They stroked my face and hair, and especially
marvelled at my closely-fitting kid gloves, which I put off
and on for their amusement. They exclaimed repeatedly,
" Oh, work of God ! " One of the elder women said, " Where
are you going, oh my daughter?" I answered, "Oh my
mother, I am going to 'ElKuds' 'The Holy'" (that is,
Jerusalem). Then she said, as if by way of explanation
to the others, " They are pilgrims ; God preserve them ! "

200 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTIKE.

The women were all of a dark bronze colour ; their faces
and arms and necks were tattooed and stained with henna,
red and orange-colour. Their rather thick, but well-shaped
lips, were perfectly bltte, indigo having been carefully
pricked into them, in little spots close together, — it produced
a very unpleasing effect. The edges of their eyeKds were
blackened with soot. Their only garments were wide, loose,
coarse cotton shirts, open at the bosom, — some were black,
others blue and brown. Over their heads black woollen
shawls, edged with bright-coloured stripes, were taste-
fully and simply worn. Many of the women were decked
with clumsily-wrought silver bracelets, and finger and
ear-rings: none of them wore shoes. The dirty, tawny
children were all nearly naked ; but their heads were
covered with white quilted skull-caps, or red tarbouches,
to which shells and beads were fastened, — amulets to pro-
tect the wearers from harm.

A young mother, more intelligent-looking than her com-
panions, came forward and saluted me gently. She, unlike
the rest, wore a crimson shawl on her head, and the edges
of her long, blue shirt were embroidered round the sleeves,
and round the neck and bosom, with coarse thread, wrought
in quaint patterns, such as we see on very old-fashioned
samplers in cross-stitch.

She proudly showed me her little swaddled son. The
complexion of his face was surprisingly fair; in fact, it was
of a deathly whiteness* This, I was told, is usually the case
in infancy among the Bedouins. I took the unyielding,
stiflfened, mummy-like Kttle figure in my arms. His swad-
dling clothes were of coarse, indigo-coloured cotton, bound
round symmetrically with narrow strips of crimson leather,
such as I had seen entwined about the Bedouin spears. The
mother evidently had considerable taste in the arts of
adornment, and in every respect she was superior-looking
to the rest. In the meantime, the bread was being made
thus: in the open air, on a small circular hearth, formed of
smooth round stones, spread evenly and close together on
the ground, a brisk wood fire was kindled. When the stones

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 201

of this primitive hearth were sufficiently heated, the embers
were carefully removed, and the well-kneaded paste thrown
on to the hot stones, and quickly covered with the burning
ashes. In this way several cakes of unleavened bread were
soon made ready. I returned to the tent. Our canteen
and provisions had been unpacked, much to the amusement
of the men, who were especially pleased with the knives
and forks, and spoons. Wooden bowls of cream and mUk
were brought, and the flat cakes of bread were served quite
hot. They had received the impression of the pebbles of
which the hearth was composed. This most likely was the
same sort of bread which Sarah of old made for the stran-
gers, in obedience to Abraham's desire, when he said,
"Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead
it, and make cakes wpcm the hearth!' The women stood in
a group at a little distance looking on while we cut up our
cold roast chicken. They had never seen people eat with
knives and forks before ; it must have appeared very bar-
barous to them. They laughed shyly, and hid their faces
with the ends of their shawl head-dresses when they were
noticed, and suddenly they disappeared altogether, as if in
obedience to a given signal I made a sketch of Kasim,
the handsomest and most stately-looking of the men; he
blushed like a girl when he saw his face in my book.
He expressed great curiosity about our intended move-
ments, and was very communicative. The other men asked
no questions, neither did they seem willing to answer
any, except in the usual words, " YaMem Allah!' " Grod
knows."

After a final cup of coffee had been passed round, we re-
mounted, and went on our way at about two o'clock, riding
over hills covered with wild thyme, and through valleys
where grain, sown by the Bedouins, was springing up, but
it was thirsting for rain. We rose high on to the Carmel
range, overlooking the plain of Esdraelon, and sometimes
catching glimpses of the great sea on our right. We
rode for a considerable distance without seeing any towns
or villages, or even tents, or the slightest indication of a

202 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

road or track, so that I could fancy I was travelling in an
muBhabited Country, except when we saw a long sLg of
camels laden with charcoal, or a line of donkeys carrying
such large burdens of thorns and brushwood, that they
looked just like hedges moving briskly along. They were
evidently conveying fuel from a well-wooded district to
towns and viUages in the treeless plains. We were in
a part of Palestine rarely, if ever, trodden by strangers,
where the peculiarities of Eastern travelling are more
apparent than in the more frequented roads. We dis-
covered that our guide, who had been directed to conduct
us towards Arabeh, had misled us, and was taking us by a
circuitous and unmarked route in order to avoid passing
near certain villages, where his life would have been in
danger, for a price was set upon his head by his enemies in
that district. He* led us into the fertile plains west of the
Carmel range. Eain began to fall in torrents ; Mohammed,
our groom, threw a large Arab cloak over me, saying, " May
Allah preserve youy oh lady, while he is blessing the fields"
Thus pleasantly reminded, I could no longer feel sorry to
see the pouring rain, but rode on rejoicing for the sake of
the sweet spring flowers and the broad fields of wheat and
barley.

For two or three hours we had not seen a building of any
kind, not even a ruined khan in a valley, or a watch-tower
on the hill-sides. At last we passed a smaU waUed town,
built on a low rounded hill; the eastern slope of which was
dotted with white grave-stones, and olive-trees, fruit gardens,
and ploughed land encircled it In a quarter of an hour we
came to a little village, where the rude dwellings were
crowded closely together, as if for safety, and flocks and
herds fed in the neighbourhood, guarded by shepherds fuUy
armed. The rain ceased, and the sun shone out for a few
minutes, with a red glow, over a waving field of wheat, and
then went down. We desired the guide to halt at the next
village. We rode on southwards, and in about twenty
minutes reached a place called "Khubeizeh," on account
of the abundance of mallows growing wild in the neigh-

I>OMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE, ^ 203

bourhood. A barricade of mud surrounded the village. The
houses were so low that even I could not have stood up-
right in any one of them. Some were merely hollow cones
of earthy others were square and roofed with brushwood.
Some were like burrows, scarcely above the ground, and all
were desperately dirty. The narrow streets, or paths be-
tween the houses, were mud and slime and standing water.
The wretched-looking inhabitants followed us about or
peeped at us from their miserable abodes ; and a troop of
dogs barked in loud chorus as we traversed the village in
all directions. We found no spot suitable for a halting-
place, so we hastened onwards and soon arrived at Meh§,f,
a crowded hamlet, quite as uninviting as Khubeizeh. The
guide assured us we should find safe shelter at Kefr Kara, a
Moslem village about three miles farther south. (No
Christians inhabit any of the villages iri this district.) We
decided to go on, although it was already very dark. Eed,
blinking watchfires could be seen here and there on the
hills around, and rain began to faU as we rode across the
plain 'as quickly as the darkness would let us. We sent
our kawass on before, to announce our approach to the
sheik .of Kefr Kara, and when we arrived he (the sheik)
was at the entrance of the village, attended by a lantern-
bearer, ready to receive us, and he said, " Welcome^
and be  and helped
themselves to milk and eggs, but the meat and rice they
took up neatly in their hands. The ladies stood round all
the while, to see that I had everything I required.

When I had eaten, the tray was moved into the middle
of the room, and a large metal basin with a perforated
cover was placed before me. On the top of it was a cake of
native soap, and as I rubbed my hands with it, water was
poured over them from a curious silver jug, something like
an old-fashioned cofiee-pot, with a long, thin, curved spout.
One continuous stream ran over my hands, and disappeared
through the cover of the basin. The embroidered towel was
handed to me again, with some water to rinse my mouth.

All the women (that is, the three wives of the governor
and the three wives of his brother Saleh Bek), with their
children, sat down on the matted floor round the tray, and
dipping their hands together into the various dishes, they
soon finished the simple meal. Two or three more dishes of
rice were brought in. Each woman rose as soon as she was
satisfied, had water poured over her hands, and washed her
mouth. Afterwards strong coffee without milk or sugar was
passed round. The servants and slaves then assembled at
the tray, and ate with astonishing speed and voracity, and
quickly all traces of dinner were cleared away.

Chibouques (pipes with red earthenware bowls and long
tubes made of cherry-stick or jasmine, with ebony mouth-
pieces) were handed to the elderly ladies, and two or three
narghiles to the others, who took them in turn. After
Helweh had smoked for a few minutes, she inclined her

224 DOBCEBTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

head gracefully, placed one hand on her bosom, touched
her forehead with the pliant tube, and then handed it to
the lady sitting next to her, who happened to be the second
wife of her own husband, Saleh Bek. Thus it was trans-
ferred from one smoker to another, even to the handmaidens,
with the words, " May it give you pleasure." This politeness
and ceremony is strictly observed among the Moslems even
between the nearest relations. The prescribed forms of
greeting in habitual use, appear to me to have the efifect of
keeping comparative peace and harmony in the harims.

A very beautiful narghil(5 was prepared especially for me.
It was at least half a yard high. The glass vase or bottle
was clear as crystal, and well cut. It was filled with water,
in which rose-leaves were floating. At the top of the long-
necked vase was a well-chased solid silver bowl, holding
the burning charcoal and Persian tumbac. The pliable
snake-like tube or hose connected with it, wag covered
with red velvet and bound with gold wire ; it was about
four yards long. The mouthpiece was of amber, set with
rubies and turquoise. The smoke passed through the water,
bubbling and disturbing tho red-rose leaves, and then travel-
led up the long tube. Thus the fragrant fumes of the tumbac
were cooled and purified before they reached my lips.

I observed that there was a littlo whispering and con-
sultation going on among the women, and then Helweh
came and sat by me and said, " Are you married ? " I said
" No," and they answered, " Why then have you left your
father and mother? are they not kind to you?" I told
them how good they were, and how my mother taught me
to speak and read and write my own language, and the
languages of other people. I tried to make th^m under-
stand how English parents educate their children.

Werdeh said, " It is much better to marry and to stay at
home than to travel about the country; for the dangers are
great now in this time of war, and the women should stay
at home."

Sit Sara said, " Werdeh has spoken wisely ; why do you
not marry?"

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 225

I answered, " Ya sitti, there €tre no men of my country
here ; how can I marry ? "

S4ra then said, " Tou speak our language like a stranger,
but sweetly. An Arab would take you. Why do you not
marry an Arab ? "

I replied (very much amused), " My mother is not here
to find a husband for me. How can I marry ? " I thought
this would settle the question at once in their estimation ;
but Sit S&ra said, " I will be your mother, and bring you
to a husband. My brother is a Cadi, a great Judge of
Nablfts ; he looks for a wife, he has only threa He will
love you because you are white."

I answered laughingly, "Thank you, oh my mother!
what preparations must I make, and when must I be
ready ? "

Sit Sara considered for a moment, and then said, " How
many camels has your father got ? "

I replied, " My father has no camels. In my country
there are only three or four living camels kept as curiosities,
in a house in a beautiful garden, with servants to watch
over them and take care of them. We have a few stuffed
camels also, in a large glass house."

At this they aU laughed loudly, and cried, " Oh, most
marvellous ! "

Sfi,ra continued, " Are your father's olive-trees new and
fruitful?" " My father has no olive-trees.'' At this they
were still more surprised. Sfija said, "Your father has
gold. He wiU give you of his gold, and precious stones,
and a red box, full of clothes and towels, some silk cushions,
a red wooden cradle, and much soap. My brother has great
wealth, and he will give camels to your father for your
portion, and gold coins."

I found that they thought I was in earnest, they all
clapped their hands, and one of the women sang a song of
rejoicing, thus : —

" Oh, Laidy Miriam, child of a far-off land.
Dwell with us and we shaU have joy !
Ton shaU be cheriahed above aU the women

Q

226 DOKESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

In the house of my Brother !

You shall be his Queen snd his chief delight !

For your face is like the moon,

And your words are precious as pearls !

Oh, Lady Miriam, child of a fiuvoff land,

Dwell with us and we shall haye joy 1 **

Then all the women rose and stood in a circle, forming
a chain by slipping their hands into each other's girdles.
They first moved slowly and gently rpund, in a measured
step and to a monotonous tune, which tiiey sang ; while
the servants and children, seated on the floor, were beating
time by clapping their hands. They sang thus : —

^ Let us dance ; let us sing;

He is looking from the lattice.
He will throw to us showers of silver ;
He will throw to us showers of gold !

Let us dance, let us sing ;

Faster, faster ; louder, louder 1
Let him hear our mingling voices ;
Let him hear our twinkling footsteps.

Let us dance, let us sing ;

Faster, faster ; louder, louder !
He will throw to us showers of silver ;
He will throw to us showers of gold ! **

They sang this over and over again, and the dance
gradually quickened till it became very animated, but
the dancers always kept in step. At last they sat down
quite tired. While they rested I told them how I passed
my time at H^ifa, and I tried to give them an idea of my
home in London, and how it was quite possible to live
there, without camels or olive-trees. They asked me if
the people ever danced in England ; and they were very
much shocked when they heard that men and women
danced at the same time and together.

At sunset little Selim told me my brother wished to
speak to me. He led me to him. He was in the vaulted
chamber, with several Eflfendis and Moslem gentlemen,
who asked me if I did not feel afraid to travel in a country
where the people were fighting and plundering each other.
I said, " I am not afraid, your excellencies, for I have found

DOMESTIC LIFB IN PALESTINE. 227

that all in this land are kind to the stranger." Then they
said, " May Allah make a straight path for you ! "

Supper was brought into the divan for the gentlemen, so
I returned to the hareem. It was cheerfully brightened
by little red clay lamps, placed in niches in the walls,
and a large lantern stood on a low stool in the middle of
the room. The women were wondering how I could dare
to go to the men's quarter of the house. I explained to
them that it was the custom in England for men and
women to meet together constantly, and that we walked, or
rode, or drove abroad unveiled. They were exceedingly
surprised. I added, " We are governed by a Sultana,
named *Nassirah' (Victoria), a lady so much loved and
respected by her subjects, that when she appears in the
streets or public places, the people cry aloud for joy, and
shout, ' God save the Sultana ! ' Then her face is bright
with pleasure and she looks graciously around, bowing her
head to rich and to poor alike. And on certain days the
nobles, and the learned men and her officers, are allowed
to kiss her hand." They cried, " Oh, most wonderful!" and
S§,ra said, "Is your Sultana a girl?" I answered, "No,
she is married ; but the Prince, her husband, takes no part
in the government." A sudden light seemed to break in
upon them, and I found that I had unwittingly given them
the idea, that the women of England rule and take the
lead in everything, and are superior to the men. I could
not entirely remove this impression, for they said, " Your
Sultana could not keep the sceptre in her hand, if she were
not stronger and wiser than the men." One of the women
said, "Can your brother, the Consul, write?" I tried to
give them a more favourable opinion of my countrymen,
but I do not think I succeeded very well, for they still
seemed to fancy that women were their superiors.

Supper was brought for me in the same order as
dinner, except that we had, in addition, a large dish filled
with little green sausages. They were made of minced
meat and rice, rolled up in leaves, dressed in butter. They
were very nice. Asm6, a beautifiil girl about eight years

Q 2

228 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

of age (the eldest daughter of Saleh Bek), and Selim, ate
with me ; but the ladies stood in attendance. I described
how !Ejiglish people sit on chairs, round a high table, and
eat from separate plates, using knives and forks, and
spoons, and how men and women eat together. They cried
out, " Oh, wonderfiil !" for they had never heard of a woman
eating in the presence of a man, not even with her husband
or father.

After supper, they talked about the war. They told me
how much they feared for their two eldest sons, who, though
only fifteen or sixteen, went constantly to engage in the
skirmishes in the mountains. These boys had often been
slightly wounded, and every day their mothers expected to
hear of one of them being killed.

Then they sang a song about the Governor, Mohammed
Bek, who was absent from Arrabeh, and they sang thus ; — >

** May our enemies perish before him,
May the arm of our Prince be strongs
May he be mighty in thn batUe-field,
May his enemies perish before him.
That our shepherds may pasture

Their flocks in peace !
And our camels carry
Their burdens in safety.
May our enemies perish before our Prince,

Our Prince and our Protector !
May he return to us with joy,

With great joy, and as a conqueror \
And all the dwellers in the mountains
Shall tremble before him."*

Then the black slaves danced, each one standing alone, a
little apart from the others. They moved their arms above
their heads slowly and gracefully, bending the body for-
ward gradually, then suddenly they raised their heads and

* Arab songs are very difficult for foreigners to understand. I could
make out little more than the subject and spirit of the aboye, while the
women were singing them. Helweh at my request explained the words in
simple language assisted by signs ; and a year afterwards, when she was
my neighbour at Haifa, she helped me to understand them sufficiently to
enable me thus to render them into English.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 229

rose to their extreme height, with their hands high. Their
limbs seemed very supple and pliant, and I think they
enjoyed dancing very much ; but it was not a pretty or
lively dance. They sang about a beautiful Bedawl girl
vrith teeth like lightning. I sang English songs at their
request, and showed them a few of the measures and
figures of our Western dances. They were most pleased
with the Spanish waltz, which I danced slowly with
imaginary partners : they clapped their hands, beating time
while I sang.

After this I was very tired, and I asked Sit Sdra to
let me sleep. She said, " Let us walk out on the terrace ;
the rain is over, the stars are shining. Let us walk out, oh,
my daughter ! and the room shall be made ready." So we
stroUed on the terrace of the hareem, with Helweh. There
were red watch-fires on the hills around ; and, by looking
through the round holes in the parapets, we could see
people in the streets below us, with servants carrying
lanterns before them. And bright stars shone in the deep-
purple night sky.

I was led across the court into a square room, and in-
troduced to the fourth and youngest wife of the Governor
of Arrabeh. I had not even heard of her before. She was
surrounded by her women and attendants, and was sitting
on a mattress propped up by pUlows and cushions, and
partly covered by a silk embroidered lehafif. Her head-
dress was adorned with jewels, and roses, and everlasting
flowers, and her violet velvet jacket was richly em-
broidered. Her cheeks were highly rouged, and her eye-
brows painted. Her eyelids were newly dressed with kohl,
and her hands with henna. She lifted a little swaddled
figure from under some heavy coverings, and handed it to
me ; it was her first-bom son. He was seven days old, and
his father had not yet seen him. The mother had hoped
and prepared for the pleasure of placing her boy in his arms
that night, but he had not returned to Arrabeh. (A week
is usually allowed to elapse before a Moslem father sees
his new-bom child or its mother, and the eighth day is

230 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

generally kept as a day of rejoicing and congratulation
Professional singing women are hired for the occasion.)

Coflfee was made for me, and a narghile prepared ; but I
did not linger long with the young Moslem mother and her
infant son, for the room was so over-heated that I could
scarcely breathe. A large open brazier, filled with glowing
charcoal, stood near the door, and the air and everything
in the place seemed to be impregnated with an oppressive
odour of musk Even the coflfee and the fumes of the
narghile were strongly flavoured with it. I was very glad
to be in the fresh air again on the starlit terrace.

When we went back into the large room, I found that
it had been nicely swept. In one comer five mattresses
were placed, one on the top of the other, with a red silk
pillow, and a silk embroidered wadded quUt, lined with
calico, arranged nicely as a bed for me. I rejoiced in-
wardly, thinking I was to have the room to myself But
veiy soon I was imdeceived, for seven other beds were
spread on the floor, each formed of a single mattress only,
with a quilted coverlid and pillow. (If a Moslem wishes
to pay great honour to a guest, several mattresses are piled
up for him or her to sleep upon, and these gradations of
respect are curiously observed. Yive is rather a high figure,
but I have known my brother to have seven spread for him.)

I found that all the ladies, and children, and servants,
and slaves, were to sleep in the same room with me ! Two
narrow hammocks, each about a yard long, were taken
from a recess, and, fastened to ropes, suspended from iron
rings in the ceiling. The hammocks were oblong frames,
made of the strong stems of palm fronds, with coarse
canvas stretched over them. To these, two swaddled and
screaming children were securely bound. Eopes, made of
palm-fibre, were fastened to the comers, and united and
plaited together, about one yard above, and then fixed to
strong ropes hanging from the ceiling. The four comer
ropes formed a tent-like framework to support a piece of
muslin for a mosquito curtain.
When I began to undress, the women watched me with

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINB. 231

curiosity, and when I put on my night-gown they were
exceedingly astonished, and exclaimed, "Where are you
going? What are you going to do?" and, "Why is
your dress white?" &c. They made no change in
their dress for sleeping, and there they were, in their
bright coloured clothes, ready for bed in a minute. But
they stood round me till I said, " Good night ; " they all
kissed me, wishing me good dreams. Then I knelt down,
and presently, without speaking to them again, I got
into bed, and turned my face towards the wall, thinking
over the strange day I had spent. I tried to compose
myself for sleep, though I heard the women whispering
together. When my head had rested for about five
minutes on the soft red silk pUlow, I felt a hand stroking
my forehead, and heard a voice saying, very gently, " Ya
Hablbil" ie. "Oh, beloved." But I would not answer
directly, as I did not wish to be roused unnecessarily.
I waited a little while, and my face was touched again.
I felt a kiss on my forehead, and the voice said, " Miriam,
speak to us ; speak, Miriam, darling ! " I could not resist
any longer, so I turned round and saw Helweh, Saleh Bek's
prettiest wife, leaning over me. I said, " What is it. Sweet-
ness ? what can I do for you ? " She answered, " What did
you do just now, when you knelt down and covered your
face with your hands ? " I sat up, and said very solemnly,
" I spoke to God, Helweh ! " " What did you say to
Him?" said Helweh. I replied, "I wish to sleep: God
never sleeps. I have asked Him to watch over me, and that
I may fall asleep remembering that He never sleeps, and
wake up remembering His presence. I am very weak.
God is all-powerftd. I have asked Him to strengthen me
with His strength." By this time all the ladies were
sitting round me on my bed, and the slaves came and
stood near. I told them I did not know their language
well enough to explain to them all I thought and said.
But as I had learnt the Lord's Prayer by heart in Arabic,
I repeated it to them, sentence by sentence, slowly. When
I began, thus, — " Our Father, who art in heaven," Helweh

232 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

directly said, " You told me your father was in London."
I replied, " I have two fathers, Helweh. One in London,
who does not know that I am here, and cannot know till
I write and tell him ; and a Heavenly Father, who is with
me always, who is here now, and sees and hears ns. He
is your Father also. He teaches us to know good from
evil, if we listen to Him and obey Him."

For a moment there was perfect silence. They all looked
startled, and as if they felt that they were in the presence
of some unseen power. Then Helweh said, " What more
did you say ? " I continued the Lord's Prayer, and when
I came to the words, "Give us day by day our daily
bread," they- said, " Cannot you make your bread your-
seK?" The passage, "Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive those who trespass against us," is particularly
forcible in the Arabic language, and one of the elder
women, who was rather severe and relentless-looking,
on hearing it, said, "Are you obliged to say that every
day?" as if she thought sometimes it would be diffi-
cult to do so. They said, "Are you a Moslem?" I
answered, " I am not called a Moslem. But I am your
sister, made by the same God, who is the One only God,
the God of all, my Father and your Father." They asked
me if I knew the Koran, and were surprised to hear that
I had read it. They handed a rosary to me, saying, " Do
you know that ? " I repeated a few of the most striking
and comprehensive attributes very carefully and slowly.
Then they cried out, " Mashallah " — " The English girl is
a true believer ;" and the impressionable, sensitive-looking
Abyssinian slave-girls said, with one accord, " She is indeed
an angel."

Moslems, both men and women, have the name of
" Allah " constantly on their lips ; but they do not appear
to realise the presence and power of God, or to be conscious
of spiritual communion with Him. Their common greet-
ings and salutations are touching and beautiful words of
prayer and thanksgiving, varied with poetic feeling and
Oriental sentiment, to suit any occasions. But their greet-

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE!. 233

ings, after all, seem to me only to express politeness,
respect, kindness, good-will, or affection, as the case may
be. Even as the old English " Ood he with youf' has lost
its full significance— and more, it has even lost its sound,
clipped as it is into a common-place '*Oood-bye" The
Moslem ejaculations before and after eating, and during
the performance of ablutions, though beautiful and appro-
priate, are now merely like exclamations of self-congratu-
lation, without reference to any superior or unseen power.
And the regular daily prayers so scrupulously said by
men, though generally neglected by women, are reduced to
ceremonial forms ; while the words uttered are, in many
instances, sublime and magnificent.

If this my notion be correct, it will explain why these
women were so startled, when, in answer to Helweh*s
question, I said simply and earnestly, *' I spoke to Ood:''
for that took them by surprise, and gave them the idea that
I believed my words were really heard. Whereas, if I had
answered in common-place language, such as, " I was saying
my prayers," or *' I was at my devotions," probably they
would not have been impressed in the same way ; though
they might have wondered that a Franji should pray at all
to their God. One of the women remarked, that no people,
except Moslems, ever prayed to the one true God.

After talking with them for some time, and answering,
as clearly as I could, their earnest, shrewd, and. child-like
questions, I said " Good ni^ht " once more. So they kissed
me, and smoothed my pillow. But though I was fatigued
bodily, my mind was so thoroughly roused and interested,
that I could not immediately sleep. I watched the women
resting under bright-coloured quilts, with their heads on
low, sUken pillows. The lantern on the stool in the middle
of the room lighted up the coins and jewels on their head-
dresses. Now and then, one of the infants cried, and its
mother or a slave rose to quiet it ; and it was fed with-
out being taken from its hammock. The mother stood
upright whUe the slave inclined the hammock towards her
for a few minutes ; and then there was silence again. The

234 DOMESTIC UPE IN PALESTINE.

room was very close and warm, and the faces of some of
the sleepers were flushed. At last I slept also.

When I awoke in the momii^, I found that all the beds
had been cleared away. Helweh and Sit Sdra stood by
mine, as if they had been watching for me to wake. A
number of boys almost blocked up the doorway, where the
sunlight was streaming in. Servants and slaves were chat-
tering, and piling up the mattresses in the recess. Little
children were quarrelling ; and the boys alone were silent
A black girl was sitting on the floor, pounding some
freshly roasted coffee-berries in a marble mortar; and their
fragrant aroma filled the room. I think the mortar was
made out of an ancient capital ; it was beautifully carved,
like Boman work. Another girl was making a kind of
porridge of bread, milk, sugar, and oil, for the children.

When Helweh saw that I was awake, she called out to
the boys to clear the doorway; and a group of women,
shrouded in white sheets, (who had been waiting in the
court outside,) entered. They were neighbours, who had
been paying visits of congratulation to the young mother
whom I had seen on the previous night; and they had
been invited to come in "to hear the English girl speak
to Godr

My garments were examined with curiosity, and I had
very much more assistance than I required in making my
toilette. When I was dressed, Helweh said, " Now, Miriam,
darling, wiU you speak to God, that the women, our neigh-
bours, may hear ? "

So I knelt down, saying, " Grod, the one true Gk)d, is the
Creator and Father of all ; and those who seek Him truly
shaU surely find Him." Then, in a few simple words, I
prayed that He would keep us in continual remembrance
of Him. That we might feel His presence ; and that He
would write His law in our hearts, and lead us to seek
earnestly to understand and to obey His will concerning
us. That we might be inspired to love Him more and
more, with a trustful and reverential love, and live in
harmony with aU people.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 235

After a pause, I said, "Will you say Amen to that
prayer ? " They hesitated, till Helweh exclaimed, " Amln,
Amin ! " and then the others echoed it.

S&ra said, " Speak yet again, my daughter ; speak about
the bread.''' So I repeated the Lord's Prayer, explaining it
(as I understand it), sentence by sentence, at their request
They asked me some very curious and suggestive ques-
tions, and they prayed that I would stay with them always.
But while I was taking coffee, and hot bread and cream,
one of the boys brought me a note from my brother, to tell
me that he would be ready to start in half an hour, and
that I was to go to him in the divan as soon as possible.
So S^ brought me my cloak and habit, which had been
nicely dried and smoothed. With regret, I took leave of my
warm-hearted friends of the hareem. They said, " Go in
peace," and " Eeturn to us again, oh, Miriam, beloved ! "

CHAPTEE X.

ALL the little boys went with me into the divan, where
my brother sat, surrounded by eflfendis and young
men of the Abdul Hady family. He had dismiss^ the
guide who had conducted us to Arrabeh, and decided to
travel without one. We were safer alone; for it might
have compromised us to have in our party any one who
had been engaged in the late skirmishes, or who belonged
to a faction.

It was pouring with rain when we started ; but the sun
shone now and then, tracing vivid rainbows in the clouds.
The undulating highlands which we traversed reminded
me of the Sussex downs ; while beyond them bare rocks
and rugged slopes appeared ; and, far away on the right,
the Mediterranean could be seen, between greyish blue
hills. Occasionally we passed quite an English-looking
bank of grass and wild flowers ; and wherever the poterium
spinosum grew, it sheltered the sweetwilliam, the Chinese
pink, and the forget-me-not. We rode over a large, well-
cultivated plain, and met two horsemen, .who courteously
exchanged salutations with us, and then said, " What is
the news ? "and " Whence do you come ?" &c.

Bain fell heavily, as we rode on to a steep ridge, which
commanded a view of the fortress of Seniir. It stands on
the summit of a seemingly inaccessible hill, of conical
form. The road down the southern side of the ridge was
so very diflScult and dangerous for horses, that we, and
even the Arabs, dismounted, and the animals were un-
willingly dragged or urged along. We made ©ur way

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 237

cautiously, stepping and sKding and leaping by turns over
the loosened stones and smooth slabs of rock ; sometimes
walking in the midst of a water-course, with the shallow
but increasing streahi rushing round our feet We paused
for a minute or two in a narrow valley, and stood in the
shelter of a low, deserted hut, made of tree-branches and
stones. Then, with difficulty, we mounted the hill, and
reached Send of Truth."— Zoro&a&eZ,

Some people defended the celebration of the festival be-
cause it was an ancient custom ; but, as Cyprian says —

" Custom without truth ia but agedneas of error."

Unfortunately there is another powerful motive for keep-
ing up this solemn jugglery. Large sums of money are
spent in Palestine every year by the pilgrims, who come from
ail parts of Eussia, Greece, and Turkey, and the people
of Jerusalem, Bethlehem, and Kazareth naturally regard
Easter as their haivest-time.

Priests, shopkeepers, relic manufacturers, householders,
owners of camels, horses, and other beasts of burden,
would all more or less feel it, if the annual pilgrimages
were to cease ; and as the Holy Fire is the chief attraction,
the temptation to encourage the delusion is very great.

Is this strange ceremony a relic of the services of the
Fire-worshippers of old ? There are two or three Moslem
shrines which are said to be miraculously illumined on
certain days, and I am told that as early as the 9th century
the Syrian Christians believed that an angel of God was
appointed to light the lamps over the tomb of Christ on
every Easter-eve.

CHAPTER XII.

ABOUT an hour before the sun went down, on Holy
Saturday, we rode out of the city, glad to breathe the
fresh air after the fatigue and excitement of the morning.
We passed out at the Y&fa Gate and went aU round Jeru-
salem close to the walls. I saw a number of poor peasant
girls coming out of the olive-grove opposite to the Damas-r
cus Gate. They wore tattered white cotton veils and home-
spun purple linen dresses. They were barefoot, but they all
looked merry, and carried boughs of trees and flowers in
their brown hands. One of the youngest had a branch of
hawthorn with glossy green leaves and several bunches of
white blossom on it. It was the first bit of " May " I had
seen, and, weU pleased, I stopped my horse and asked the
girl if she would give me a part of it. She looked up good-
naturedly, and, seeing a rosebud fastened in my habit, she
said: " Lady, if you will give me the flower which grows in
your bosom you shall have my hawthorn blossom." So
we made the exchange.

On the 2d of May news reached us of serious skir-
mishes between the rival factions in the district of Jenin.
The little mud-built village called " Khubeiseh," which we
passed through on our way to Kefr Kara, had been the
scene of conflict, and many people whom we knew had
been engaged in it.

On the 5th, my brother started for H§,ifa, by way of
Nabl&s and Jenin, and I was once more left with my kind
friends at the Consulate, where I enjoyed leisure and ex-
cellent opportunities for sketching, studying, and observing
all that was going on around me.

x2

308 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

There was no more rain, and the sun was daily increas-
ing in power. English travellers continued to arrive every
few days, and I often had the pleasure of accompanying
and guiding them in their " Walks about Jerusalem," and
their excursions in the neighbourhood.

Roses were abundant at this time. It was the season for
making rose-water and conserves. The peasant women
brought basket-loads of roses into town every morning.
Often at sunrise these women might be seen pausing on
their way by a streamlet to empty their baskets into the
rippling water, literally making a bed of roses for the river.
Perhaps they do this, as they say, only to wash their flowers
and to make them keep fresh and look as if wet with dew,
but / think it is more probable that they wish to make
their roses heavy, for they sell them in the market by
weight.

On Wednesday, May 7th, a hot, oppressive sirocco wind
prevailed. Early in the afternoon I rode out with little
Skander Finn and his cousin L. We went down into the
valley of Hinnom, where hawthorns, covered with pink
and white blossom, scented the air. The olive-trees were in
flower, and the fig-trees green with fresh leaves. We passed
the Aceldema and reached En EogeL There was no water
in the rocky river-bed ; however, it had not flowed in vain
The reservoirs were filled and the parched earth revived.
We went a little way down the valley, crossed the dry bed
and dismounted. We climbed half-way up the hill on the
left-hand side and reached a ledge or natural terrace in
front of a steep clifi*, which L assured me was cavemed,
though no signs of a cavern could be seen. The ledge was
so overgrown with tall thistles that it was difficult to find
a footing ; we beat these down and found the door which
they concealed. The top of the door was only slightly
above the level of the terrace, which sloped.abruptly down
to it, like the entrance to an underground cellar, but with-
out any steps. With the help of Hadj Ali and his stick,
and by clinging to roots and weeds, we contrived to slide
down and pass through the doorway, which I measured,

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINK 309

and found it was four feet by seven, cut in the soKd rock.
After a minute or two we became accustomed to the sudden
darkness^ and could partially distinguish the objects around
us. On the left side, just within the cavern, there was an
immense pedestal, quite plain. We went down slipping and
sliding, cautiously, one after th^ other, down deeper and
deeper into the darkness, till we came to a column, about
twelve feet in circumference, supporting a roof which ap-
peared to me to be about twenty feet above us. The base
of this column was far below the level of the door,' but as
it was nearly opposite to it, it caught on one side a little
reflected light, and there maiden-hair grew luxuriantly, but
the other sides of the pillar were only clothed with pale
mosses and drooping fungus assuming grotesque forms. I
removed a mass of maiden-hair to examine the nature of
the native rock of which the pillar was formed It was
quite white, and crumbled easily beneath my touch.

In the meantime L. and Skander were exploring the dis-
tant recesses, and their spirit-like figures gliding about in
the darkness below gave some idea of the depth and extent
of the cavenL The floor, which was of loamy earth, con-
tinued to slope downwards. There were three other massive
columns ; the farthest one, I should think, must be about
thirty feet high. My guides warned me not to foUow, for
they had come to a large, though shallow, pool of water.
The rain had streamed down the steep bank and had made
for itself a smooth channel to the bottom of the cavern,
carpeting the way with rich soil from the surface of the
terrace above. Water was trickling slowly down the walls
and from the roof. Bats, disturbed by our approach, blun-
dered against us now and then, and the damp, cold, death-
like atmosphere made us shiver. We climbed up again,
and Hadj Ali helped us to reach the thistle-grown terrace
in safety. We were gasping for a breath of fresh air, and
rested for a minute or two blinking in the dazzling day-
light and basking in the warm sunshine.

Then we scrambled over rugged rocks and through
thickets of thorns and thistles till we came to a large recess

310 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

in a steep white cliffi It was like a room, entirely open on
one side, about eleven feet in height, ten feet deep, and
fourteen feet wide. It was, to all appearance, a natural
Excavation which had been partially squared by human
art. In some places the ceiling looked as if it had once
been coated with rough cement. The white walls were
rather damp and were garnished vdth maiden-hair of the
finest kind I had ever seen, and many plants which love
the shade were flourishing there. Out of every crevice some
delicate leaf or tendril crept. This cave was no doubt
formerly inhabited by human beings — kings, priests and
prophets of old may have lodged here.

Skander had climbed higher up the hill and now called
to us> sajdng: "I have found a wonderful place up here,
come and see." With difSculty we followed and found
him stretched flat on his face, peering into a dark opening
about one foot high and six feet broad, close to the ground,
he said it was like a large fox-hola I could not possibly
enter this cave, but I stooped and looked in and could see
that there were some ancient sepulchres within ; I counted
four. They were, I believe, cut in the solid rock, and were
ornament^ with bold, efiective mouldings and bosses.
This place seems to be worthy of careful exploration. The
entrance is likely soon to be quite concealed by the stones
apd dSyris falling from above, and the tangled masses of
vegetation near it. There is no tradition connected with
it, and it is on that account, perhaps, that it is so rarely
pointed out to travellers.

We mounted and rode homewards, looking towards the
south-east corner of the Holy City. The sunlight was
gleaming on the terraces just below it, and it tinged with
an emerald lustre the fields of barley there. On the right,
above En Eogel, the ruins of Siloam appeared, and we
could just see Absalom's pillar. * As we rode round the
base of Moimt Zion, Hadj Ali gathered a beautiful branch

* It is this view which the lamented Mr. Seddon painted so faithftdlj'
The picture is in the South Kensington Museum.

!DOMBSTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 311

of a pomegranate-tree, covered with bright blossoms, the
first I had seen that year.

We remembered that Eamadan, the month when the
followers of Mohammed fast by day and feast by night,
had commenced on the previous Sunday, so we hastened
on, that Hadj Ali might prepare his evening meal and be
ready to eat it, at the moment of the firing of the " mogarihy'
the signal gun at simset — ^the sound so welcome to hunger-
ing and thirsting Moslems.

Poor Hadj Ali had not taken food or even smoked a
pipe since sunrise. This fast, which lasts for thirty days,
is observed with extraordinary fidelity by people of all
classes.*

On Thursday, May 28th, I was invited to visit the new
schools for young Jewesses, established by Sir Moses
Montefiora The morning was bright and dazzling. We
passed the barracks and entered the street leading to the
Armenian convent. The sun was almost vertical, and the
polished stone pavement reflected back the heat and light
The high walls of the houses on each side scarcely cast a
line of shadow — only the little casement windows jutting
out here and there, and the bright flowers which climbed

* In the second chapter of the Eoxan, the rules for ohserying Bamadaa
are given thus : —

" true believers, a fast is ordained unto you as it was ordained tinto
those before you, that ye may fear Qod.

*' The month of Ramadan is the month of lasting in which the Koran
was sent down from heaven, a direction unto men. and declarations of
direction and the distinction between good and eviL Therefore let him
among you who shall be dwelling at home in this month, fast the 8€m£
monM. ; but he who shaU be sick or on a journey shall fast the like number
of other days. Qod would make this an ease unto you, that ye may fulfil
the number of days aod glorify Qod for that He hath directed you and
that ye may give thanks. ....

'' It is lawful for you to eat and drink at night until ye can plainly
distinguish a whUe thread from a hlausk thread by the daybreak, then keep
-•he fast until sunset"

According to Moslem Divines, there are three degrees of fasting. The
first and second are strictly material ; the third is the fasting of the heart
from worldly cares, and the restraint of the thoughts, which must be
concentrated on Qod.

312 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE.

through the trellis-work, or huBg from the roofs, traced
fantastic and delicate shadows on the ground. Not a breath
of air was stirring. It was midday, and no one was to be
seen in the broad, unsheltered, silent street, where even the
dogs were sleeping, as if overcome by the heat and light.
We turned to the left and passed a walled-up archway,
once the entrance to an ancient mosque. We skirted the
back of the Armenian convent and thus reached the Jewish
quarter, and were very soon knocking at the school-house
door, over which there was a well-engraved Hebrew
inscription.

While we waited for admittance, I looked up at the
windows. Two were square, unsheltered openings. A third
jutted far out from the wall, and through its quaint and
fanciful wooden lattice we could see bright and rare flowers.
The fourth was a large square Oriel window, supported by
a stone bracket, and protected by an iron balcony. A
crowd of happy-looking children were peeping from it.
One dark-eyed little creature had a red cloth tarbouche on
the back of her head, and a rose in her black hair. The
others wore soft muslin kerchiefs of various colours, tied
tastefully on their heads.

We entered the door, crossed a small court, and were
led up an open staircase, on to a terrace, the low, broad
walls of which were converted into a garden. Flower-pots
had been embedded in the masonry, at regular distances,
along the top of the parapets. Thus a sort of floral battle*
ment was formed, and produced an excellent eflect, for
the plants were kept nearly all of the same size and height
The rose-bushes, pinks, and cloves, in full flower, con-
trasted well with the dark-leaved myrtle, the Cape jas-
mine, and the white walls.

We were politely received in this court by a Spanish
Jewess, who conducted us into a light, cheerful room, con-
taining animated groups of girls, varying in age from seven
to fourteen, perhaps. I counted thirty-one children, but
the full number usually assembled there was thirty-five.

Eight forms and a double row of desks gave quite a

^^-i

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 313

European character to the room, and the raised pulpit-like
seat of the teacher indicated order and authority.

The girls were nearly all engaged at needlework, and
our guide exhibited to us, with evident pride and pleasure,
a considerable stock of wearing apparel, the result of one
week's work in that room. The simple garments were very
nicely made, considering that most of the little workers
did not know how to sew six or seven months before. The
mistress could not tell us what was done with the work,
when finished, as it passed from her hands at the end of
each week. The children looked busy and bright. Some
of them were singularly beautiful. One tall and stately
girl, of about fourteen, was acting the part of monitor, and
she answered our questions, in Arabic, with the utmost
modesty and self-possession, and glided among her little
pupils with native grace and dignity. All these children
were natives of Palestine, they spoke Arabic, and wore
the Arab costumei Their heads were, without exception,
covered either with muslin kerchiefs, or with the simple
red tarbouche.

The windows of this room were large, and thrown wide
open. They looked eastward, and commanded views of
the whole extent of Olivet, and the misty Moab mountains
far away. The midday breeze sprang up suddenly, and
slightly cooled the fiery air.

After lingering for a short time, to enjoy the prospect, we
were led to another room, equally large, light, and airy.
Here we found about thirty children, under the care of
two female teachers. One tiny little creature was learning
a Hebrew lesson, and carefully spelling words of two
letters. Another child of seven or eight was reading, with
very little hesitation, some Scripture history. The other
children were seated comfortably, and with perfect ease
and freedom, yet without disorder, upon mats, or in the
deep, carpeted window-seat. There I recognised the happy
faces which I had seen from the street below. They looked
up at me, smiling, as much as to say : " We know you again
-^we saw you waiting at the door.*'

314 DOMESTIC LIFS IN PALESTIKE.

They were all at needlework, and I could not help
observing the extreme deUcacy and beauty of their hands.
K, as it is said, this is a distinguishing feature of noble
birth, then these young daughters of Israel are of princely
race. Some of the little hands were stained with henna,
and almost all the nails were tinted, and looked like the
delicate, rose-coloured shells we find on the sands on
English shores.

The children were uniformly neat and clean, and there
was a picturesque variety of costume there, that struck us
pleasantly, contrasting with our recollections of the ugly
uniforms in some of our public schools at home and
abroad. As we were retiring, a shy little creature sum-
moned up courage to give me the rose from her hair, and
then she peeped at me slyly between her tapering fingers.

These two rooms were set apart expressly for the children
of parents belonging to the Sephardim congregation, con-
sisting of the Spanish or Portuguese* Jews settled in
Jerusalem.

We were now led downstairs again to the open court,
which we crossed, and, after ascending another stairway,
we found ourselves in the school of the Ashekenazi con-
gregation, formed of German, Eussian, and Polish Jews.
Here there were fifteen children, and they all seemed
to be under seven years of age. They were much more
fair, though less beautiful, than those in the other rooms.
They were sitting, very much at their ease, perched up on
the sloping desks, with their little feet resting on the
forms. How thoughtful and kind it was to allow them
this freedom during the hot weather I There was not a
sign of fatigue, or any expression of rebellion against
restraint, in any of the young faces round us. There was
activity of mind and rest of body, in a pure air.

The Jews of Jerusalem are especially careful not to
allow their children to associate with Christians or Mos-
lems ; and they will not suffer them to stray away from
home, or play in the streets, for fear they should learn bad
habits, or be constrained or induced to be baptized into a-

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE? 315

Christian Church. Consequently, the little ones were con-
fined nearly all day in the close, ill- ventilated, small rooms
of the Jewish quarter, until this school was established.
Here they assembled early in the morning, and, taking
proper hours for rest, recreation, and for meals, returned
home at sunset. Already a great improvement was ob-
served in their appearance; they looked more healthy, and
their lives were happier.

A little girl of five years of age, with pink cheeks, blue
eyes, and hair almost white, was reading aloud from some
Hebrew volume, and was evidently interested by it I
cautiously inquired whether she knew by heart aU that
fell so fluently from her lips. I was assured that I was
listening to genuine reading.

We went downstairs to the second German room, where
most of the girls were between thirteen and fifteen years of
age, and the rest younger. We heard two of the eldest
read, with emphasis, several pages from the life of Moses —
a book written expressly for the use of women and children.
It is a paraphrase of the Bible history of Moses, in a
curious, harsh dialect, being a compound of Hebrew and
German. It is printed in Hebrew characters, and embel-
lished with quaint and curious woodcuts, in the style of the
followers of Albert Dlirer.

In these two rooms fifty-five pupils generally muster.

The housekeeper, who had guided us from room to room,
then led us to her own, and exhibited some shirts, which
she and the elder pupils had been making to order. They
were stitched and hem-stitched, and neatly finished off.
She seemed delighted with our approval and praise ; for
this shirt-making was quite a new accomplishment, as the
Jews of the East wear much more simple under-garments
than these.

We took leave of her, and I returned to the Consulate,
very tired. My friends went on to the Eothschild schools,
of which they afterwards gave me a very favourable report

When I was in Jerusalem, in 1859, I made inquiries
about these schools, especially the one established by Sir

816 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

M. Montefiore, intending to visit it again. To my surprise
and regret, I was told that it no longer existed; and I
conld not obtain any satisfewjtory cuscount of it, or under-
stand why it was broken up. I suppose that Oriental
indifference to female education is the chief cause.

On the 13th of May, Mrs. Finn, in behalf of the " Jeru-
salem Agricultural Association," purchased a portion of thfe
beautiful valley of Urtas. I witnessed the making and
concluding of the bargain. Ten of the fiercest and wildest-
looking Arabs I had seen were assembled in the oflSce of
the Consulate, with their chie^ a tall, powerful man, called
Sheik Saph, whose family, local tradition says, has for
ages been distinguished for the height and strength of
its men.*

Mrs. Finn came forward, and stood in the midst of the
group of men, and said : " O Sheik, do you agree to sell ? "
and Sheik Saph answered : " I agree to sell, my lady ;
do you agree to buy ? " and Mrs. Finn replied : " I buy, O
Sheik." Then the purchase-deed, which had been already
prepared, was read over, signed, and sealed ; and one
hundred and fifty sovereigns were counted slowly into the
hands of the Sheik. He received the gold with great
gravity and seeming indifference ; but his men looked on
eagerly, with hawk-like eyes. After this, about a hundred
coins, of small value, were thrown on the ofl&ce-floor, ac-
cording to custom, and were eagerly scrambled for by
all present Thus the exact sum paid for the ground
could not be ascertained. This method of selling any-
thing, for a counted and an uncounted sum, is called
" a sale by the broken group." When this precaution is
neglected, in dealing with Arab tribes, a purchaser may
be obliged to yield up property to its original' owner at
any moment, for the amount of the purchase money.

Sheik Saph and his two chief followers were invited
into the drawing-room to take coffee. They made strong

* This is rather curioas in connexion with 2 Sam. xxL 18 : — "Then
Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph, which was of the sons of the giant." '

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 317

>

professions and promises of faith and good-will towards
their " nohle lady, Mrs. Finn," saying they would protect
the property at the risk of their lives, and as if it were
still their own. They went away evidently qidte satisfied
with the transaction.

On the 15th, Mr. and Mrs. Finn went to Urtas, to stay
there for a few days, for change of air, and to superintend
the arrangements for inclosing and cultivating the recently
purchased land. I was invited to spend a day with them,
in company with $in English traveller, Mr. W., and Skander
Finn. We started from the Consulate at sunrise, and rode
quickly across the plain of Eephaim to Eachel's Sepulchre,
and over the hills by Bethlehem. A well-mounted kawass
led the way, and a mule carrying Debihu, the Abys-
sinian servant, and a tent, followed. We reached the
pleasant valley in about two hours. It looked to me more
beautiful than ever, with its rippling streams, its flourish-
ing fruit-trees and rose-bushes covered with flowers.

We found our friends waiting for us, seated at the wide
entrance of a dry cave, in a white limestone rock, just
above the new garden-ground. We went together up to
Mr. Meshullam's cottage. His wife showed me a large
sieve fall of fine roses, which had been gathered before
sunrise. We breakfasted in the rose-scented room, and
then rested for a short time on the cushioned stone divan,
under a large fig-tree, the thickly growing leasees of which
now afforded perfect shelter.

A ride was proposed, and we mounted. Mr. Finn led
the way in a south-westerly direction, over a steep and
pathless hill, which looked as if it had never been tra-
versed except by wild goats and conies. When we com-
menced descending, we found it necessary to dismount ;
and, one after another, we led our horses, slipping and
sliding, over large smooth inclined slabs of rock and loose
stones, till we reached a broad level platform, where rich
earth had rested, and formed a bed for wild flowers. Here
we paused for those of our party who had prudently taken
an easier route round the base of the hilL They presently

318 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

overtook us, and we were reminded that Amos, the herds-
man and prophet, who said : " Shall horses run upon the
rockf" dwelt not far from here, and very likely he had
often seen them stumbling or stepping cautiously over
such hills as this. We rode all together up a narrow wind-
ing valley, where wild thyme and heath, and blue, yeUow,
red, and white salvias, grew abundantly among the grey
rocks, which were half-covered with orange-coloured lichen^
The air waa warm and fragrant

At the head of the valley there was a rounded hiU^
crowned by a low clump of trees, which sheltered a white
tent. The northern and western slopes were green with
bearded barley. This lovely patch of cultivated land con-
trasted strangely with the wild hills around, where there
was not any sign of human industry. Mr. Meshullam
enjoyed our surprise, and then explained how he had
cleared the land and sown it, and made a little garden
on the top of the lull. The soil was very rich in quality^
but rather thinly spread over the surface of the rock*

There were higher hills rising beyond, and sheltering
this retreat. We ascended gradually, till we reached the

* This ground has been greatly improyed since, and when I visited it in
1859, I found that Peter, one of Mr. Meshullam's younger sons, a brave
and enterprising young man, had, on his return from service in the Crimea,
built a little stone house there, and inclosed a lai^ge portion of cleared
land. He oftei^ lived on the hill for weeks together, his only companions
being two or three native peasants, and his favourite dog, and a few other
domestic animals. He adopted the Bedouin costume, and lived quite like
an Arab, except during his occasional visits to Jerusalem and other towns.
He has lived from childhood in Palestine, and his physical strength,
quickness of action, and foresight have endeared him to the Arabs. He is
known and respected by most of the Sheiks in the district. He has more
, than once been requested to become the chief- of a small tribe. He told
xne he would have accepted the office gladly, if he could have done so
without becoming a Mohammedan. He was dreaded by the doers of mis-
chief for miles around. He found the neighbourhood infested with wild
boars, jackals, foxes, and other beasts of prey. He killed a great number,
and very often succeeded in shooting hawks and eagles. When H.R.H.
Prince Alfred was in Palestine, in the spring of 1859, Mr. Peter Meshullam
was one of his most constant companions on the inland journey from
Jerusalem to Tiberias, andthence to Hdifa^ where the Euryalu9 was at
anchor.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 319

highest point in the range, which commanded a wide
prospect in every direction.

Looking eastward, I at once recognised the Dead Sea,
calm and blue, and the long line of the Moab mountains
beyond ; but the rest of the view all round was to me,
as well as to Mr. W., only a maze of white, grey, and
brown hUls, and dark valleys chequered with cloud shadows,
without any roads or landmarks.

Mr. Finn read the landscape round for us, and its
features soon grew familiar to me. We were looking east-
ward, and he said : " That dark ravine to the right, in the
range of rocks on this side of the Dead Sea, is the Valley
of the Wilderness of Engeddi, where David * dwelt in
strongholds ' during his exile. That peak, like an ex-
tinct volcano, which rises above the surrounding hills, is
the Frank Mountain, called by the Arabs, Jebel Fureedus,
i e. the Lesser Paradise Mount. A little way to the right
of it, on that terraced and rounded hill, are the ruins of
Tekoa, where Amos guarded flocks and herds, and gathered
wild figs, in the days of Uzziah, King of Judah, two years
before the earthquake. We will go there some day, and
look for a wise woman." Turning towards the porth-east,
he said : " Do you notice a depression in that long range ?
Look a little to the left of it, and you will distinguish the
leaden roof of the Convent of Bethlehem, and then you
can make out the surrounding buildings. Farther north is
Mount Olivet ; — and now that a black cloud is passing over
Jerusalem, you can plainly see two tall minai'ets rising
white and bright out of the city."

Many of the hills, especially in the south and east, were
crowned with ruins, and showed signs of former cultiva-
tion, but now they were deserted. The stone walls of the
ancient terrjwjes were broken down, and the earth washed
away, and where vines and fig-trees once grew, thorns and
thistles had sprung up — ^the whole land truly is made
silent and desolate. We were overlooking a large portion
of the division of the tribe of Judah. See Jer. vii. 34, —
" I will cause to cease from the cities of Judah the voice

320 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINB.

of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bride-
groom, and the voice of the bride : for the land shall be
desolate.'' A string of camels and a few horsemen were
hastening across the country, and now and then we caught
sight of them. Here and there a few black tents were
pitched, and flocks were feeding, but there was nothing
else to give life to the landscape.

The wind, which had been gradually rising, now blew
so violently, that we could scarcely stand against it. The
cloud which had overshadowed Jerusalem was whirled far
away, and unless we had known exactly where to look,
and what to look for, we could not possibly have distin-
guished the hill on which the city stands, from the rocky
hills which encircle it We were reminded of the words
of Carlyle : — " The eye only sees that which it brings with
it the power of seeing." We rode down into the vaUey
for shelter, but we were presently tempted to ascend the
opposite hill, for we saw some square black tents among
the low trees and bushes. We rode up to the encampment
and dismounted, and were soon surrounded by a group of
dusky Arabs. They had cultivated a little patch of ground
with barley and beans, and a few wild olive-trees grew at
the base of the hill. Their half-naked little children were
playing with the goats, jumping from rock to rock, and
rolling on the ground, the elder ones were gathering wood
for the fire. The women were attending to a cauldron of
rice, which was suspended gipsy-fashion over a wood fire
in the open air. They clustered round Mrs. Finn and me,
examining us with curiosity, and especially wondering at
our gloves and boots. They all looked rather languid and
fatigued — ^the effect probably of the daily fasting, for they
were very rigid Moslems of Bethlehem origin. We asked
them how long they intended to remain there? They
replied : " We shall remain here till Bamadan is past."

From the top of the lull, the flash of the " mogarib," or
sunset gun from the citadel at Jerusalem could be seen,
and partly on that account, they had chosen the spot for
their encampment. Besides this attraction. th^re was water

BOMESTIO LIFE IN PALESTINS. 321

near^ and pasture for their flocks, and dwarf oak-trees, and
resinous shrubs and thorns which they cut down for fdeL
The gum cistus flourished there, and was covered with
wide-open, delicate blossoms, white, pink, and lilac, which
fell off when the flowers were gathered, and fluttered away
in the breeze like butterflies.

We remounted, and went by another route, towards
Urtas, making our way along narrow wadys, and crossing
ridges, where tall hollyhocks and the hibiscus abounded.
Presently we came to a hill on which there were extensive
and interesting ruins. We dismounted and scrambled up
among rocks, hewn stones, and thistles, and thorn-bushes,
which grew on the ancient terraces. When we reached the
plateau on the top of the hill, Mr. Finn, who had pre-
viously explored the place, pointed out to us the foundation
of a very large building, divided into compartments. The
walls had been broken down, but in some parts they stood
four feet high. They were built of very large, well-bevelled
blocks of stone, not joined together with mortar, but the
interstices were filled up with finely crushed stones. The
ground was strewn with tesserae about three-quarters of
an inch square, with which all the inclosed spaces had
evidently been paved.

From the style of the masonry and the general outline,
Mr. Finn judged that this was a good example of Jewish
workmanship of an early period, and as ancient as any
existing in the country.

The buildings must have covered a large space, and were
apparently all connected with the central and principal ona

The Arabs call this ruin the ''Bar el Bendt,'' t,e. the
house or "Betreat of girls/' but they have no tale to tell
about it. There is no historical notice or tradition of any
Christian convent having existed here at any time ; and
there is not the slightest indication of Christian art in the
general ground-plan.

The great bevelled stones which are scattered all over the
hill, and rest in heaps in the valley below as if thrown
down by an earthquake, are exactly like the stones of

\

322 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

which Solomon's Pools, and other ancient works are fonnei
Mr. Finn suggested that this was possibly one of the places
of which Solomon spoke when he said : " I made me great
works, I builded me houses," and the singular traditionary
name "Dar el Ben&t,*' which has clung to it, may signify
that this was an establishment connected with Solomon's
hareem, which, it is said, contained " seven hundred wives,
and three hundred concubines."

I can imagine the time when the now fallen walls
were standing, and inclosing cool chambers, columned
corridors, terraces, courts, fountains, and gardens of citrons
and roses — when the hUl-sides were covered with vines,
and the valley below was well watered, and brought
forth all kinds of goodly firuits and fragrant spices.
Gathered together there, I see in fancy, " virgins without
number" agile and graceful mountaineers from the Lebanon,
proud and stately daughters of Jerusalem, sweet, shy girls
fix)m the plains of Sharon, and the fairest of the fair
maidens of Shunem, contrasting with the dark loveliness
of the melancholy young African exiles, who wore " the
shadow'd livery of the bumish'd sun,'* and gloried in the
tints he made them wear.

Guarded by " valiant men of Israel," and surrounded by
handmaidens and slaves, they were nursed here in luxury
and splendour, decked with ornaments of gold and silver
and precious stones, clothed with raiments of fine linen," and
silk and embroidered work, anointed with oil and per-
fumed with sweet odours. Every art was employed that
could add a new charm to beauty. I can hear their songs
of rejoicing when the winter rains passed away, and the
flowers appeared on the earth. I can see them early in
the morning in the vineyards, or on the stairs cut in the
rock on the hUl-side, going down into the garden of nuts,
to see the fruits of the valley, to see whether the vine
flourished, and the pomegranate budded — and to this day,
at every marriage festival in the country, their wild, pic-
turesque, and passionate love-songs are echoed in a lan-
guage very nearly allied to their own.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 823

On this subject I hope on some future occasion to speak
more fully, in some notes on the life and times of Solomon,
and his Song of Songs. We lingered a long time amoqg
the ruins. I picked up a handful of tesserae, and then
went down to the valley. We found traces here and there
of a rocky staircase, the joint work of nature and art.

At the base of the hill, wild pomegranates and the
arbutus grew. Just as we were mounting I saw on the
top of a seemingly inaccessible heap of rocks and hewn
stones a very fine honeysuckle. Mr. W. determined to
gather it for us. He leaped across the deep dry bed of the
winter torrent, and climbed over the bushes tod rocks, and
soon returned in triumph with such a large, bright trophy
of pink hollyhocks, at least five feet high, and long trailing
branches of the honeysuckle, that he frightened aU the
horses as he approached. We rode on laden with flowers.
The honeysuckle smelt very sweet Its blossoms were
large, and of a pale yellow colour, shaded in with white
and pink. We made our way quickly to Urtas, and
after dinner we sat for a short time under the fig-tree,
The peasants came down from the ancient village above,
to look at us, and we took the opportunity of putting some
of them into our sketch-books. Then we mounted, and had
a delightful ride back to Jerusalem. It was long past
sunset when we reached the gates, but the keeper of the
key had been detained to admit us.

On the 24fth of May, the birthday of our beloved Queen
was celebrated at H.B.M. Consulata At an early hour the
British flag was saluted from the citadel. Visitors began
to flock to the house, and were received by Mr. and Mrs.
Finn, who had returned from Urtas the day before. I had
never seen, even in the East, such a picturesque and mixed
assembly gathered together in one room. There were the
Consuls in full uniform, decked with ribbons, and stars and
foreign orders, attended by their cancellieri, side by side
with the Protestant missionaries in their sombre dresses,
the Latin Patriarch, with the Abb^ Eatisbon, and a large
party of Franciscan and Benedictine monks. Then came

y2

324 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTIKE.

the chief dignitaries of the Armenian, Greek, Syrian,
and Coptic Churches in their flowing robes — ^learned
Babbis in their long straight gabardines, and dark turbans
— zealous Jews from Safed, Hebron, and Tiberias, in
varied Oriental costume, mingling with groups of those
of their nation who had embraced the Christian religion,
and adopted the European dress.

Ody Azam, and several other refugees from Nablfts were
to be seen. CoflFee and pipes, sherbets and sweets, were
handed round by kawasses and black servants, aU equipped
in new clothes for the occasion.

Every one looked bright, cheerful, and friendly ; compli-
ments and greetings were exchanged, and blessings pro-
nounced on our Queen and country in many tongues.

A little before midday, his Excellency Kamiel Pasha
came with M. Gilbert, and the commander, and the chief
surgeon of the Turkish troops, followed by a number of
EflFendis, most of whom I had met previously. Several of
them reminded me of the day on which they had eaten
can&fi with me at Nablfts.

The Pasha and his suite gracefiiUy excused themselves
from taking any refreshments, and expressed a regret that
such a f§te day had fallen in the month of Eamadan.
Eamadan is a moveable fast, and occurs in turn at every
season of the year. -

Little Constance Finn took pity on the Pasha, and, much
to his amusement, filled the pockets of his glittering uni-
form with bonbons, teUinghim to eat them directly after
sunset.

Ten Greeks, and as many Jews, with several Moslem
and Christian merchants, were at the lower end of the room
while his Excellency was present. In the afternoon the
less ceremonious visits were paid, and in the evening the
company was almost exclusively British, and " God save
the Queen " was sung with loving loyalty and enthusiasm
at the Consulate on Mount Zion.

Thus the spring-time passed pleasantly. Day after day
my attention and my interest had been excited by scenes

DOMESTIC UFE IN PALESTINE. 325

and incidents wMcli vividly illustrated the treasured
records of the past, and threw new light for me on Hebrew
chronicle and Gospel story.

I had seen and entered into the spirit of human life in
all its progressive stages. I had found shelter in the tents
of lawless wanderers, and claimed sisterhood with Bedouin
girls. I had lingered among more peaceful tribes, who
dwell in patriarchal simplicity in stationary tents, sur-
rounded by flocks and herds. I had lodged with the
fellahin, in their rude villages of mud and stone, en-
circled by orchards, gardens, fields of grain and pasture
land, and had associated with the townspeople, the great
men, the law-makers and the governors of the land In
the meantime I had occasionally enjoyed the society of
some of the most highly cultivated and noble representa-
tives of the civilized nations of Europe. I could find some
meeting-point of sympathy with all, and I truly felt that
" One touch of nature makes the whole world kin."

My desire to make my friends in England share my
pleasures, and to enable them to see, as far as possible, a
true reflex of all that I saw, led me to look carefully
and earnestly on all things. I seemed to possess unusual
strength and power of resisting fatigue, and acquired habits
of ceaseless and minute observation. My pen and pencil
were almost always in use. Friendly voices often said:
*' You are working too hard, you do not take sufficient
rest ; " or : " Unless you work with less intensity you will
suffer sooner or later. In this coimtry, at this season, it is
absolutely necessary to have a little sleep or perfect repose
at midday."

I did not take warning, and at last sleepless nights came
and were followed by weary days and loss of appetite, and
my almost unnaturally excited and over-taxed strength
suddenly gave way. I remember one hot night, after in
vain trying to sleep, I rose, and sat in one of the eastern
windows of the Consulate on Mount Zion, ^.nd watched
for the rising of the sun over the Mount of Olives.

I waited for a long time, before there was any change in

326 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINIS.

the cool grey sky, or any colours on the dusky earth. Every-
thing was as still as death. Presently there was a pale,
golden tinge in the east, and the dark mountains of Moab
grew dim and shadowy in misty light, the brightness rose
tip into the heavens, which suddenly became orange, blue,
and rose-coloured. The taU, date palm-trees, so black and
so motionless a moment before, now stirred their green
fronds gently, and the delicate yellow grasses on the house-
tops and on the terraces quivered and shook as if just
awakened out of sleep, and birds fluttered from their nests
chirping and twittering in chorus, but it was some time
before the sun appeared above Mount Olivet. That was on
the 26th of May. Afterwards I became weaker, and weaker,
taking no note of time, sometimes riding out very gently
into an olive-grove to rest under the trees, while I idly
watched the children at their play, or the flickering shadows
of wide-winged birds, or the busy insects, creeping in and
out among the stones and the wild flowers. But there were
days when I could not rise from my bed, and sometimes I
thought I should die there. For two or three days I was
quite deaf through extreme weakness. The late Dr. Mac-
goWan was um-emitting in his attention, and I never shaU
forget the kindness of my nurses, of whom Mrs. Finn was
the chief On the 1 8th of June, the Armenian nurse, Emessa,
came to my bedside, and said gently, in Arabic : " Be glad
and rejoice, for now you will be well quickly. The Consul
has come, God be praised."

From that time I began to recover, and the next day I
rode up with my brother to Mr. Graham's little tower on
Mount Olivet, and took up my abode there for a few weeks.
It is a genuine Arab structure. On the ground-floor were
stables and a kitchen; and a vaulted chamber above,
with a broad window in a deep recess, served as the
sitting-room. A few stone steps lead to the flat roof, which
forms a pleasant terrace, and is protected by a low wall, as
are most of these flat roofs, and as they must have been
anciently, in obedience to the law : " When thou huildest a
new house, then thou shaU make a battlementfor thy roof, that

^ DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 327

thou brtnff not blood upon thine house, if any rnan fall from
thence,'* — ^Deut. xxii. 8. From this terrace we had almost a
bird's-eye view of Jerusalem. Looking down the slope of
OUvet, sprinkled with trees and rugged with rocks, we saw
the deep valley of Jehoshaphat, which separated us from
the city.

Mr. Graham and my brother went into the city every
morning, and I used to sit in the window-seat sweeping
the landscape with an excellent telescope, watching the
worshippers in the mosque area, or gazing on the hills
round about Jerusalem, until every one became as familiar
to me as the face of a friend.

The olives and fig-trees around were flourishing, the
pomegranates were in full leaf and blossom, and the fruit
was beginning to form. The patches of wheat and barley
on the terraces had been reaped, and thorns and thistles
were springing up in the stubble-fields. My friends from
the Consulate used to come sometimes to spend the midday
hours with me, and my brother generally arrived in time
for an evening strolL This quiet life brought back my
strength, and I could again use my pen and pencil with
delight, and with an untrembling hand, and by taking
regular hours of rest I found I could work and enjoy all
pleasant sights and sounds without suffering any ill effects.

On Saturday I noticed that large companies of women
gathered together on the slope of the opposite hill, below
the St. Stephen's Gate. They sat in little groups under the
olive-trees. They were all shrouded in white sheets, but
many of them took off their mundils, or muslin face-veils,
thinking themselves quite out of sight of strangers — ^but
I could distinguish their features through the telescope.

Eopes were fastened to the tree-branches and the children
hegan to swing with great glee. The women followed the
example, and seemed thoroughly to enjoy the monotonous
movement.

By midday there were more than a hundred women as-
sembled, besides groups of children, so restless that I could
not count them, attended by unveiled Abyssinian servants.

328 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

Several black men came out of the St. Stephen's Gate,
carrying provisions; they handed them to the female
servants, and then went away directly. Soon a* number of
circular trays were placed in the shade and covered with
simple food and sweetmeats. Water was poured from jars
over the hands of the women, and then they sat on the
ground round the well-filled dishes. They were not nearly
so silent over their meal as men are. They lingered over it,
and I could see that they were laughing and talking merrily.
Then they washed their hands again, and took coflFee, and
smoked narghiles while the servants had their dinner, and
they aU remained there, some sleeping and others chatting,
under the trees, till an hour before sunset, when they veiled
themselves closely and went into the city. It is a very
common practice in the summer-time to keep holiday thus.

On Friday, the 4th of July, the wind rose suddenly at
midday, and was so violent that I was obliged to have all
the casements closed, and even then the curtains were
blown about, and papers fluttered through the rooms, yet
the heat was intense.

On Saturday, the 5th, I went with my brother, early in
the afternoon, to the little village on the top of the central
point of Olivet We called at the house adjoining the
mosque. We entered a court, and mounted a steep stone
stairway, and reached a broad terrace, with high raised
stone divans, on each side of the arched entrance to a large
but low room. Carpets and cushions were quickly brought
out and spread on the raised seats, and a handsome Moslem,
the son of an Effendi of some note in Jerusalem, who was
staying up there for change of air, invited us to make our-
selves at home.

In a few minutes, the master of the house, a fine,
grey-bearded, turbaned sheik, joined us. After we had
taken sherbet, coffee, and a narghil^ he opened the door at
the^base of the minaret, and we groped our way up the
winding stairs to the top, and then stood in the balcony,
silent with delight at the wonderful prospect which pre-
sented itself. Looking eastward over the wilderness of

DOMESTIC LIFE 11? PALESTINE, 329

bossy hills, we saw a large expanse of the Dead Sea, with
the Moab mountains beyond, stretching far away north
and south. The sun shone magnificently, shedding a halo
of gloiy on every object. In the foreground of the view
a wely, or dome, stood on a rounded hill, which was
covered with olive and fig trees. This is called the Dome
of the Witnesses. Beyond this, there was no sign of life,
all was desolate. But, looking westward, we could see
Jerusalem, stretched out like a map beneath us, and there
were evidences of human skill and industry on almost all
the hills.

While we were there, M. L., the cancelli^re of the French
Consulate, and M. Gilbert, joined us. The latter said
that the Pasha had been to the castle, to call on us, and,
hearing where we were, had followed us. So we went
down on to the terrace to meet him.

Our host asked me, in a low voice, if I would visit his
hareem, as his wives had expressed a wish to see me.
With my brother's permission, I went. The old man led
me through a court, and up on to a terraced roof, where an
elderly woman, the wife of his youth, awaited me. He
went away, and she said: "Welcome, my daughter;
we have heard of you, and have been longing to see you
and speak with you." She took me into a little garden on
the housetop, and two handsome women, with features of
Egyptian character, came forward to greet me. They
wondered that I ventured to remain in the lonely castle on
the hill, and said : " We dare not live there. God has
given courage to English girls." I then inquired how many
English girls they had known. " We know you, and we
have known one other only. She was a girl who lived
in the castle for a long time with her father." I found
that they referred to the daughter of Mr. Barclay, the
author of the *' City of the Great King." They asked after
her with warm-hearted kindness. . »

Suddenly, while we were speaking, the two younger
wives started up, and went to the other side of the garden,
crouched down in the shadow of the wall, and made their

330 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

way cautiously down to their rooms. ' I said : " What
has disturbed you?" The old wife, who did not move,
directed my attention to a window, or rather a small
square opening in a house not far oflF. A man was look-
ing from it, evidently surprised to see a stranger there, for
he lifted up some children to look at me. The old woman
said : " Never mind, let us gather some flowers before we
go down." There were dahlias, hollyhocks, balsams, scavias,
African marigolds, everlastings, roses, sweet basil, and
myrtles, in full blossom. I made a bouquet of the three
last, and the woman said : " Why have you passed aU the
other flowers to take these?" I said: "These are the
flowers I love the best for their scent and for their beauty."
She said : " Even as you love one flower better than
another, so God loves one creature more than another.
You are one of the favourites of God, and He protects you
in all dangers."

She wore by her side a flat gold box, about four inches
wide and six inches long, suspended by a double chain. It
was engraved with sentences from the Koran, and she said
that it contained a charm against the power of an evil
eye, and against sorcery. I told her I never wore charma
She replied : " You do not require any. No one can hurt
you."

We went down into the women's room. The two young
wives were waiting for us at the wide-open door, and had
prepared coffee and sweetmeats for me. The room was
laige and low, without any windows. There were small
holes near the ceiling.

I saw several young children. They seemed very
much neglected, and the flies were allowed to tease them
terribly, clustering on the edges of their unwashed eyelids,
and buzzing about their sugar-crusted lips.

The sun was going down, and the muezzin cried out
from the minaret close by, so I rejoined my brother, and
we retired, to allow our Moslem friends to enjoy their
evening meaL I went several times afterwards, to sketch
from the minaret, and to see the women.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 331

On Sunday morning, Juljr 6th, I sat in tlie window-seat,
and watched the funeral of a Moslem woman. The pro-
cession issued from the St. Stephen's Gate. Some soldiers
and other men carried the open bier. The body, covered
with a sheet, was lying down flat, but the head was very
much raised, and the face concealed by a mundll. The open
grave was close by the wayside. A number of men were
grouped around it, and some women were watching from
the slope above, wailing wildly, swaying their bodies to
and fro, and throwing up their arms, as if pleading pas-
sionately. The clumsy bier was propped against a rock,
and the dead body fell into an awkward sitting posture.
Two men went down into the grave, and quite disappeared.
The corpse was then removed from the bier, the sheet was
taken ofif, and disclosed a figure just like an Egyptian
mummy. It was handed, not very gently or reverently, to
the men below, and then eight men held the sheet over
the opening. After a minute or two the sheet was with-
drawn, the men who had been covering up the body ap-
peared above-ground, the sheet was removed, and the grave
quickly closed. The crowd dispersed, and in a short time
all was quiet again.

It was a very hot day, and I was quite alone, for I had
been persuaded not to venture into the town to church. At
about three o'clock, I saw a large body of irregular Turkish
troops issuing from the St. Stephen's Gate. They rode in
single file down into the valley, and then rose up the sides
of Olivet, along the path towards the village above. They
all carried guns, and most of them had long spears. They •
were dressed with no attention to uniformity, but nearly
every one wore a red and yellow silk kefia, or fringed
shawl head-dress. I counted fifty-two in the first detach-
ment, but others followed in small parties, took the road
along the valley, and disappeared behind the garden of
Gethsemane.

A little before sunset, my brother returned, and, in
answer to my questions about the soldiers, said: "They
were on their way to Abu Dis, a village on the other side

332 DOMESTIC UFB IK I>ALESTINE.

of the liill, whicli is now in arms against El Tiir, the village
just above us. Several skirmishes have taken place during
the last three days, and a few people have been killed on
both sides. The Pasha is now determined to put a stop to
the fighting. His Excellency has just now told me that he
intends to encamp up here, and will have his tents pitched
near to this tower." He did. so, and shortly afterwards
his pretty green tents were to be seen under the ohve-
trees.

On Tuesday, July the 8th, Mr. Graham and my brother
returned from the town early and said : " Now, put on some-
thing that clay will not spoil, and rocks will not tear, and
we will take you to explore the Tombs of the Prophets.'*

Having equipped myself accordingly and provided wax
candles, we rode up to the top of the hill through the little
dusty village of El Tvemor
himself led the eldest boy with gentle firmness, and the
younger boys were conducted one by one by the soldiers.
I looked on in silence, and they did not see me again. My
brother then told me that he had received by post an order
to give up the boys, and had hoped to be able to execute it
without my knowledge. It was chiefly in anticipation of
this order that he had removed the boys from the Vice-
Consulate, that I might not see them made prisoners. He
added : " When I came in just now, I met the Governor ; he
seemed quite disturbed, and said : '0 Mr. Sogers, I beg
you to cheat your sister for us. The Abdul Hctdy boys are
with her J and I cannot take them from her. Her sorrow is
too great for me. Cheat her; and let the boys be left alone,
and I will come again for them.^ *'

On hearing this, I begged to be allowed to speak a word
to the Governor. My brother did not object, so I sent a
kawass to ask him to come to me for a minute, before
starting for *Akka. He kindly came, and I inquired
seriously what he expected would be the fate of the boys.
He said : " Because of their youth, and because they are of
a high family, 1 think they will be gently treated, and held
only till they shall be redeemed. I wHl myself conduct
them to the Pasha, instead of sending them with the
soldiers, and I will in your name speak in their behalf"
I said : " Will you let me have news of them as soon as
possible?" He promised to do so, and kept his word. In
a few days, a horseman came from 'Akka to greet me, in
the name of the Pasha, to assure me that the boys were
in good health, were well fed, and well lodged in an apart-
ment of the seraglio, and though they were not allowed to
go outside the city, or even into the streets, they walked
every day on the ramparts as much as they pleased, — ^they
were detained simply as hostages, and were treated almost
as guests. His Excellency wished me to know that he had
given them each new tarbouches, new shoes, and changes
of under and outer garments, and had sworn by the life
of his son that not a hair of their heads should be hurt

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. S95

I received several messages afterwards, all to the same
effect*

At this time we were busy making preparations for a
visit to England. We had made arrangements to spend
the summer months there ; but when all was in readiness
for the trip, the vice-consul found he could not leave his post,
and I was obKged to make up my mind to travel by myself,
for loud voices were calling to me from my English home.

All the Austrian steamers had been recalled, to swell
the Austrian fleet ; so my brother planned to take me to
Beirftt by a Bussian steamer, and then to place me on
board an English merchant steam-ship bound for England.

Hann4 my Arab maidservant, an affectionate girl of
seventeen or eighteen, who had been with me nearly three
years, begged earnestly to go with me, and when I ex-
plained that I could not take her, she said with pas-
sionate and impetuous eloquence : " Why did you make
me love you, if you meant to leave me ? Why did you
take me from my mother, and teach me to like the life

* To make this incident more clear, I must explain that Mahmoud £ek
Abdul Hady, after liaving been displaced on account of serious complaints
made a^^ainst him, had in 1858 been re-appointed to the governorship of
NabltLs by the late Koorsheed Pasha, for the consideration, it is said, of a
large bribe paid at the Serai. But in January, 1859, Mahmoud was
arrested without opposition and sent to Beiriit, and Riza Bey, a Turk,
succeeded him. In April a military expedition was sent to Arrabeh to
arrest all the leaders and factious members of the Abdul Hady family,
and aU those who were implicated in the Nabliis riots of 1856. The
people resisted, and the town was besieged by the Turkish troops, assisted
by two opposing and equally notorious factions. It is the Turkish policy
to set one interest against another, and affairs become very complicated
when at one time the troops are fighting for and with a faction, and a few
months afterwards are employed to fight against it. The town of Arrabeh
was not so much injured as we had at first been led to belieye, the upper
chambers only were demolished, and they were broken down by masons
employed by the Turkish officers, because these upper chambers, with
their battlemented terraces, which formerly made the town appear so
picturesque, had been used as fortresses by the besieged. (See p. 216.)
The power of the Abdul Hady faction is for the present destroyed. The
leaders are banished, but Saleh Bek and some others who had not been
active agents in the a£fair, have been restored to favour, and the children,
my prot^g^s, have been restored to their parents.

396 DOMESTIO LIFE IN PALE8TINS.

of the Inglese, if you must send me away to live like
an Arab again? I cannot live with Arabs any more."
I had not attempted to teach her English, and she had
only acquired three or four words. She had not in any
respect changed her mode of dress, but had learned to
appreciate neatness and order, and could not bear the idea
of the uneven floors of earth and the unplastered and
smoke-blackened walls of the houses of the poorer class
of Arabs.

I reasoned with her, and showed her how happy she
might make an Arab home, and how she could render me
a much greater service by remaining in H&ifa than by
accompanying me to England.

On June 2d she came to my bedside, before sunrise,
and awoke me, saying : " Ya dakhaliek, ya habeebee ! — ^the
steamer is here, and the day of our separation has come ! "

A number of our friends had already congregated at the
Vice-Consulate, to say good-bye, and an English traveller
had come down from the convent to accompany us to
Beirftt. -

We were soon by the seaside, in the midst of a noisy
crowd of boatmen, kawasses, porters, and heaps of lug-
gage ; for the French and Prussian Vice-Consuls x>i Hllifa,
and the Pfere Vicaire of the Convent of Mount Carmel,
were going with us.

I went oflf in the first boat, with Hann^ and a few
friends. I was anxious to hasten to the steamer, as I
knew that Miss Frederica Bremer was on board. I soon
found her in the salocJn, and though we knew each other
only by correspondence, we required no introduction. It
was a great pleasure to clasp her hand, and to hear her
voice. She speaks English distinctly, but with a musical
foreign accent.

I was in earnest conversation with her, when my maid,
who was by my side crying, murmured : " Who is that
stranger who is stealing from me my last moments with
you ? If she is not your mother, how can you look so glad
whUe I am so full of sorrow ? "

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 397

I soothed her by saying : " The lady is a stranger here ;
she is my friend, and is travelling quite alone, she will
land presently at HS,ifa with you. For my sake you must
try to help her. You, with the kawass, will lead her to
the house of Dr. Koelle, where a room has been made
ready for her."

With her usual impulsiveness, she kissed Miss Bremer's
hand, saying : " I am your servant, lady."

In about an hour I took leave of my H^ifa friends, with
the expectation of seeing them again in a few months, and
it was with conflicting emotions that I watched the little
boats going towards the shore as we steamed out of the
Bay. The deck of the steamer was crowded with Eussian
and Greek pilgrims — men, women, and children — ^who had
spent the Easter week in the Holy City, and to their great
consolation had bathed in the waters of the river Jordan.
In the pleasant airy saloon there were several passengers,
French, Italian, Prussian, and Swiss, most of whom I knew,
but there were no ladies.

Soon after we had started the captain of the steamer came
to me and said, speaking in French: *' Mademoiselle, to-day
is the fSte day of our Grand Duke Constantine — ^with your

permission the Bishop of will celebrate it, and we

shall be happy if you will assist at the servica"

Immediately afterwards, four Greek priests in black
robes came in, and spread " a fair linen cloth " over a table
at the end of the saloon, and placed on it a quaint old
Byzantine picture, representing some sacred subject. The
nimbus round the head of the principal figure was of gilt
metal, and there were several precious stones introduced in
the clasps and decorations of the dresses.

The priests handled this picture with great reverence.
They propped it up carefully, and placed in front of it a
silver basin filled with holy water, and three large silver
candlesticks, in which gilt and ornamented wax candles
were fixed and lighted.

The captain and officers in fuU uniform, the sailors, the
steward and waiters, and the first-class passengers stor

398 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

in a group together at the lower end of the saloon, facing
the impromptu altar.

Then a Bussian bishop and an archdeacon entered They
were powerful and earnest-looking men, and were robed as
gorgeously as if they were about to celebrate service in a
cathedral

They each had long brown wavy hair, which was parted
in the middle, and hung down in front so as to unite with
their moustaches and their thick beards.

They knelt down side by side in front of the picture
with their heads uncovered. One of the attendant priests
placed a large missal before the bishop, who read the
prayers and the Gospel and Epistle for the day in the Rus-
sian language ; then a second priest prepared a censer and
swung it, while the archdeax^n chaunted a litany. He
commenced softly and plaintively in a minor key, but
suddenly changed the melody to one of a more cheerful
but very simple measure, and the concluding portions were
like shouts of joy and triumph. The responses were very
heartily made, especially by the sailors, and the sounds,
evidently familiar, were caught up and echoed by the three
hundred devotees on deck.

The bishop concluded the service by pronouncing a
general benediction. He held in his hand a little cross
carved out of a piece of the rock of the hill on which the
city of Jerusalem stands. It is a rather soft stone, and is
about the colour of Sienna marble. The captain solemnly
advanced and knelt down to kiss this cross, then the bishop
dipped a finger of his right hand into the holy water,
and with it made the mark of the cross on the broad,
smooth, reverential forehead of the still kneeling captain.

All the officers in turn, and then the sailors went forward
with earnest simplicity and devotion to claim this benedic-
tion, and Mons. Aumann and several of our fellow-passen-
gers — although they belonged to the Latin and other
Churches — followed the example. Then the bishop went
out on to the deck to give his blessing to the pilgrims
there, and to let them kiss the cross, while the priests were

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 899

sprinkling them with holy water, and swinging the censers.
When the bishop passed through the kneeling crowd, the
pUgrims pressed the hem of his robes to their lips, and
looked up to him as if they regarded him as an angel from
heaven.

Then followed a material feast. Large cans of meat and
soup, and loaves of bread, were distributed to all the deck
passengers, in the name and for the sake of the Grand
Duke ConstantiBe, the Emperor's brother — ^while the first-
class passengers were invited by the captj^in to partake of
a champagne dijedner a lafourchette.

The temporary altar was quickly removed, the picture
was hung in its customary place at the en^ of the saloon.*
The table was soon spread with fruit and flowers, taste-
fully arranged. The captain led me to a seat by his
side, and the rest of the company followed. We were
twenty-two altogether, including the bishop and arch-
deacon. A very recherchS Eussian breakfast was served.
The made dishes, which were numerous, were composed of
curious combinations, and those which I tasted were
piquante but peculiar.

A toast for the Grand Duke was proposed, and the cap-
tain requested my brother to start an English cheer for
his imperial highness, and hip ! hip ! hurrah ! resounded
again and again through the saloon, echoed by Eussian,
French, Prussian, Swiss, and Italian voices, which mingled
strangely together, with varied accentuations; and the
pilgrims, on hearing, or guessing the meaning of the
cry, repeated it as well and as noisily as they could.

[I observed that nearly every one at the table spoke
French fluently, but I think the only foreigner present who
understood English was the learned linguist. Dr. Eosen,
the Prussian consul of Jerusalem.]

After a few other loyal toasts and complimentary
speeches, in which the Alliance was particularly alluded
to, the piano was opened, and the national anthems of

* Pictures of patron saints, or of the holy family, are invariably seen in
the saloons and cabins of Russian steamers.

400 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

Bussia, England, France, and Turkey were sung in chorus,
while I played the accompaniments.

We arrived at Beirftt in the afternoon, and when we
took leave of the captain and the ship's officers they
assured us they had never had such a pleasant passage on
the Syrian coast

We went to the Hotel de Belle Vue with our English
fellow-traveller. From the lofty terrace, after sunset, I
saw the Eussian steamer brilliantly illuminated. Its general
form was completely marked out by lines of light, and
fireworks were thrown in rapid succession from the deck,
while, from the residences of some of the Greek merchants
in town, rockets^ were rushing and whizzing high into the
purple night sky, and showers of stars were falling, all in
honour of the Grand Duke Constantine. His Imperial
Highness had been recently travelling in Syria with the
Grand Duchess and a large suita

The next morning I was in a pleasant, many-windowed
room, surrounded by oleanders and roses in full blossom,
and trees covered with large white bell flowers.

I was comparing sketches and notes of travel with an
English tourist, when my brother entered to tell me that he
had taken a passage for me in the Demetritis, a merchant
steamer bound for liverpooL I found it rather difficult to
keep up my courage. We went on board the following
afternoon, Saturday, June 4. I was introduced to the
captain, a good-natured, rough Sunderland sailor. I was
the only cabin passenger, and although I was on my
way home, I felt strangely desolate when my brother
liad taken leave of me, and we steamed away from the
shores of Syria; but I was determined to try to enjoy the
voyage, and I soon made friends with the captain, who
seemed almost frightened at first of the responsibOily of
having me in his charge, and was nervously anxious to
make me comfortable. I asked him if he had any books.
He said : " Only ships' books, Miss — ^none that a young lady
'ud care to read.*' However, he showed them to me, and I
found that they were very interesting guides to the Medi-

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 401

terranean shores, explanatory of the large charts with which
the captain was provided "When he saw how pleased I
was with these, he was at home with me directly, for he
was an enthusiastic and practical seaman. He took pains
to point out how we were steering, and to make me under-
stand some of the principles of navigation. He showed
me all his nautical instruments, and explained their uses,
and promised to let me see him take his observations every-
day. On Sunday we were out of sight of land, the cap-
tain made a divan for me of cushions, covered with a
Union Jack, tmder an awning on the quarter-deck.

There was a very steady, orderly set of sailors on board.
One of the mates, a seK-educated man, spent all his
leisure time in studying the rudiments of French, so I had
the pleasure of helping him over a difficulty now and then.

On Monday morning, the 6th of June, we anchored in
the port of Alexandria, where the Demetrius had to take in
a cargo of cotton. Here all the deck passengers landed,
with the exception of one man, a Jew of Aleppo, who was
bound for liverpooL The Captain wished to give him some
directions one day, while we were oflf Alexandria, but found
that he could not make himseK understood, so he requested
me to act as interpreter. I went out on to the deck, and
approached the solitary Syrian, whom I had not before
observed for he had occupied the other end of the ship.
He was a man of about thirty years of age, and appeared
very intelligent, but extremely timid. His dress, which was
scrupulously clean, was of tiie kind usually worn by re-
spectable town Arabs. When I was near to him, I said
in Arabic: "God save you!" He started with astonish-
ment, and, bowing down, kissed my hands vehemently, ex-
claiming: " God bless you, and God bless the voice which
speaks to me in Arabic ! I thought I was left here alone !"
When he found that I was going all the way to Liverpool,
he said fervently : " Thank God ! Thank God ! This is
good ! " After telling him, in the captain's name, that a
sheltered sleeping-place had been prepared for him in the
fore-part of the ship, I entered into conversation with him,

D D

402 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

and found that he was going to some Syrian merchants at
Manchester, to whom he had been recommended, but he
had never seen any of them, and knew no one in England.
He asked me how he was to find his way from Liverpool,
and begged me to help him; he made many inquiries,
which proved that he had no idea of the wide difference
which there is between life in the East and life in the
West He did not know a word of English, He wrote his
name," Shaayea'^ (that is, Isaiah) '^Ateyas^ in Arabic cha-
racters in my pocket-book, and a day or two afterwards
I wrote for him, in English and Arabic orthography, the
names of the three Manchester merchants of whom he
had spoken. I also gave him a letter of introduction
to a Syrian gentleman of LiverpooL From this time,
whenevei* I was on deck reading, studying the charts, or
sketching, Shaayea was by my side, and always watched
impatiently for my appearance, greeting me with the words :
" Ya dahhaliek^^ my protectress. He appeared to me to
be a very good Hebrew scholar. He had several printed
books and MSS. with him, and sometimes, at my request,
he translated passages from the Hebrew Pentateuch into
Arabic literally. Thus the time passed pleasantly. We
did not leave the Port of Alexandria till the 10th, for the
Demetrius had, on the 7th, been struck by the Meander, a
French steamer. Our figure-head and largest anchor were
carried away, and the chief mast was snapped in two.
The upper half fell on to the quarter-deck, where I was
sitting alone. It came down as steadily as the funnels of
the steamers do, when they stoop to pass imder the London
bridges, and so slowly, that I had time to watch it and
move out of its way. The collision was very violent, the
head of the Demetrius was lifted up on to the Meander and
lodged there for about twenty minutes, causing great agita-
tion and alarm, and a running to and fro on the decks of
both the steamers. The mate said: " The Meander has hurt
herself almost as much as she has hurt us. Miss ! '* The
case was amicably arbitrated, the necessary repairs were
quickly made, and the Demetri%is proceeded on her way.

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 403

We reached Malta on the 14th, and passed through the
Straits of Gibraltar on the 21st. * I had seen the Mediter-
ranean sometimes smooth and blue under a burning sun,
and at other times ploughed into deep dark furrows which
seemed as if they would swallow us up — a strong west
wind had prevailed for many days.

I observed that Eabbi Shaayea was by this time looking
iU and weak. I think the food which he took was not
Buflftcient. He had brought provisions with him, for he
could not eat food prepared by Christians, and he had
nothing but bread and Aleppo conserves, lemons, coffee
and tobacco. I tried to induce him to kill a fowl and cook
it himself, but he said he could not, because he had not a
properly prepared slaughtering-knife. I asked him if there
was any kind of food we could give him, which it would
be lawful for him to eat. He only answered : " I have plenty
of bread, it is sufficient for me.'*

The captain was very anxious on the subject, and often
said, in his good-natured bluff way: "I don't like to see a
man starving while there's plenty of good food to be had;"
and one day, as he was assisting himself to pea-soup, he
exclaimed: " I wish you could get ' Solomon' to take some
o' this soup. Miss — ^but I suppose it smells too much o' the
pork !"

On the 23d we were off Lisbon, and directly I went on
deck Shaayea came to me, threw himseK on his knees, and
caught hold of my dress, crying pitifully. I raised him
up, and said: "Why is your heart trembling, Shaayea?"
He looked terrified, and replied: "The sailors will kill
me. They will kill me. I am afraid of them 1 " I said :
" TeU me quietly Shaayea, has any one hurt you ? " He
whispered: "I am frightened." I said: "Indeed, Shaayea,
you have nothing to fear, I can protect you. Tell me what
has happened." He took out his clasp-knife and opened
it, and made signs as if he meant to say that he feared the
sailors would cut his throat I said: " Put away that knife
and answer me plainly Shaayea, Did any one on this ship
ever hurt you, or try to hurt you?" He said: " No — but

D D 2

404 DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINB.

they say dreadful words to me — they curse me!" I
answered: " How do you know that they speak bad words,
Shaayea ? you do not understand their language. Tell me
what they say?** He was about to answer, but he looked
cautiously round, and seeing that a sailor was near, busy
at work, he would not speak, but took my pencil out of
my hand, and wrote on the fly-leaf of a Hebrew and
Italian grammar, the Arabic letters which represent the
sounds, " J. A. K." I thought he intended this for some
Arabic word, and I pronounced it accordingly, and said:
** I do not think I have ever heard that word, what does it
mean?" He answered: "Hush, lady! it is not Arabic,
it is English." Then the signification of the word, which
looked so unfamiliar in Arabic orthography, flashed into
my mind, and I could not help smiling, as I uttered the
word "e/aci," with its true English accent. He exclaimed:
" Yes, yes, lady, that is the word with which they con-
tinually curse me." " Eabbi," I replied, " this is not a
curse, it is not a bad word, * Jack * is the English way of
saying * Yuhanna! The sailors do not know your name is
Shaayea Ateyas, so they call you * Jack,* and they would
call me by the same name perhaps if I were a boy." He
seemed satisfied, and was more composed. He smoked a
few cigarettes silently, as he watched my pencil while I
made sketches of the beautiful town of Cintra. But the
next morning the captain said to me : " Solomon wants to
speak to you I think. Miss — he looks so miserable, and is
watching at the door." So I went out to him before taking
breakfast. I found him more distressed than ever. He
told me that the sailors had called out to him : " HaUo,
Jack ; ** and all my attempts to reassure him were in vain.
He felt convinced it was a curse which they pronounced.
He asked me if I had felt afraid when I was first left alone
among strangers on this ship, he added: "I saw the Consul
leave you. Were you not afraid then?" I said: "No,
Shaayea, I was sorry to leave my brother, but not afraid ;
we are quite safe here." He answered: "You are safe,
because you are among your own people ; but I am a Jew,

'- VI vi

DOMESTIC LIFE IK PALESTINE. 405

and the Christian sailors curse me loudly/* I tried to
convince him to the contrary, adding : " The Christians of
England love the Jews, and our country is governed and
our laws are made jointly by Jews and Christians. We
have Jews in our Medjlis, and people of all creeds and
coimtries are safe with us;" but he refused to be comforted.
After this he would not go to the forepart of the ship,
but kept as near as he could to me all day, and at night
slept in a nook between some bales of cotton, which were
covered with tarpauling, and stood opposite to the cabin-
door. The captain kindly overlooked this breach of order,
and allowed him to do as he liked.

I perceived that Shaayea's timidity and weakness increased
every day, but his confidence in me, individually, was un-
bounded. *' Where are you going after you land at liver-
pool ?" he inquired. " To my parents in London," I said.
" Then I will also go to London, I will go with you," was
his answer.

I told him this would not be possible, and advised him
not to think of altering his arrangements, saying : *^ Before
you left Aleppo, you no doubt made your plans carefully,
and now you must persevere in carrying them out. You are
weak and timid from want of proper food and rest, but you
will soon be strong and happy again when you are with
your fellow-countrymen in Liverpool and Manchester." I
had asked the captain and mates to use their influence
with the saUors, to prevent them from startling Shaayea in
any way, especially with the terrible word *'Jack** I also
spoke to them on the subject, but although there was an ex-
ceedingly good feeling shown towards the poor fellow by all
the men, this injunction was naturally regarded as a joke.
However, I believe care was taken to avoid the word, though
when sails were being taken in, or hoisted hastily, an occa-
sional " Now Jackl^ or " Out o' the way Jcxk" escaped the
most cautious and kindhearted. Shaayea continued to
express an overwhelming fear of the sailors, and told me
how, whenever a Jew is alone among Christians, he is sure
to be murdered, relating instances which he said had

406 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESIINIL

occurred in Aleppo and Damascus. I tried in vain to
inspire him with courage and hope. The captain^ who
invariably called him " Solomon," used often to greet him
good-naturedly, but always in a very loud voice, and gene-
rally in broken English, with a word or two of French
which he happened to know, as if he had the idea that in
addressing a foreigner, it was only necessary to speak very
loudly, and in some foreign language.

It was this habit, I believe, which caused Sheiayea erro-
neously to imagine that the captain was angry with him.
He used often to exclaim : " I pray you, lady, ask the
captain to forgive me!" and at my request the captain
sometimes came out to comfort him, when he would tap
him on the shoulder and say : " All right old fellow, you
not enough mangezl'^ or, if it were in the evening, he
would say : " Cheer up Solomon, it's aU right, you'll be
better to-morrow, Dormez! BormjezT^ On the eveniDg of
the 25th of June, Shaayea startled me by declaring himself
a Christian. I said : " Shaayea, for what reason do you say
you are a Christian?" He astonished me still more by
answering: " For the sake of the Messiah," and added, " Tell
the captain, I pray you, that I am a Christian, and then he
will not be angry with me any more." I said : " I assure
you Shaayea^ the captain is not, and never has been angry
with you, and whether you are Moslem, a Christian, or a
Jew, you are as safe in his ship, as if you were in your
home at Aleppo, and if you could understand his language
you would know how kind he is." But he urged me
still, and J consented to tell the captain what he had said,
though I could very clearly see that he was only prompted
to make this declaration by excessive and ill-grounded fear.
I did all I could to inspire him with confidence. I re-
minded him of the courage of David, and of Daniel, when
they were in real danger, and of their trust in God. I told
him he might take food from us without doing violence to
his conscience by calling himself a Christian, I said : " I
think, if Eabbi Moossa himself could speak to you, he
would say : ' Peace be upon you, Shaayea — eat that you

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PAUESTINB. 407

may Uve/" I added, "Eemember how David and his
attendants, when they where hungry, did eat even of the
consecrated bread/* He said : " God bless you, my pro-
tectress." Soon afterwards he took a cup of coffee from the
steward, as he had frequently done before, and smoked a
cigarette. He seemed more peaceful than usual when I
wished him good night

The next day, Sunday the 26th of June, when I saw
Shaayea, I did not refer in any way to the conversation of
the previous night, for fear of exciting him, but I led him
to speak of general subjects, such as the commerce, the
products, and the manufactures of Northern Syria, and
asked him to teach me the Hebrew alphabet. This amused
him for a little time, and while I read to myself, he sat
near smoking, reading silently from a Hebrew Psalter.
We had crossed the Bay of Biscay, and in the evening we
stood by the cabin door, watching the sun go down, red
and glorious behind the dark clouds which seemed to rest
upon the broad Atlantic. Shaayea said that he was soriy
that the night had come, and then complained of feeling
very low-spirited, and very tired of the journey. I told
him that after one more day we should land at Liverpool,
and I gave him my London address, saying that he might
write to me from Manchester to tell me how he was, whe-
ther he liked England, and to let me know if I could help
or serve him in any way. He kissed my hands and cried,
as if from extreme weakness* The captain requested mo
to advise Shaayea to rest that night in a sheltered place, as
there was a heavy swell on the sea, and he would be likely
to get wet if he remained in an exposed part of the deck.
I explained this to Shaayea, but he said : " I cannot go to
the other end of the ship, I am afraid." He seemed very
much agitated, and when the captain was going to his
cabin, Shaayea caught hold of him, and kissed his hands
and his feet vehemently, but the captain raised him up
and said: " Come Solomon, no more o' that, cheer up, be a
man ! Dormez ! Dormez !"

He asked for an effervescing draught, and I requested

408 JDOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

the steward to bring one for him, and he did so ; Shaayea
had taken one a few days before. .

At half-past nine or ten o'clock, I said : " It is late Shaayea,
you must go to rest now ! Peace be upon you ! " He
said: "Good night, my protectress." I answered, "A
hundred good nights to you, Shaayea I" He took off his
red morocco slippers, and placed them carefully side by
side on a ledge, and then crawled into his favourite nook
between the cotton bales, and covered himself with his
wadded quilt I never saw poor Shaayea again ! On the
following morning, as soon as I opened my door, I called
to the steward and said : " How is Solomon this morning,
steward ?" He answered very sadly : " I don't know. Miss ;
he's missing." I said: "What do you mean steward ?" He
replied: "Why, Miss, the captain has been looking every-
where for him, and can't find him — and he's in a dreadful
way — he's looked in every hole and corner. Miss, except in
your cabin ! "

On fully realizing these startling words, I re-entered my
cabin which contained two berths. I had always used the
lower one as a wardrobe, and I drew its little red curtains
aside with a trembling hand, hoping intensely, and yet
fearing that I should find Shaayea there, but it was not so.
The captain entered at this moment, looking very much
agitated. He told me that he had searched every nook in
which a cat could be hidden. He said he had never lost
man or boy, under any circumstances on his ship, and he
did not know what to do. I said: " Who saw Shaayea last ?"
On inquiry we found that one of the sailors who had been
aloft in the night, remembered to have seen Shaayea at
about midnight, leaning against the ship's side, bej'^ond the
foremast. He thought it rather strange, for he had never
seen Shaayea in that part of the ship before, but as he did
not suspect anything wrong he took no further notice. No
one else could give any tidings about him! I noticed that
Shaayea's slippers were exactly where I had seen him place
them on the previous night.

Every one looked sad and thoughtful. The general im-

DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE. 409

prei&sioii was that Shaayea had thrown himself overboard,
but I told the captain that a Jew was not likely to commit
suicide, and I suggested that some accident might have
happened to him. He begged me to go round the ship
with him that I might judge for myself whether there was
any place from which a passenger could fall into the sea
"accidentally. After examining every part carefully, and
making minute inquiries, I reluctantly came to the conclu-
sion that poor Shaayea had through excessive fear and an
excited imagination lost his self-control, and had either
voluntarily or unconsciously thrown himself into the sea.*

All Shaayea's property was collected together, I assisted
the captain to make an inventory of it and then it was
put under lock and seal

We arrived at the Liverpool docks on Tuesday morning,
June 28th. I had an interview with the quarantine officer,
and after having entered the name of the ''missing'' deck
passenger in his book in Arabic and in English, I hastened
up to London.

An official inquiry was made into the history of Eabbi
Shaayea's disappearance, by order of the Turkish consul at
Manchester, and as it was soon known that I was the only
person on board who had conversed with the poor fellow, I
was called upon to state all that I knew about him. I had
kept a careful journal on the way, and was consequently
able to furnish an account, which eventually satisfied the
inquirers that the balance of Shaayea*s mind had been
destroyed, by his continual anxiety and groundless fears.
I signed a solemn declaration of the above facts in the

* I did not know that emotional disturbance was the cause and con-
dition of insanity, or I should certainly have kept a continual and careful
watch over poor Shaayea, but I never suspected that he was in any real
danger, I was strongly reminded of his overwhelming dread of imagined
dangers while reading lately the very important fact, that " the common
causes of insanity are such as produce emotional changes, either in the
form of violent agitation of the passions or that chronic state of abnormal
emotion which pronounces itself in the habitually exaggerated force of some
one passion or desire, whereby the healthy balance of the mind is at length
destroyed." See Bucknill's Psychology of Shakspere,p. 183. Longman, 1859.

J?

4J0 DOMESTIC LIFE IN PALESTINE.

presence of a magistrate, whose signature was certified by
the Turkish consnl-^general in London, and a full report of
the case was made to the Ottoman Government.

The history of poor Shaayea, and many somewhat similar
circumstances which I had witnessed, prove to me that the
oriental Jews still regard blessings and curses with great
awe. Even a blessing pronounced by mistake was declared
by Jacob to be irrevocable, and Balak entreated Balaam to
" curse the people of Israel," as if he thoroughly believed
that a curse would act as a charm, and alter and determine
the course of events. Shaayea's case is one example, out of
many which I could give, of the excessive fear with which
Christians are regarded by oriental Jews, especially by the
Jews of Northern Syria. This is a sad and striking proof
that the Christianity of the East is not the world-embracing,
harmonizing Christianity which Christ taught.

INDEX.

Ablutions, 183, 185, 210, 223.
Abrahlm Sakhali, 166.
Abrahlm Jerrar, 287—243.
Abu Ghaush, 19, 64, 837.
AbvssiniAn servants and slaves, 36,

65, 377.
AfricaH foot messenger, 193.
African maniac, 108.
AMel Agha, 178.
Amran the Samaritan Priest, 244 —

277.
Angelina, the bride-dresser, 94 — ^97.
Ankit&r and the Crusades, 180.
Aqueducts, 55, 56, 259.
Annenian remedies for Cholera, 146.
Arrabeh, 216—236, 389—395.
Arrival at Jerusalem at midnight, 286.
Arrival of a piano at H&ifa, 351.
Art and poetry of the modem Arabs,

338.

B.

Bajeh, a few days at the, 375.
Bastreena, new year's gifts, 388.
Battlemented house-tops, Deut. xxii.

3 ; 826, 395.
Bazaars and shopkeepers of H&ifa, 99.
Bazaars and shopkeepers of Jerusa-
lem, 31, 32.
Bazaars and shopkeepers of Nabltls,

260.
Bazaars and shopkeepers of Yilfa, 8.
Bedouin adoption of a Jewish orphan

boy, 347.
Bedoiun bread-making, 200, 201.
Bedouin custom amed "dakhal,"

891.
Bedouin depredations, 177.
Bedouin encampment in tiie Valley of

Salt, 198.
Bedouin eyesight, 183.
Bedouin infants, 200.
Bedouins on the move, 51.
Bedouin song to a camel, 66.
Bedouin visitors, 172.
Bedouin women in the Valley of Salt.

199. .

Beds and bedding, 47, 152, 230.
Beit Lahm, i. e., Bethlehem, 41.
Beit Lahm, a modem home in, 47.
Beit Lahm carver in his workshop,

44.
Beit Lahm, a mother and infant of,

45.
Beit Lahm, pooulation of, 48.
Beit Lahm, girls of, 49.
Betrothal at N&sirah, 257.
Bible found in Jacob's Well, 267.
Biers, 145, 831.

Birthdays of Queen Victoria, 328, 374.
Birth of a child announced, 366.
Birth of Christ, 208.
Birth of the Imperial Prince of France

proclaimed in Jerusalem, 291.
Bishop of the Holy Fire, 801.
Blind man of Kefr KAra, 206.
Bread-making and baking, 70, 113,

182, 200.
Bread, Oriental reverence for, 154.
Bride-dressers, 94.
Bride from Damascus, the, 880.
Bremer, Frederika, 897.
Brothers and sisters, 271 — 273.

C.

Carmella and her African attendant,

381.
Carriage roads, 89, 56, 76.
Carver of Beit Lahm, 43.
Castle of Senflr, 237.
Castle of Shefe. 'Omer, 136.
Caves and caverns, 18, 49, 77, 125, 308

—310, 332.
Celebration of peace, 296.
Celebration of the festival of Sainte

Barbe, 363—365.
Celebration of the f^te of the Grand

Duke Constantine, 397.
Celebration of victories in the Crimea,

98.
Characteristics of Arab children, 189,

190
Character of the Samaritans, 248, 173
ChfUTQS and talismans, 46, 102, 252

182, 196, 200, 213, 330> 38L

412

INDEX.

Chess, 367.

Cholera at H&ifa, 145—151.
Cholera, remedies for, 146, 150.
Christening of Jules Aumann, 192.
Church of the Knights of St. John,

26.
Circumcision, 70.
Clairvoyants, 116.
Confession of a Greek Priest, 305.
Congregation at the Latin church at

N&sirah, 118.
Conjecture concerning ancient beds

and bedding, 47.
Conjecture concerning carriage roads.

Conjecture concerning the Holy Fire,

306.
Conjecture concerning the houses of

Capernaum, 47.
Conjecture concerning '' polished

comer-stones," 95.
Conjecture concerning Solomon's Ha-

reem, 822.
Conjecture concerning the "Nativity,"

208, 209.
Consequences of a dream, 151.
Contents of the storeroom, 153.
Convent at Beit Lahm, 41, 42.
Convent on Mount Carmel, 79, 150.
Costumes of Bedouins, 200.
Costumes of Beit Lahm, 44 — 50.
Costumes of N&sirah, 120.
Costumes of Shefa 'Omer, 135.
Costumes of the people of Jerusalem,

31.
Cotton fields of the plain of 'Akka,

141.
Course of the Kedron, 289, 290.
Cradles, 45, 77, 138, 230.
Crocodiles, 346.
Crusades, 129.
Crown of Thorns, Poterium spino-

sum, 170.
Custom House at TantfLra, 73.
Custom, force of, 365.

D.

" D^hal," a Bedoum law 391.
Damascus, Hafeefee of^ 380.
Dances at funends, 156, 157, 165.
Dances at weddings and f6tes, 93,

132, 228.
" Dar el Ben&t," house of girls, 321.
" Daughters of sound," 112.
" Daughters of the hills," 111.
Day of ill luck, 363.
Death at midnight, 144.
Death occasioned by grief, 157.
Death of Abrahlm Sakhali. 155.
Death of Elias Sakhali, 162.
Death of KhalU SakhaH, 166.

Demetrius, the S. S., 400.

Denimciation of black lace mittens, 97.

Dinner in a hareem, 222.

Dinner with D. Tannoos, 274.

Dinner with Salihh Agha, 179, 185.

Divination dictionary, 105.

Dr. Levisohn and the Samaritan Pen-
tateuch, 387.

" Dome of the Rock," 34, 377.

Dora, 75.

Dreams and their interpretations, 105,
15L

Druzes, 141, 142, 379, 384.

E.
Earthquake, 360.

Easter at Jerusalem, 291, 296—306.
Easter service&at the Holy Sepulchre,

298.
Education of native boys, 139, 175,

355.
Education of native girls, 178, 339,

367.
Education of young Jewesses, 311 —

316.
Elias Sakhali, 160.
Encampment of Bedouins, 198.
Encampment of Bishop Gobat, 28.
Encampment of Gipsies, 212.
Encampmentof wandering Arabs, 820.
Encampment on the Talil^yeh, 21 , 36.
En Bogel and the Brook Kedron, 289,

310.
Erinna the Hermit, 124—126.
European colony at H&ifa, 86.
European homes in Jerusalem, 35.
Evening prayers at a Moslem village,

349.
Evening prayers of Moslems and

Christians, 188.
Exhibition of a performing goat, 69.
Eyesight and disease of the eyes, 32,

175, 182, 206.

F.

Farewell entertainment at Urtas, 335.

False alarm, 89, 269.

Feast of Sainte Barbe, 363.

Feast of Tabernacles, 260.

Feast of the Passover, 249, 250, 276.

Fdtes at the French Consulate, 193,

292.
Fdte of the Grand Duke Constantino,

397—400.
Fdtes on the Queen's Birthday, 323,

374.
Fight in the Church of the Sepulchre,

302.
Fire-worshippers, 306.
First-born sons, 12, 45, 46, 299.
First sight of Jerusalem, 21.

JSVEX.

413

Force of custom, 865.

Foundation of a Native Society for the

DifEusion of Useful Knowledge, 371*
Four wives of Sheik Abdallah, 103.
Free-thought among the Moslems,

190, 264.
Funeral processions,. 144, 145. 147,

166, 831.
Funeral services, 158, 166.
Funeral songs and dances, 164, 165.
Furhah Giammal and her love-letter,

9, 376.

G.

Garden at H&lfa, 107.

Garden at Nabltis, 270.

Gardens at Y&fa, 14, 889.

Grardens of Solomon, 52.

Gates of Jerusalem, 63, 286, 291.

Gazelle hunt, 182--186.

Gipsies, 212, 213.

Girls at the Jewish schools, 811, 316.

Girls of Beit Lahm, 49.

Girls of Bethany and Siloam, 32.

Girls of Kefr K&ra, 205.

Girls, education of, 173, 189, 339,
367.

Goat, performing, 69.

Government of Nabliis, 215, 216, 395.

Government of Syria, 160 — ^162.

Grass on the house-tops, 169.

Greek and Armenian pilgrims, 299,
306.

Greek and Latm clergy, 86, 97, 133,
305.

Greek Feasts, 86, 298, 365, 397.

Greek gaixleners and Jewish builders,
20.

Greetings at the Gate of H&ifa, 83.

Growth of Russian influence in Pales-
tine, 386.

Guest-chambers, 15, 130, 177, 271.

H.

Hafeefee, the bride, 380.

H&i&, 80.

" Hallo, Jack," 404.

Hareem at Arrabeh, 218—235.

Hareem at Kefr K^, 205,

Hareem at Sen 278.
Mohammed Bek of Hdifa, 98, 99, 102,

144.
Monks of Mount Oarmel, 79.
Moses Montefiora (Sir), 58, 311.
Moslem funerals, 145, 147, 331.
Moslem prayers, 185, 188, 190, 210,

232, 827, 349.
Moslem rosaries, 190.
Moslem women, 100, 106, 218—235,

367-370.
Mother and babe at Arrabeh, 229.
Mother and babe at Beit Lahm, 45.
Mother and babe at H&ifa, 866, 382.
Mother and babe at Y^fa, 12.
Mount Carmel, 76, 110, 150.
Mount Olivet, 21, 826—334.
Mount Tabor, 123—127.

N.

NabWui, 241—276, 298—296.

Names, 46, 347.

Native schools, 139, 175.

Native servants,, 15, 85, 39, 62, 352,

377.
Nativity, the, 208, 209.
Necromancy, 116.
'' New brooms sweep dean," 143.
Nose jewels, nails and rings, 881.

O.

Olive harvest, 140.

OUve oU, 142, 261.

OUve-troes, 20, 225.

Olivet, 21, 326—334.

Opuntia, a specie of cactus, 13, 170.

Oriental enjoyment, 271.

Oriental ideas about the Queen of

Ehighmd, 227.
Oriental reverence for bread, 154.
" Our Father, who art in Heaven,"

231.
Out-door costumes of women in the

chief towns of Palestine, 10.

Overcome evU with good," 369.

«

P.

" Painting the eves," 96, 364.

Panic in H&ifa, 148.

Passover, 250, 276.

Peasant girls, 307.

Persecution of the Jews by Oriental

Christianfii, 189, 859, 410.
Peter MeshuUam, 818.
Philip's Fountain, 59.
Pilgnms, 296, 298— 306, 397—399.
Pillage of the Christiui quarter at

Nabliis, 294.
Piano at H&ifa, 851.
Polyganay, 104, 106, 363;
PopiDation of JBeit Lahm, 43.
Population of H&i&, 85.
Population of N&sirah, 128.
Postmen waylaid and robbed, 243.
Poterium, spinosum, crown of thorns,

170.
Prayers, 188, 190, 210, 231—235, 300,

842, 349.
Price for the head of Abrahlm Jerrar,

242.
Priest Amran, 244—277.
Priests of the tribe of Levi, 248.
Prisoners of war, 390 — 894.
Rt)fessional bride-dressers, 94.
Protestants, 30, 119, 258, 371.

Q.

Quarantine boat, 4.
Quarantine lodging at Yftfa, 5.

iin>Ex,

415

QuarantiDe, 148.

Quarantme at the Convent on Mount

Carmel, 150.
Quarries, 263, 848.

R.

Rabbi Shaayea of Aleppo, 401.

Rabbi Shaayea's mysterious disap-
pearance, 408.

Jlain, 68, 146, 162, 197, 202, 288—291.

Ramadan. 36, 48. 311, 320, 826, 374.

Ramleh, 16, 64, 838.

Reeds, 67, 127.

Refugees from Arrabeh, 389—394.

Remedies for cholera, 146, 160.

Remedy for mosquito bites, 67.

Reputation of N&sirah, 121.

Rescue of the Rev. S. Lyde, 296.

Roots of houses, 47, 117, 168—171,
826.

Rosaries, 190.

Ruins, 20, 26, 321.

Ruins of C8Bsiu:ea, 346.

Ruins of Dora and Athlite, 76, 349—
361.

Rules for Moslem &sting, 311.

Russian Hermit and "his man Fri-
day," 124—126.

Russian influence in Palestine, 386,
387.

Russian steamers, 386. 386, 396.

Ruth m the fields of Boaz, 46, 48.

S.

SakhaU family, the, 90, 166—167, 172,

362.
*' Sale by the broken ffroup," 316.
Saleh Bek and his chUdren, 364, 366,

367, 889.
Saleh, 86, 110—116, 146.
Saleh's Uttle sister, 117.
Salihh Agha, 178—186.
Salutations and kisses, 11.
Samaritan literature,t246, 246, 248, 387.
Samaritan Priests, 244, 248, 249.
Samaritan synagc^e, 246.
Samaritans, the, 244—277.
Samson and the thirty sheets, 10.
Sapphire bead and the white mare,

Scapularies, 196.

Scene at midnight at Kefr K&ra, 207.
Scene at midnight in a hareem, 233.
Scene in an Arab sailing-boat, 71.
Schools, 139, 311, 356.
Sea-shore, 187, 341, 846.
Seekmff a night's lodging, 202, 203.
Sel&meh, the chief ^est of the Sa-
maritans, 246.

Sen^, 236—240.

Sham fight, 297..

ShefSsk 'Omer. 130—139, 173—182.

Sheik Abdallah and his seven wives,

loa

Sheik Mflssa, and his ideas about wis-
dom and folly, 261, 264.

Sheik of Kefr K&ra, 203.

Sheik of Mount Olivet, 328, 834.

Siege of Arrabeh, 889—395.

SiegeofH&ifa, 87.

Siege of Jerusalem, 297, 298.

Sit Leah and her son, 12. *

Skirmishes on Olivet, 332, 884.

Smoking, 11, 28, 224, 284.

Soap, 142, 261.

Solomon and his Song of Songs, 822.

Songs, 66, 77, 182, 164, 226, 228, 301,
822, 362, 370.

Sparrows on the house-tops, 168-9.

Starch, 164, 222.

Stephani's guest-chamber, 130.

Stone for building and stone quarries,
263, 348.

Suggestions about Moslem women,

Suleiman, the tailor, 148 — ^160.
Simday at sea with Rabbi Shaayea,

407.
Sunday at YAfa, 67.
Sunday on Moimt Zion, 80.
Sunrise, 826, 848.
Supper with Salihh Agha, 179.
Sureya Pasha of Jerusalem, 886.
Sword dance, 166.
Sweetmeats, 88, 181, 193, 222, 242.

T.

Tabor, 128—127.

Talibeyeh, the, 21, 30.

TantAra, 78, 74.

Tent life, 21, 28—80, 86, 61, 198, 820.

Test for building stone, 263.

" There cometh a shower," 68.

Tombs of the prophets. 382.

Translation of an Arabic love-letter,

876.
Translation of Arabic songs and

hymns, 66, 164, 225—228, 273, 301,

376.
Treasure-trove, 116.
Truth, 306.
Turkish baths, 96.
Turkish soldiera, 240, 800, 304, 391,

394, 396.

U.

Urtfts, the gardens of Solomon, tf2,
55, 81&-323, 884-386.

416

INDEX.

V.

VaUey of Figs, 281.
Valley of Boees, 59.
VaUey of Salt, 198.
VeU of Ruth, 46.
VeilB, 8, 46i
Village oven, 113.
Village priest, 849.
VUlage supper, 350.

W.
War song, 228.

Wedding at the Greek church, 90.
Wedding prooessions, 76, 91—94.
Whirlpool, 860.
Whirlwind, 36.
White mare, 173, 174.
Widow and her children, 163, 862.
Widow and her son, 255.
Widow's petition, 84.
Willow-pattern cheese-plates, 122.

Wit rewarded, 273.

Women at the bakehouse, 181, 182.

Women of Kefr K&ra, 204, 206, 210.

Women of TantAra, 74.

Wreck of an Arab boat, 346.

Wrestling, 180.

Y.

Y&fa, the ancient Joppa, in sight, 2.
YAfe, a-13, 67—71, 339.
Yas^ Agha and his hareem, 101.
Yassln Agha's petition and proposal,
372.

Z.

Zacaiiah Agha, 351, 362.
Zahra and Uie violets, 270.
Zahuris, or clairvoyants, 116.
Zeller, Mr., 258.

Zora, the Samaritan bride, 244, 246,
251.

THE END.

R. CLAY, SUti, AND TAYJUOK, PJII1«XA.RS, ^UNi>uM.

1

^SGHA/

^ DS 1

OS 112.R7a CI ^^H 119 1

iMiiiiiiiii'liiiiSSiinEliiBii ^B^^^_J

3 6105 037 148 041 |^^H^|

]

DATE DUE

JUN

\<^.f'J

.■!i;i

1333

1

1

STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
STANFORD. CAUFORNIA

94305

