SOURCE: https://archive.org/download/paper-doi-10_1098_rstl_1759_0054/paper-doi-10_1098_rstl_1759_0054_djvu.txt

[ 5 2 9 ]

After a few days, obferving fome cough remain,
it feemed advifeable to give two or three vomits j as,
from late experience, they do not endanger a renewal
of the difcharge, and muft promote the expectora¬
tion of the efchar, or any extravafated blood; which
otherwife, by its delay acquiring a putrid acrimony,
perhaps mod: frequently erodes the contiguous veflels,
and, forming new ulcerations, becomes the general
caufe of consumptions, fubfequent to accidental fpit-
tings of blood.

I am, Gentlemen,

Your very humble fervant,
Lichfield, Dec. 17.1759. Erafmus Darwin.

LII. An Account of the late Earthquakes in
Syria: In a Letter from Dr. Patrick
Ruffell, to his Brother , Alexander RufTell,
M. D. F. R. S.

Read Feb. 21,
1760,

Aleppo, Dec. 2, 1759.

A S I recolleCt nothing in the way of
bufinefs, which I have not already
wrote you about j and as I know not when this
letter may get away, I fhall, in the mean time, give
you fome account of the earthquakes here, which
have thrown the people into a terrible confirmation.

The fpring of this year was unufually dry, the
fummer temperate, and the autumn, though the
rains came on towards the end of September* might

be

The Royal Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve, and extend access to

Philosophical Transactions (1683-1775).

www.jstor.org

[ 53 ° ]

he efiecmed much drier than in other years. The
Aleppo river has been very low all thefummer; and
its bed, from the firft to the fecond mill, is, I be¬
lieve, even now ftill without water. This pheno¬
menon I, at firft, thought remarkable; but have
been informed, that the fcarcity of water complained
of, during all the fummer, was cccafioned by driving
the river into fome rice-grounds lately formed to¬
wards Antab.

On the morning of the ioth of June, a flight
fhock of an earthquake was felt here, and, as ufual,
foon forgot; having, f© far as we know, been felt in
no other place, in any degree of feverity.

Odtober the 3 0th, about four in the morning, we
had a pretty fevere fhock (indeed the inoft violent I
had ever felt), which lafted fomewhat more than a
minute, but did no damage in Aleppo. In about
ten minutes after this firft, there was a fecond fhock j
but the tremulous motion was lefs violent, and did
not laft above fifteen feconds. It had rained a little
in the preceding evening.; and when the earthquake
happened, the weft wind blew frefh, the fky was
cloudy, and it lightened.

This earthquake occafioned little alarm amongft
the natives, and even with the Europeans was the
topic only for a day. But the fubjedt was foon re¬
vived, by letters from Damafcus, where the fame
lhock felt by us at Aleppo, and feveral other fuccef-
five ones, had done confiderable damage. From
this time, we had daily accounts of earthquakes from
Damafcus, Tripoly, Seidon, Acri, and all along the
coaft of Syria; but fo exaggerated in fome circum-
ftances, and fo inaccurate in all, that we only knew

C S3* 3 _

in general, that Damafcus, Acri, and Seidon, have
fuffered injury from the earthquake, though lefs than
was at firft given out.

Such flories circulating among the people, ren¬
dered them more fufceptible of alarm j and an occa-
fion foon offered, where they feared, that the worft
of their apprehenfions were to be realized.

This happened the 25th of November. The
morning had been ferene, fome clouds arofe after
noon, and the evening was remarkably hazy, with
little or no wind. About half an hour after feven at
night, the earthquake came on: the motion, at firft,
was gently tremulous, increafing by degrees, till the
vibrations became more diftintt, and, at the fame
time, fo ftrong, as to fhake the walls of the houfes
with confiderable violence j they again became more
gentle, and thus changed alternately feveral times
during the fhock, which lafted in all about two mi¬
nutes. In about eight minutes after this was over,
a flight fhock, of a few feconds duration, fucceeded.
The thermometer was at 50, and the barometer flood
at 2S-9, the mercury fuffering no alteration. There
was little or no wind in the night, the fky clear,
excepting fome heavy clouds, that hung about the
moon. At a quarter after four next morning, we
had another fhock, which lafted fomewhat lefs than
a minute, and was hardly fo ftrong as that of the
preceding night. The night of the 26th was rainy
and cloudy. At nine o’clock we had a flight fhock,
of a few feconds. The motion here appeared to be
very deep, and was rather undulatory than tremulous.
The ly th, cloudy and rainy. From midnight of the
25th, befides thefe now mentioned, four or five flighter
Vol. LI. Zzz fhocks

[ S3 2 )

(hocks were felt ; but I myfelf was fenfible of none>
till the morning of the 28th, when we had a (hort
pulfatory (hock. The fame day, at two o’clock,
we had a pretty fmart (hock, lading about forty fe-
conds. From this time, I was fenfible of no more,
though others either felt or imagined feveral (light
vibrations every day.

However violent this earthquake was, or rather, by*
the frightened people of Aleppo, imagined to be, it
is certain, that, excepting in a very few old walls,
the city bears no fredi marks of ruin; none of the
olded minorets have differed. Its effects at Antioch
were more formidable; many houfes have been
thrown down, and fome few people killed.

December 7 Ti.

HP H E earthquake of the evening of the 2 fth has
* proved fatal to Damafcus; one-third of the city
was thrown down, and of the people, numbers yet
unknown perifhed in the ruins. The greater part
of the furviving inhabitants fled to the fields, where
they dill continued, being hourly alarmed by (lighter*
(hocks, which deterred them from re-entering the-
city, or attempting the relief of fuch as might yet be
faved, by clearing away the rubbifh. Such was the
purport of a letter I read this day, which was wrote
from Damafcus three days after the earthquake.
Other accounts we have at this place, make the lofs
of the inhabitants amounts to 20,000 j but, in cir-
cumdances of fuch general horror and condition,
little accuracy can be expedted, and the eadern dif-
pofition to exaggeration reigns, at prefent, univerfally.

Tripoly has differed rather more than Aleppo;
three minorets, and two or three houfes, were thrown.

down.

[ 533 ]

down, while the walls of numbers of the houfes
were rent. The Franks, and many of the natives,
have deferted the city, and remain in the fields.

At Seidon, great part of the Frank kane was over¬
thrown, and fome of the Europeans narrowly efcaped
with their lives. Acri and Latakea have fuffered
little, befides rents in fome of the walls; but Saphet
(eight hours from Acri) was totally deftroyed, toge¬
ther with the greater part of the inhabitants.

Such are the moll authentic accounts we have
from abroad •, how much they contribute to calm the
minds of the people at Aleppo, you may eafily ima¬
gine. Since the afternoon of the 28 th, feveral flight
mocks have been every day felt, and many more
formed by the power of imagination: for my own
part, I have fince that time perceived none, except¬
ing one the evening of the 5 th, which was pretty
ftrong, but lafted not above twenty fecoads. The
weather, for thefe two days, has been gloomy and
rainy; a change which people are willing to flatter
themfelves is favourable. It often lightens in the
night, and thunder is heard at a great diftance.

ExtraB from another Letter of Dr. Patrick
Ruffell, to Dr. Alexander Ruffell, dated
at Aleppo, 29 March 1760.

TN my laft, of the 7th of December, I gave you a full
account of the earthquakes, which have occafioned
an univerfal panic all over Syria. There were feveral
other fliocks in December,.and a few very flight ones
in January: fince which time, all has been quiet.

Z z z 2 Except-

[ 534 ]

Excepting a few old houfes, none of the buildings
in Aleppo were actually thrown down j but the walls
of a confiderable number of houfes have been rent.

We have had the wetted winter I ever faw in this
country. The Coic has every-where overflowed its
banks, and is juft now much higher than it has been
known to rife for many years.

LIII. Remarks on the Bovey Coal: In a
Letter to the Right Honourable George
Earl o/'Macclegfield, Prejtdent of the Roy al
Society. By Jeremiah Milles, D. D.
F. R. S.

My Lord,

Read Feb. 2 8, am 'HE defcription, which the learned
176 °. profeflfor Hollman has given the

Society *, of two remarkable ftrata of foflil wood in
Germany, one in the neighbourhood of Munden, in
the duchy of Grubenhagen, and the other near Al-
lendorf in Hefle, correfponds, in fo many particulars,
with fome ftrata, difcovered about fifteen years ago,
in Devon fh ire, that it fuggefted to me a doubt, whe¬
ther thofe German ftrata were really (what the
learned ptofeflbr fuppofes them) foflil wood, and
formerly a vegetable fubllance, or (what he fays the
miners call them) foflil coal. The reafons, on which
this doubt is founded, are fubmitted to the judgment
of your Lordfhip, and the Society, in the following

* See the above, N° xlix. p. 506.

4

account

