SOURCE: https://archive.org/download/AnnalsOfPalestine1821to1841SpyridonRecountsTheEarthquakeOf1834/AnnalsOfPalestine1821to1841_Spyridon_RecountsTheEarthquake%20of%201834_djvu.txt

62

Journal of the Palestine (Oriental Society

XVIII

On the ground the scattered bones are slowly joining together,
bone to bone. We already see some heads and limbs, and they in
turn unite into whole bodies. Three of them are lying on the
ground next to the right mountain ridge. But there is still no life
in them. This next action is shown further to the right: again
three dead bodies are lying on the ground and from the sky three
winged beings are descending upon them. One of these three genii
is shown approaching one of the bodies and lifting his head, in
order to breathe life into it. The next step is represented by the
standing man. As in the case of the genii where one of them is
shown in action, here again the standing man represents one of
the dead bodies risen from the dead ; the hand of God is extended
towards him. On the other side of the mountains, all the dead
bodies aie standing revivified, and the hand of God decends upon
each of them. Using the words of the prophecy of Ezekiel (?7 n )
the whole house of Israel has come to life.

With this interpretation in mind, Ezekiel is represented only
twice, once in the act of calling upon the people of Israel to repent,
and the second time in the Valley of Dry Bones. The three dead
bodies lying on the ground are a representation of the multitude,
as is often the case in ancient art, where a figure thrice repeated
stands for the plurality. The genius bending over one of the dead
bodies and breathing life into it represents the entire group of which
he is a part; the same holds true for the standing revivified man
who illustrates the resurrection of the three dead bodies which had
already been performed. This again would correspond to the
conception of art among the ancients, where one member of a group
may represent the whole. If my interpretation is correct, then we
have here an unparalleled religious painting, containing episodes
which though unconnected by time and space, are nevertheless
unified by the one cardinal idea of sin, repentance and forgiveness.

N. B. Unfortunately I hid no good photograph of the right part of the
panel in Jerusalem. The drawing shown in PI. XIII. was copied from Du Mesnil,
Revue Bililique, vol. XL.V (1936), p. 85, and completed on the basis of photographs
in our possession by Mr. N. Avh;ad of the Archaeological Department of th«
Hebrew University.

ANNALS OF PALESTINE, 1821-1841
S. N. Spyridon

(Jerusalem)
FOREWORD.

When first I came upon what we call the Mar Saba Collection
of Manuscripts, I was greatly elated, yet at the same time -depressed.
I rejoiced in reading the homely tale of Palestine to be found in
these Greek manuscripts. But then, while these manuscripts may
be accessible to many at the Greek Patriarchate, Jerusalem, the
language is a standing difficulty. The manuscripts are in the
Greek tongue, which, although once official in Palestine, is now
a dead language to most of the inhabitants of this country. Hence
the necessity of translating the manuscripts into a better known
medium.

An immense store of information is locked up in the Greek
manuscripts of the convents of Mar Saba, Mount Sinai, Mount
Athos, and the Phanar, and awaits the diligence of a scholar. The
present volume, which the editor hopes to be the forerunner of
others, is a translation of a part of a manuscript by the Monk
Neophytos. We know very little about the life of the author, except
the scanty information we can glean from his own works. FrorVj his
other writings we know that he came to Jerusalem from Cyprus
in 1801 and that he was still writing in 1846. Here and there,
throughout this volume, we get a glimpse of his life. He very
probably came to Jerusalem when young and certainly learned the
Arabic tongue. His Greek, though very distant from the language
of Homer, is still literary. His writings have a human interest all
through; in particular there is a great freedom of expression when
speaking of the religious communities or, as he calls them, "nations" ;
he is frank with the candour of a child, yet he never means to
be offensive, h'or this reason the editor has neither suppressed nor
changed anything in the translation, even where he decidedly

(58

I i-4 Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society XVIII

disagrees with the author's opinions. The translation- is very
literal, often at the expense of the English.

The translator is especially grateful to Archbishop of Ascalon,
Vassilios, Keeper of the Mar Saba Manuscripts, who has kindly given
access to the text. He also wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to
Fk. EuGKNb: Hoadk o, i ; . m. whose collaboration has made the work
possible.

Note. The following extracts, which form about two thirds of the whole,
work, are n valuable contemporary source for the history of Palestine. It
is the translator's intention to republish them at an early date, completed by
tlie remaining portions. The latter deal principally with the internal affairs of
the Brotherhood of the Holy Sepulchre and its relations with the other
religious communities.

Ic is evident that tin: author was a man of strong prejudices which led
him at times to use violent and wounding language. In the interests of
historical accuracy, we have thought it best to let his expressions stand as they
were written, and to allow the reader to make the necessary allowances
for himself.

The illustrations are taken from contemporary books of travel, notably
"Svria, The Holy Land, Asia Minor in series of Views, drawn from nature by
W. H. Banlett 1836" and "Picturesque Palestine, Sinai and Egypt," by Sir Charles

Wilson. R.E., K.C.B.. V'.R.S. EDITOR, JPOS,

XVIII

Spyhidon : Annals of Palestine, 1821 — 1841.

TWENTY YEARS.
1821- 1841.

BEING A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE HOLY
ORTHODOX CHURCH SUBJECT TO THE
THRONE OF JERUSALEM.
COMPILED BY YOUR MOST HUMBLE SERVANT
NEOPHYTUS OF CYPRUS
MEMBER OF THE BROTHERHOOD OF THE
HOLY SEPULCHRE
IN JERUSALEM.

It was the unhappy fate of our nation, already crueliy and sorely
tried, both at home and abroad, to undergo one more — by God's will
the last — trial, and to experience, as often before, murder, slavery,
confiscation of belongings and beloved offspring, persecution, outrage,
insult, scorn, terror, trepidation, and whatever else is read in the
history of the dealings of our people with the sons of Hagar.

It is well known that the cause of our late misfortunes, during
1 82 1, 1822 and 1823, was the wish to free ourselves from the irksome
yoke of tyranny and slavery. Many have written of the terrible
happenings in Greece, Thessaly, Constantinople, Asia Minor and
the Islands of the White (Aegean) Sea, as Chios, Crete, and Cyprus. By
the grace of God, I have taken notes on the happenings— yet not
all — in Jerusalem and in those places subject to the Throne of
[erusalem. My pen, albeit it stinks of ignorance, faithfully speaks
of deeds, some of which I have heard of, but most of which I
have seen with my own eyes. It is also the hope of this pen,
ill-favoured as it is by the Muses, to take up again this story and
relate what befell our nation in the years following the 1 period here
described.

YOUR MOST HUMBLE SERVANT
NEOPHYTOS OF CYPRUS,
MEMBER OF THE BROTHERHOOD
OF THE HOLY SEPUI.CHRK.

66

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society

XYIII

1821

That was a great and a holy day, the sixth of April, when
news arrived of the rebellion of the Greeks from the yoke of
slavery! The Locum Tenens of the Patriarch in Jerusalem,, Procopios,
with the Bishops in the Synod, tried by all means to keep the
news from getting abroad, but, on Good Friday, the Mufti and
the notables of Jerusalem got word by letter from Jaffa of the
rebellion. These we persuaded by entreaties and presents to
keep quiet and not to disclose the news until after Easter, lest
the Turks already seeking an excuse, might be perturbed and
cause trouble, whence some untoward accident might befall the
pilgrims.

On the second day of Diakainesimos (Easter Monday) we
hurried off our pilgrims to the Jordan River on their usual pilgrimage, 1
for as yet nobody knew anything. On the morning of the fourth
day of Diakaniesimos (Wednesday) they returned and in the
afternoon those of Samos and the other islands, having been
informed by sailors of what had happened, left Jerusalem. On
Friday morning they went aboard ship and sailed.

On the fifth day of Diakainesimos a courier arrived from the
IValy of Damascus bringing letters, the contents of which disturbed
Jerusalem. Rumours were rife among the Turks and we strove
to fill the mouths of those in power in an attempt to keep
the news from the people. Meanwhile we had hurried up the
pilgrims, who departed from Jerusalem on the second day of
Thomas (second Monday after Easter). But the Governor of
Jaffa had received orders from  we w iH s 'ay all of you,
from the oldest to the youngest, and we will destroy your church.''
With God's help we kept them quiet. By borrowing money at
a high rate °^ ' nterest ar| d by mortgaging our property we "put
silver int0 the moutns " °f tne Notables.

j n the same year, 'Abdallah Pasha of Ptolemais caused great
mischief t0 t ' ie Ghristians. He invented means whereby he
imprisoned trie Metropolitans of Ptolemais, Athanasios, and Benjamin
of Beir ut ' ^ e demanded such great sums of money that the
payment t ' iern ' ) ° t ' 1 i m P ove rished and in serious straits. That

1 ftiese ships, manned by Greek sailors from the different islands came to
tlie shore 5 of Syria, under the leadership of Hadzi Vasili in order to arouse the
inhabitant °^ the ^ L ' banc>n 10 revolt. Having failed in this, they came to
Beirut bombarded the city, destroying some houses. They then landed
and havioS looted fruits and lood and anything they chanced to find, they
went back to their ships and departed. ' °' ^'° n ' 2nykii>on: Annals of Palestine, :8>l-~T«/|i fc>'»

Egyptian entry meant freedom (as it really did.) The Moslems
alone could not hide their sorrow and sullenness (although they
danced with the rest), because they had .1 presentiment that Egypt
would use its power against them. They felt that they could not
continue to act as they wished, and that hereafter Jerusalem and
all Palestine would be reformed. They heard and saw things which
they hated to hear and see, namely regular soldiers wearing tight
trousers and carrying terrible fire-arms and musical instruments,
and marching in formation after the European fashion.

Ibrahim Pasha, leaving a garrison in Ptolemais, hurried on to
Damascus which surrendered on June 3rd. Thence he went quickly
to Aleppo which capitulated on July 4th...

Omitting other happenings in Arabia we return to the affairs
of the Brotherhood.

The year 1832 had a small rainfall. Corn was therefore very
scarce and dear, costing from the beginning of 1833 to the summer
of the same year, 130 piastres per kantar, which equals 45 okkas.

Those who had no money and corn, the poor, alone suffered. This
was true of the Brotherhood, who used to help the poor by giving
them bread. The monastery of St. Saba suffered because it needed
bread every day for 185 mouths, that being the number of the
males amongst the Ebedi} as from the beginning females were not
allowed to take bread. I was the Superior as I have already told
you, and once I was struck with a dagger by one who came to
demand bread without right. This was the last year that we
suffered from these people, for after the conquest of Ibrahim Pasha
the Monastery was freed of them. Of this, we will speak later.

1 It is said that tlic Ebidi were lonneriv Christians (roni Lazistuu. ! here
thev had been condemned to death, when our father St. Saba went to
Constantinople, lie interceded with the Kmperur Justinian and delivered them
from death, '['he Kmperor ^rave them as a present to tlte Monastery nt St.
Saba, and ordered them to stav there with the i r families and be slaves and
watchmen for the Monastery. They became Moslems many v«ar« aprti.

hi;

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Societv

XVIII

the opening of the whole door or THE church of tmf.

HOI.V SEPULCHRE 1^ THE ARMENIAN'S, AND THE ABOLISHING
OF THE PAYMENT OF THE KUAFAR. (JANUARY 18*4).

Glory be to Jesus Christ. Our Lord, who granted that in our
days should come the dawn of freedom. After the great victory of
Russia over Turkey at Adrianople and in Asia, a Russian officer,
named James, came to worship at the Holy Places. At the door of
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, he saw the dishonesty practised
upon, and the contempt shown to the Orthodox as well as to the
heretical Christians, and that even on Good Friday and Holy
Saturdav. Very much grieved at the sight, he left for Hgypt to
sec- Mehemet Ali Pasha, to whom lie narrated the state of affairs
and complained of the injustice and the wrong done to those who
wished to worship at the Holy Sepulchre, who were obliged to
pay Khafar (entrance fee) and bakshish. He reminded him that if
Russia, which w;is a Christian country, were aware of it, it certainly
would not be allowed to continue. Mehemet Ali Pasha, being a
prudent man, quickly saw the point and wrote a huynrhh
ordering the abolition of the Khafar, which in the future was to be
collected neither by the Muteiveth (Inspector) nor by the keeper
of the kev, nor by the Door-keeper of the Church: also that for
the future both sides of the church door should be opened so
that people might freely go in and out. The Pasha handed this
decree to the Armenian Boghos Hey.

He sent it to the Armenians in Jerusalem, who presented it
to the Governors. Tliev abolished the Khafar, and even the usual
ann paid at the tomb, and pilgrims of every nation entered with-
out hindrance.

On January nth. 18^4, the Armenians made a solemn entry and
opened both sides of the door. Since that time the Armenians
and ihc franks and we (rave opened the whole door.

T! 1 K ARRIVAL Of IBRAHIM PASHA IX IERLSALEM.
1 APRIL 12th ■ i.|th. [S;4' !

On April i2th, Ibrahim Pasha arrived in Jerusalem with great
show and pomp The representatives of the different nations went
out to meet him. From the citadel came the terrible roar of the
cannon, lor it possessed 55 of them. He did not enter Jerusalem.

j.P.O.S. xvnt

Plate XVI.

The Gate of the Citadel, Jerusalem iR?o

J.P.O.S. XVIU

PU« XVII,

The Church of the Holy Sepulchre, 1836

XVIII Spyridon : Annals of Palestine, 1821-1841.

and he did not camp in the place where the Pashas usually camped,
beneath the terebinth tree on the north side of the city, but he went
straight to Mount Zion where his father Mehemet Ali Pasha had
built a khan or inn. Some days before they had made this khan
ready to receive him. The next day, being Friday, he entered
Jerusalem through Mount /ion Gate (in Arabic Bab-\el-Nebi\ DaHid), in
Turkish Daut Kapisi) and walked down to the Haram-esh-Shenf.
Having finished his prayer, he returned to the Khan without
visiting anyone of the Moslem houses, to which he was heartily
invited. As he entered and left the Mosque there was a great
demonstration by the people, and the cannon in the fortress were
fired in salute. In the afternoon there went to salute him first the
Franks, as is the custom, and then ourselves with the Armenians.
Neither nation spoke a word to him of the recent right. The next
day was Saturday, that before Palm Sunday. At about the eighth
hour, when all the different nations were singing the Office, Ibrahim
Pasha unexpectedly entered the Church of the Holy Sepulchre out
of curiosity, accompanied by five or six soldiers, the Mufti, the
Bashkatib and the Mttteivelti. He first visited the Tomb, and
asked about the candles and sacred images which were in it. Then
he went to the Catholicon with great jov, as it seemed, and there
he stood amazed at the decorations and listened to the psalms. He
entered the chancel and passed through to Calvary. He walked
all around the church and went up to the place of the Armenians
to hear the wooden planks that were vised as bells. Finally leaving
the church he said to those who accompanied him : "A great and
wonderful thing is this church of the Christians."

CONCERNING THE ARMENIANS AMD GRKEKS WHO WERE INJURED
AND KILLED IN THE CHURCH OH THE HOLY SEPULCHRE.
(APRIL 21st, 1834)

Since the capture of Jerusalem by the Turks until this year
1854, God knows that the Orthodox pilgrims who came at Easter
were never more than 3,000. It was only the Armenians, (and they
only from 182; till 1834), who could count more than 4,000 pilgrims.

In the year 1 83 4 1 on Holy Saturday, there were at the Holy

1 In this year the Coptic Patriarch camu 10 Jerusalem accompanied bv
one of his bishops. His name was Antonius.

S!S Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society XVIII

Sepulchre 4,500 Orthodox pilgrims. Besides these, there were
Orthodox Arabs from Aleppo, Antioch, Damascus, Beirut, Tripoli;
and from the Lebanon, Catholics and Maronites, all together numbering
nearly 2,000. From Jerusalem itself and from neighbouring villages,
there were 2,000 Orthodox. The Armenians, Copts and Syrians
numbered 6,000. At the function of the Holy Fire, there were
present at the Holy Sepulchre i,,ooo people of all nations, including
the Turkish Police and Officers, the Kawasscs and other persons
attached to the Pasha, for Ibrahim Pasha was himself inside the
church with 300 soldiers. The place was- exceedingly overcrowded,
and over 500 Armenians and Arabs had to remain outside the
Church, As soon as the Holy Fire appeared, those who were inside
fainted from the heat of the place. The people inside rushed to
go out and those outside tried to enter the church that they also
might light their candles in the Holy Fire. In the rush, those who
had fainted were trampled to death, because they had no opportunity
to arise from the ground. Others, in an attempt to escape, tripped
over the dead bodies and lay on the ground, too. The Pasha's
men made an attempt to stop the rush, and so save the people on
the ground. They used the butts of their rifles and struck the
people on the heads. But it was all of no avail, for the crowd
in front were pushed on by those in the rear, who knew nothing
of what was happening in front. Many had been trampled to death
when word reached the Pasha who was sitting in the gallery of
the Franks, and who all this time was looking down into the
church and never noticed what was happening at the door. Now
he rushed down to get to the door. He failed to break through
the crowd with his men, for the crowd was welded into one body,
and being stout, he fainted from the heat and the rush. He had
the appearance of death, and his men, fearing for his life, took him
by the legs and hands, and walking on the shoulders and heads
of the people and with a great effort they finally brought him, half
dead, to the courtyard outside.

When the regular soldiers and the police saw the Pasha in
this state, as well as several of their friends who were being trodden
upon, they were enraged and charged the people with bayonets.
Cod was good to the people, and the Pasha, quickly recovering,
ordered the soldiers to desist. Then, taking water, he went to the

XVIII

Spykioon: Annals of Palestine, 1821 — 1841

,80

assistance of the wounded and ordered the soldiers to open a way
through the crowd, to withstand the crush from inside as weil as
outside, until the dead, who where lying in heaps in the Church,
like bundles of skins, should be taken out. Twenty-seven of out
pilgrims (Greeks) were killed; three from Jerusalem; thirteen from
Damascus, Beirut, Aleppo, and Tripoli and from other parts ; all
together, men, women and children, the dead numbered forty-three.
These were carried to the Church of St. James. Among the Armenians
there were over one hundred deaths because they, being near the
door, were the first to meet the rush. The wounded and crushed
among the Greeks and Armenians were over three hundred, but
these, with the help of water and vinegar, were saved from death.
We kept our dead until evering, hoping that some of them might
yet be restored to life, and then obtaining permission from the
Pasha, we buried them on Mount Zion. The Armenians buried
some of theirs on that day, and the rest they buried on the following
day, Easter Sunday. All nations were in grief and on all sides
wailings and lamentation were heard. The Pasha, as the Prophets
say, was turned to mourning and the customary joy to great sorrow;
God knows for whose sins, but of a certainty for ours.

We Orthodox carried out the usual Easter Service, at which
many pilgrims and natives were present. The Armenians did not
come at all to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre to celebrate the
Easter. Some remained to mourn their dead, and others went,
with grief, to celebrate in their Convent. Next day, many of the
Armenians and some of our pilgrims as well, left for home. Most of
them went on the third day after Easter to Jaffa, where, as there
were many ships, they quickly embarked. By the second Sunday
after Easter all the pilgrims had departed from Jaffa, despite the
thousands of Greeks and Armenians who wished to travel.

INSURRECTION OF THE MOSLEMS OF JERUSALEM, JUDAEA. SAMARIA
AND SURROUNDING DISTRICTS (APRIL 28th, 1834).

In those days there was a great uprising in all Arabia, and'
in all the villages around Jerusalem, in Judaea and Samaria for the
people revolted against Ibrahim Pasha, the Egyptian overlord.

These were the causes of rebellion. On the 4th day of

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Socictv

xvin

Diakainesimos (taster Wednesday) April 25th, Ibrahim Pasha
convoked all the leading men and notables of the districts of
Samaria and Judaea and put to them the following questions: "As
we, Moslems, have as perpetual enemies the Nazarene nations, is
it or is it not necessary for us to have a big standing army?"
They replied: "Yes, undoubtedly it is necessary.'

The Pasha continued: "If so, from whom shall we take men
for this army, from the Christians or from the Moslems?"
Thy replied: 'From the Moslems, assuredly.'
He said: 'You have answered rightly. Therefore it is
necessary for you, if you are true Moslems and wish the welfare of
the nation, to send in your young men from every city and from
every village, so that they may learn from their youth the art of
war and be trained in it, and so be ready in case of need."

Silence fell upon the meeting and for long they thought of the
replv : "Your order be upon our heads, but there is no need for
us to give our boys and young men for war. When the enemy
of our religion enters our country, all of us young and old, will go out
and fight and willingly shed our blood for our faith and our fatherland."

The Pasha replied: "How do you expect to wage war if you
know not the art thereof: "

They replied : "This art of war, known to our grandfathers,
who withstood the enemy and defended their country until now,
is also known to us, and as they once did, so we also hope
to do in the future.''

The Pasha replied: "War is not the place for a herd of
useless men : technique and skill are required. This is my decision.
One young man shall be taken from every five Moslems, who
shall be trained in the regular tactics of war. This order I want
carried out without delay, beginning here in Jerusalem."

Briefly, the idea of the Pasha was to get 3,000 young men
from the three districts, of Jerusalem, Judaea and Samaria, and a
proportionate 200 from the city of Jerusalem.

All the Moslems of these districts were greatly disturbed and
knew not what to do. Coming together, some of them decided to
revolt, saying: "It is far better to die with our arms in our hands
than to give our beloved children to everlasting slavery, without
the hope of ever seeing them again. "

XVIII

Spyredon : Annals of P»lestine, 1811—1841.

91

On Haster Saturday, in the evening, a message was brought
to the Pasha saying that in the village of Abu Dls near Bethany
some people had died of plague.

THE DEPARTURE OF IBRAHIM PASHA FOR JAFFA AND THE SIEGE
OF JERUSALEM BY THH FELLAHEEN
(APRIL 28tli-MAY 27th, 1834.)

The Pasha, fearing lest his army should be infected by the
plague and because he felt the planning of a revolt, left for Jaffa
on Sunday after Easter, for he had with him only a few sol-
diers. He gave out that it was his fear of the plague which
caused him to depart. He left a thousand soldiers in Jerusalem to
protect the city and the citadel. As soon as the Jerusalemites and
the fellaheen heard of the departure of the Pasha, they gathered
together from all parts and held council secretly as to whether
they should obey the order of the Pasha or revolt. Despite their
party feuds, they unanimously decided to revolt.

On Wednesday, May 8th, they surrounded Jerusalem, and
forbade the people to leave or enter the city. Soon, about ten
thousand men from Samaria, Hebron, Judaea and Jerusalem had
gathered to the ranks. On Thursday morning, they sent a message
to the soldiers in the citadel and on the city walls that they should
quit Jerusalem and go wherever they wished. The Bimbashis
(Majors) and the Miralais (colonels) replied that they had no
intention of leaving but would resist until death. Trie fellaheen
then began to fire on the city walls with their rifles and to attack,
the city, but they were easily repulsed by the regular soldiers
within the city.

At the beginning, some of the Jerusalemites showed them-
selves on the side of the Pasha, others said they were indifferent,
but secretly, all of them, as time proved, were on the side of the
fellaheen. The fellaheen kept up a continual fire on the walls,
night and day, so that the soldiers became tired of the long
duty, and the officers decided to withdraw all the men to the
citadel and leave the city walls to be defended by the citizens of
Jerusalem. The Bimbashi asked the notables of the city to come
to him and he explained the situation to them. They replied that
it was not a wise policy for them to fight against the fellaheen

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society

XVIII

and they pleaded all kinds of excuses, but especially the lack of
arms. The Mmbashi and his officers were quite aware of the fact
that the Jernsalciiiites and the fellaheen were in agreement on tlie
question of the revolt, so lie said to them:

"I want to know if you are on the side of the Pasha or
with the fellaheen.''

They replied : "May it never come to pass that we should be
on the side of the fellaheen, we are the force of our Effendi, the
Pasha etc.''

The Bimbas/ii therefore said to them: "If you will be faithful
to the Pasha, I will make you the promise that the Pasha will not
seek one man from the city of Jerusalem for the army-'' They
gave him so many promises and assurances that he went to the
Court and wrote with his own hand promising that he would
remain and defend Jerusalem to the end, and that he would not
demand one man for the army. This he signed, and the Mullah
was witness and surety.

The above took place on Saturday morning. The fellaheen
with the fugitives from Jerusalem kept up their attacks on the city
and attempted to capture it. Then the Bimbashi and the Miralais
brought into action the cannon on the citadel and on the walls,
and quickly beat back the fellaheen.

At six o'clock on Sunday morning, May 13th, there was an earth-
quake. It lasted but three seconds, but it was so violent that the
dome of the Catholicon was cracked in seven places and all the
plaster fell off.

The big dome of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre was shaken,
but being of wood and well bound together, it was not greatly-
damaged, 1 Many big houses in Jerusalem were cracked and many
fell. Part of the city wall, near the Mosque of Omar, fell. A
minaret fell in Jerusalem, and another one on the Mount of Olives,
as did the dome of the Shrine of the Ascension. In Bethlehem
the monasteries of the Franks and the Armenians and ours were
greatly damaged, especially the belfry. By God's mercy the beautiful

1 Three supports were broken near the base. The belfry and the arches
were shaken. Many ot the cisterns in Jerusalem were cracked and the water
tWiwed out of them.

XVIII

Spyridow: Annals of Palestine, 182 1— 1&41.

93

Church of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, as well as the
new pilgrim-house, was not damaged. 1 .

The fellaheen got frightened at the earthquake and stopped
firing for the moment, but the next day they began again, and so did
the cannon from inside. This continued until Saturday. Then
the people of Silwan and the fugitives from Jerusalem remembered
that there was an old sewer, now closed up for many years, leading
into the city. They gathered near the Dung Gate 2 and with great
difficulty they excavated and found the exit of the sewer which
opens within the city at a mill in the Jewish quarter. On Sunday
morning thirty-six daring young fellaheen and some from Jerusalem,
holding their swords in their hands, jumped up into the mill;
thence they ran to the Dung Gate, and breaking the locks, they
threw it open. The fugitives of Jerusalem and the fellaheen poured
into the city quickly without a word. The Bimbashi, being informed,
quickly summoned, with drums and trumpets, all his soldiers who
were on the walls and shutting the Gate of the citadel, they took
up their position on the battlements beside the cannon and made
ready for the attack. Then the people of Jerusalem, who said that they
did not have any arms, appeared fully armed and joined the fellaheen.

They did not rush to the attack of the citadel, but they went
to break the doors of the big house, where the Miralai and the
soldiers, who were appointed to watch the Gate and walls of the
city, used to reside. As the rebels did not find any opposition at
these houses they quickly looted them and carried off everything
they could find. The Jerusalemites hid their stolen goods in their
houses, but the fellaheen hurried to carry them to their villages
outside the city.

From the citadel the soldiers saw what was going on. They
resented the loss of the property, so opening the gate of the citadel,
about 500 of them rushed out with swords, rifles, and bayonets.

1 The wall of the Church was cracked near where the Armenians celebrate.
The tower of St. John Damascenus in the monastery of St. Saba was completely
cracked.

1 This is called in Arabic Bab-el Magharibtk, the gate of Maugrebins,
because many of these people lived there in olden times. It is also called the
Dunp Gate, because from there the rubbish of the dty was thrown into the
valley of Kedron.

78

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society

XVIII

On the Friday of Diakainesimos he departed for Damascus,
leaving the Mutesellim with too soldiers or so in the citadel.

Since the accursed Pasha was unjust not only to us, but also
to the Franks, Armenians, Jews, and even the Moslems of Jerusalem
and the fellaheen, he was hated by all alike. As soon as he departed,
therefore, the people of Jerusalem joined the fellaheen and decided
to revolt again. The Mutesellim was unable to collect the tithes
(which were in arrears in some villages), since the fellaheen resisted
immediately on the departure of the Pasha. The soldiers, who were
left to guard Bethlehem, insulted the women and tyrannized the
Christians, both Greek and Frank; some of the Moslems of Bethlehem
joined with the Td>amira in revolt, and a few of the soldiers were
killed while others were expelled. All this the Mutesellim wrote
to the Pasha, but because the latter was preparing to go on pil-
grimage he replied that the Mutesellim should collect an army and
attack and subdue the people of Bethlehem as best he could. The
Mutesellim appointed as General none other than Musa Bey, and
ordered the Moslem youth of Jerusalem to arm. Taking these and
all the troops in Jerusalem, and leaving only eleven soldiers in the
citadel, he set out with cannon and ammunition.

The people of Bethlehem and their allies blocked his way by
fortifying Beit-Safafa and other villages around the monastery of
St. Elias.

After three days the people were forced to retreat before the
artillery fire, and then the Mutesellim advanced, taking up a
good position between Bethlehem and Beitjala.

By this time most of those in Jerusalem, who were soldiers or
carried arms, were thinking of rebellion. Soon they had an
opportunity of putting their ideas into action. On June jth, some
men were sent to bring gunpowder from the magazine in the
citadel, where all of the ammunition was stored. About twenty
other persons, on the pretext of taking ammunition, entered at the
same time. They rushed the keeper, seized the keys of the magazine,
and then fell on the other ten men, whom they disarmed, bound,'
and locked up in a room. Some of them rushed up to the Tower
and shouted with joy, calling on the people to join in the revolt,
l'bey quickly armed others and placed a guard at the gate of the
citadel. Some of the people, seeing their wish already a reality, ran

XVIII

Spykidox: Annals of Palestine. 1821 — 1841

70

through the 5W« of the city arousing the old and the young alike
to a general arming, while others rushed to guard the gates of the
city to prevent the soldiers of the Mutesellim from entering on
their return.

The Moslems of Jerusalem were seen, fully armed, strutting
about on the walls, offering light to all and sundry, and firing
their guns into the air at random. Those who gathered in the
citadel, hoisted flags on the Tower, singing and shouting in triumph.
They prepared the cannon to attack the Mutesellim, who, mean-
while, with his soldiers, had heard the unceasing noise of the guns
at the citadel and on the walls of Jerusalem. Looking through his
telescope, he saw the flags {Sanjaq and Bairaq) on the Tower of
the citadel, and believed that the Greeks had arrived to capture
Jerusalem. Taking his artillery and soldiers together with those who
enlisted from Jerusalem, he quietly returned. On approaching the
city he was informed of the true state of affairs. Somewhat afraid,
he marched straight to David's Gate, intending to enter the city.
But to his sorrow, he and his soldiers heard the bitter word. With
curse and blasphemy there was hurled from the walls at him. "Get
back and begone. " The poor Mutesellim, surprised at these unexpected
events, and doubtful as to what he should do, humbly begged them
to let him enter and take his property which was in the Sarai.
Nobody listened to him, nor to those who were with him.

Having no piace to go, he turned to Abu-Ghosh 1 who gave
their word of honour that he could pass without fear to Ramleh
where reat fortress. It was destroyed by Ibrahim Pasha.

5 The Awlad Abu Ghosh, a family of over 300 years standing, had been
appointed guardians of the Jerusalem road by Sultan Suleiman the Conqueror,
and they together with the tax-collectors tool; toll from travellers, from Greeks,
Franks, Armenians, Copts, Jews etc. and from Moslem merchants. This toll
was abolished by Ibrahim Pasha, as well as other payments. He ordered that
in future they should not take a single para either from the Christians
or even the Jews. Unwilling to obey this order of the Pasha, they took
the toll by force. It was reponed to the Pasha and he imprisoned the two
brothers, Ibrahim in Acre and Gaber in Damascus.

XVIII

Spyhidon: Annals of Palestine, i8ii-i84'.

Ill

whom he had favoured, but who had rebelled against him and
returned evil for good.

Abu Ghosh was ordered to guard the roads from Jaffa to
Jerusalem ; so going to his village, he had perforce to call the sheihs
and fellaheen and advise them that in the future they should neither
revolt nor molest travellers.

JULY ist-50th, 1854.
The notables of Nablus were informed of the flight of Sheib
Qasem and his sons on the very day it took place. They saw that
they could not fight without a leader, so they went and surrendered
to the Pasha, who pardoned them. They then invited him to
come without fear to their city. The Moslem fugitives, who
were in Nablus, were afraid that the Pasha might find them there,
and punish them as rebels, so they ran away saying: "If we must
die, let us die in our own homes and not in the stTange land of
Samaria." Thev fled towards Jerusalem and were the unwilling
messengers of the defeat of the fellaheen. All of them were troubled
for thev thought of how the Pasha would treat them when he
arrived' When he had taken Nablus and the surrounding places, he
began to collect all the arms, and warned them that if in the future
a gun, a sword, or a dagger was found with anybody, death would
be the punishment.

During these days Mehemet AH was at Jaffa, where he brought
the Miitesellim of Lydda and Ramleh, and the Chief Sheihs of the
villages around Jaffa (also the MuUsdlim of Jerusalem, Sheib Yusef,
the son of Sheih Qasem), all of whom he beheaded because they
had been in league with the fellaheen, and had fought for days
against Jaffa. He would have executed some of the notables of Jafta
also, because they had joined the fellaheen in an attempt to kill
the soldiers and capture the fortress, but they escaped to Cyprus.

Regarding this latter affair, the exploits of the soldiers against
the fellaheen are worthy of mention. The soldiers were on the
walls, watching the manoeuvres of the fellaheen outside and the
people of the town inside. They captured some letters sent by the
townspeople to the fellaheen outside, containing instructions how
the latter should come to a certain point where those inside would
be ready to let them enter the city and drive out the army.

J.P.O.S. XV III

Plnte XIX.

XVIII Spyrjdon : Annals of Palestine, 1821— 1841.

&7

former died and nine of the latter. Later, it visited the Franks and
eleven Friars, five priests and six brothers, as well as six civilians
died. 1

In Jerusalem were three horrors: War, Famine and Pestilence.

THE RETURN OF IBRAHIM PASHA TO JERUSALEM.
HIS BATTLES AGAINST THE FELLAHEEN, AND
HIS DEFEAT NEAR SOLOMON'S POOLS.
(MAY 27UV-JUNE 4th, 1834)

Ibrahim Pasha was hi Jaffa when news came of the revolt of
the fellaheen and the citizens of Jerusalem. He decided to suppress
it and immediately summoned troops from Tripoli, Beirut, Ptolemais,
and other nearby places. Having collected 9,000 soldiers, he sent a
secret message to the Bimbaski and the Miralais in Jerusalem,
informing them of his coming-

On Thursday, May 24th, he set out from Jaffa, passed the
nighc at Ramleh, and next day, at 8 o'clock in the morning, took
the road for Jerusalem. He inarched along quickly, not expecting
any opposition. The fellaheen, however, watched his movements.
They withdrew from the siege of Jerusalem, and gathering from
all sides, they took up positions along the road and lay in ambush
for him at the most difficult places to pass on the way.

They allowed the Pasha to pass into the mountain valleys,
and where the road was very precipitous they rolled down huge
boulders from the top of the mountains, blocking the road to the
horsemen and animals. Having hemmed in the army, they peppered
ic with shot from front and rear. The Pasha stood aghast at such
an unexpected crowd and their disastrous tactics. Quickly recovering
his courage, he applied his tactics and was able to escape the
danger. He replied to the fire of the fellaheen with the three small
cannon and the bomb shells which he had with him. Never before
was he on such a dangerous road, as he himself admitted. Two
days and two nights were spent covering a distance which normally
should have taken five hours, during which time the troops suffered
severely from thirst and want of sleep. Having lost i,$oo men,
he at last, on Sunday morning at sunrise, sighted Jerusalem. He

1 Later, seven more Friars died.

98

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society

XVIII

pushed on and found protection from the enemy beneath its walls.
Bin he was apprehensive lest he should have to engage the thousands
of fellaheen from outside and the citizens from within. The latter,
however, who were cowardly, fled when they heard of his arrival.
Some hid themselves in the cellars of their houses, while others
rushed to get out of the city by the Getbsemane Gate, which had been
blocked up with rough stones from inside. In the rush to open it,
they trampled one another to death, much in the same way as the
Armenians and the Greeks did on Holy Saturday. It was laughable
to see what followed, but it was a just reward for their pride. Those
who once ran about Jerusalem like flying eagles, with swords in their
hands, now tried to run to Mount Olivet and escape with -their wives
and children, and some of them collapsed by the way from sheer fear.

Men, women and children, the old and decrepit, the Agianidts
and the Aghades — all fled from their houses and scarcely a person
remained in the city. They went out by Bethany and then wandered
in those solitary and waterless mountains. The heat was oppressive
and the Moslem villages would not welcome them even to a drink.
They were forced to go to a Christian village called Ramallah.
which is four hours' distance from Jerusalem. This village has 150
families of Orthodox Arab fellaheen. There only were they welcomed
with traditional hospitality; they received all that could be given as
long as they remained.

Now we will see how the Pasha was received in Jerusalem.

When the guards, who were on the towers of the citadel,
saw the Pasha, they rushed down to report it to the Bimbaski and
the others. As there were no rebels, either inside or outside, most
of those in the citadel ran up to the tower to see, with their own
eyes, the approach of the Pasha. They cheered and shouted, played
their musical instruments and trumpets, and then came out from
the citadel, sword in hand. But there was no enemy to be found,
for the fellaheen and the citizens had had time to escape. The
Bimbashi and the Miralais opened David's Gate and went out to
receive the Pasha, who embraced and kissed them from very joy.
The cannon roared out in salute. The Pasha came near to the city
but refused to enter. He stood in front of David's Gate under the
scorching sun. Neither did he allow the soldiers to enter, but sent
them to the camp on Mount Zion,

XVIII Spyridon: Annals of Palestine, 1821—1841

The Pasha was very tired and thirsty, and asked for some
water. A Frank from Jerusalem immediately fetched a little jug of
water. He drank and then gave it to his Miralais. Then came a native
Orthodox with a jug of water, of which the Pasha also drank.
Crowds of people, Orthodox, Franks, Armenians and even Jews
came out to see the Pasha who was their deliverer and saviour.
Not one Moslem, young or old, was visible.

The Pasha then asked the Christians who were present, how
they had fared at the hands of the rebels and if they had suffered
from them. Wishing him a long life, they explained to him what
had happened, and he consoled them saying: "Don't worry more,
for your father has come. I came especially for your sake. Where
are the Moslems of Jerusalem? What has happened to them all?
Why are they not to be seen?"

They replied that the Moslems were frightened of him and
had fled. He said; "But why do they fear? Who has any designs
against them?"

During this conversation the Armenians arrived with sherbet
and coffee, thus out-running ours because they were nearer. He
received the Armenians kindly and partook of their hospitality and
gave to those about him, and asked them if the rebels had maltreated
them. Thev replied that a few only of their houses had been
destroyed. Just then, the Franks and ourselves arrived bringing
sweet sherbet and other things. He again helped himself saying:
"I drank before because I was thirsty, I drink now for your
pleasure." He smiled as he said this, and then enquired if we had
suffered from the fellaheen, etc.

Having spoken for half-an-hour with the people, he bade them
good-bye and mounting his horse, he proceeded to the place on
Mount Zion where he had encamped before Easter.

An hour later a herald passed through the streets ordering all
the citi/ens, Moslems, Christians, and Jews to open their shops
without fear, and to continue buying and selling as formerly. On
Sunday, the Pasha entered Jerusalem.

The following day, he sent out a proclamation to all
parts telling the people that they had been pardoned and that they
should come and surrender without fear. He forgave their crime
and gave them time until the following Thursday to surrender, He

100

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society

XVHI

also wrote to the citizens of Jerusalem that they should return to
their homes.

Nobody came, neither the citizens nor the fellaheen. The
fellaheen tore up the proclamation and cursed the Pasha, and next
day gathered in greater numbers to carry on the fight. They
encamped near the village of Mahma, which is between Rama and
Jerusalem, about one hour's distance from the latter. The Pasha,
on learning their whereabouts, did not await their attack,
but straightway dashed against them with 3,000 men. As he
approached them, they began, as usual, to throw stones and fire
at him. When they heard a few rounds from the cannon, they
jumped out from behind the rocks and fled. They had time only
to fire one shot before they were surrounded by the cavalry.
Then, jumping from rock to rock like cocks, some of them escaped
while the rest were killed or captured. Those killed were 300, and the
prisoners 500. The latter were taken to the Pasha, who asked
the names of the leaders. Amongst them were 17 leaders who were
taken to Jerusalem, the rest he ordered to set free, saying to them :
"If you like, come again, and try your luck against me."

The Pasha returned to Jerusalem, bringing with him the
prisoners and the spoils, such as horses, mules, asses, arms, etc. Crowds
ot the Christians, l ; ranks, and Jews came out to witness the
triumph but there was no Moslem present The Pasha and his
army rested that day, hoping that the fellaheen had been frightened
and would surely ask for mercy.

But next day. Thursday, May 31st, they gathered again at a
place between Bethlehem and Bethel, called Beitjala. 1 Then coming
as far as the monastery of St. FJias, they set up barricades in the
quarries and in the olive groves of Beitjala, where there were
thousands of trees: each one made his own barricade from behind
which he was to fight. The line of fire extended from Rachel's
Tomb to Beitjala. Word of this was brought to the Pasha, who
quickly advanced against them in the early morning. When the
cannon opened fire, the fellaheen fired one shot and then withdrew
to the village of Beitjala, whence they again fled lest thev should

1 The place Beitjala was in ancient times called Bethel, because Jacob
came there and set up liis tents and lived on those mountains called Ephrau
(cf. Gen. 35 Note. This is probably incotrect-EpiTOR.

XVIII

Spywdon; AnniU of Palcitinc, 1 ttai— 184 r .

101

be surrounded by the soldiers. The army pursued them *r)d
entered the village, where the soldiers looted and robbed the
houses and killed men and women, although the peopk
called out that they were Christians. The soldiers were angry
with the people of Beitjala, because, when looting, they found some
of their property that had been stolen by the fellaheen. The
fellaheen had hidden the stolen property in the village for they
believed that the Pasha would not trouble it, since it was 1
Christian village. The soldiers, therefore, killed everybody they
came across, 33 men and women in all.

More would have been killed, if the Pasha himself had not
come up and put a stop to the killing and looting. Most of the
inhabitants of the village lost their property and their animals
(sheep, cows, mules and donkeys) and were left in poverty and
need.

The next day they came to the Pasha and begged of him
their mules and their asses so that they might at least carry wood
thereby. But the Pasha was told that they were thieves and
receivers of stolen goods, that they had a bad name and were
guilty of other crimes, so they got nothing.

In this second fight only a few from both sides were killed,
because the fellaheen, as usual, did not fight a regular battle or
hand to hand, but standing behind a tree or a stone they fired a
shot, and then on the approach of the enemy, ran for the mountains.

HOW BETHLEHEM FARED
(JUNE 1 st)

The people of Bethlehem were tired of supplying food to
thousands of fellaheen who came to the town every day, and
being also afraid lest they might come by the same fate as the
people of Beitjala, all of them, Christians and Franks, emptied their
houses and moved with their families into the monasteries for
asylum. The Franks went to their monastery, the Orthodox to
ours, and the Armenians to their own. The fellaheen enquired
why they had left. They replied that they feared for themselves
the fate of the people of Beitjala, and gave other excuses as well.
Even at the Monasteries they were forced to give bread, and
willy-nilly they prepared it and sent it out every three days at

102 Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society XVIII

first, and later every five days. Often the fellaheen told them to
come out and fight with them against the Pasha, but they replied
that being Christians and Rayahs they must not fight. The
fellaheen, therefore, decided on Sunday, June 3rd, to attack the
monasteries and rob the people of Bethlehem.

The Ta l amri* objected and swore that nobody would touch
the monasteries of Bethlehem while they were alive, and thev even
began to patro! the monasteries and guard the Christians night
and day.

The same day, the fellaheen held another meeting and spoke
of attacking the Pasha on Mount Zion, but being afraid of the
cannon, they abandoned this idea, and decided to draw on the
Pasha by a ruse, and run on to a place favourable to them and
there destroy or at least weaken him. On Monday morning, June 4th,
they gathered near the monastery of St. Elias, and the Pasha
imprudently chased them with 4,000 soldiers and one cannon as
far as Bethlehem. When the fellaheen had passed Bethlehem they
used the rocks and trees on the surrounding hills as barricades
and then opened fire on the army. The Pasha continued to follow,
and they, running on further, hid in the caves and behind the
rocks, and drew him on to the pl-ace they had decided upon, which
was Arras, 2 a very pleasant spot with springs and large pools which
they say belonged to Solomon. 3 Here the Pasha and his Miralais,
thinking that the fellaheen had fled completely, decided to rest
themselves and the troops for an hour. The horsemen dismounted
and watered their animals. The rest of the soldiers laid down
their arms and rested themselves after the heat of the day. In short,
alt of them were resting, without fear and without concern.

The Pasha had gone through much in the Morea (in Greece}
and had gained much experience in military matters. He suspected
an attack, and for safety, he took up a good position on the
highest part of the pools. Reshid Bey and his Miralais with some
1,500 soldiers went to the lower spring and there they sat quenching

1 Ta<-amri are said to be descendants of Thamar who lived in Judea.
Their strength was 1,000 guns.

* This place is one hour to the south-west of Bethlehem.

■ These were repaired by Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent, the conqueror of
Egypt and Jerusalem, who came to the throne 926 A.H.— 1520. He also built
a fortress with a wall around it neir the Pools,

I

! XVIII Spvridon: Annals of Palestine, 1831—1841. 108

I their thirst and satisfying their appetite, never suspecting that the

' enemy was lurking nearby.

Of a sudden the terrible voices of the fellaheen were heard,
who, rushing out from their hiding places, surrounded the soldiers

■, and poured a volley like hail into them.

Taken by surprise the soldiers had no time to escape and had
to stand their ground and fight, but they were powerless against
the multitude of fellaheen above them. They saw that their case
was hopeless and the Egyptian soldiers threw down their arms and
surrendered. The Ottomans, however, continued to fight and to
be killed until the Pasha, with the rest of the army and his one
cannon, came to the rescue and broke the attack of the fellaheen.

It was a bloody scene; the Pasha was defeated and in sorrow
he returned that evening to Jerusalem, leaving dead on the field,
the flower of his army, and the capable Rashid Bey, who had so

' bravely defended the citadel. tight hundred soldiers had been

killed or taken prisoners, while the number of the fellaheen killed
was unknown.

The fellaheen despoiled the dead, and took the prisoners with
flags and musical instruments to Hebron where they imprisoned
them. They were delighted and encouraged by their success, and
so became more daring. They besieged the Pasha in Jerusalem in
such a way that nobody could enter or leave the city. Even the
soldiers could not go more than one hour's distance from the city.
The fellaheen approached as near as possible but out of range of
the cannon. The Pasha did not care to follow them any more.
The city was short of provisions especially fire-wood for the bakeries.
All the bakers, being Moslems, had run away before the arrival
of the Pasha, so that the bakeries as well as the mills were closed
down

JUNE 4th-8th

The Pasha, being in great need of bread for the army, begged
the Greek, Frank and Armenian convents to lend him flour and
fire wood. The convents supplied him with flour, fuel, and bakers.

The fuel lasted but five or six days, and, pressed for more, the
Pasha ordered the soldiers to cut down the olive trees around
Jerusalem. He had a good excuse to offer for this in the feet

104

Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society

XVIII

that the fellaheen used them as barricades from which to fire on
the city.

Meanwhile, the fellaheen of Nablus and other districts made
some daring movements on the plains around Ramleh and Lydda,
where they looted ail the houses. The fellaheen also laid siege to
Jaffa and Ptolemais and captured Tiberias 1 and Safed 2 They robbed
the Jews, who lived in these towns, of immense property, as is
reported, for there was no one to offer any opposition.

The Arab Beduins around Kerak 8 suddenly attacked the
garrison of the fortress, which was 200 strong, and massacred them
all. The people of Hebron were more lenient, for having removed
the arms from their prisoners, they kept them in prison together
with the governor, and gave them food regularly, until, at their
defeat, they handed them over.

JUNE 1 ith— 21st

In Philadelphia i which in Arabic is called Salt (1) , there were
3,000 soldiers guarding the strong fortress of the town. The
inhabitants were unable to revolt at this time, for they had done
so twice before and had been punished for their daring.

1 Tiberias was once 1 large city, as may be seen from its ruins. It was
built by Tiberius Caesar, and is situated on the shore of the lake which takes
its name from the city. The city was destroyed except for one fifth of it,
which remained and was walled by