SOURCE: https://www.usgs.gov/glossary/earthquake-hazards-program?page=2



    Earthquake Hazards Program | U.S. Geological Survey

  Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

          Here's how you know

              Official websites use .gov

              A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

              Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

              A lock () or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

U.S. Geological Survey

        Science

                                                                                            Science Explorer

                                                                      Biology

                                                                      Climate

                                                                      Coasts

                                                                      Energy

                                                                      Environmental Health

                                                                      Geology

                                                                      Information Systems

                                                                      Maps and Mapping

                                                                      Minerals

                                                                      Methods and Analysis

                                                                      Natural Hazards

                                                                      Ocean

                                                                      Planetary Science

                                                                      Science Technology

                                                                      Water

                                                                                            Mission Areas

                                                                      Core Science Systems

                                                                      Ecosystems

                                                                      Geology, Energy, and Minerals

                                                                      Natural Hazards

                                                                      Water Resources

                                                                                            Programs

                                                                                            Regions

                                                                      Northeast Region

                                                                      Southeast Region

                                                                      Midcontinent Region

                                                                      Rocky Mountain Region

                                                                      Southwest Region

                                                                      Alaska Region

                                                                      Northwest-Pacific Islands Region

                                                                                            Science Centers

                                                                                            Observatories

                                                                                            Laboratories

                                                                                            Frequently Asked Questions

                                                                                            Educational Resources

                                                                                            Special Topics

        Products

                                                                                            Data

                                                                      Data Management

                                                                      Data Releases

                                                                      Real-time Data

                                                                      All Data

                                                                                            Maps

                                                                      Geologic Maps

                                                                      Map Releases

                                                                      Topographic (Topo) Maps

                                                                      Volcanic Maps

                                                                      All Maps

                                                                                            Multimedia Gallery

                                                                      Audio

                                                                      Images

                                                                      Stereograms

                                                                      Videos

                                                                      Webcams

                                                                      All Multimedia

                                                                                            Publications

                                                                                            Web Tools

                                                                      Alert and Notification Services

                                                                      APIs

                                                                      Data Access Tools

                                                                      Data Analysis Tools

                                                                      Data Visualizations

                                                                      Interactive Maps

                                                                      All Web Tools

                                                                                            Software

                                                                                            U.S. Board on Geographic Names

                                                                                            The National Map

                                                                                            USGS Library

                                                                                            USGS Store

                                                                                            Park Passes

        News

                                                                                            News Releases

                                                                      National News Releases

                                                                      State News Releases

                                                                      All News Releases

                                                                                            Featured Stories

                                                                                            Science Snippets

                                                                                            Technical Announcements

                                                                                            Media Contacts

        Connect

                                                                                            Headquarters

                                                                      12201 Sunrise Valley Drive  Reston, VA 20192

                                                                                            Locations

                                                                                            Staff Profiles

                                                                                            Social Media

                                                                                            Careers

                                                                                            Contact Us

                                                                      Email

                                                                      USGS Store 1-888-275-8747

        About

                                                                                            About Us

                                                                      Who We Are

                                                                      Our History

                                                                      Past Directors

                                                                                            Survey Manual

                                                                                            Key Officials

                                                                      Organizational Chart

                                                                                            Organization

                                                                      Mission Areas

                                                                      Programs

                                                                      Regions

                                                                      Science Centers

                                                                      Observatories

                                                                      Laboratories

                                                                      Science Support Offices

                                                                                            Congressional

                                                                      Statements

                                                                      Contacts

                                                                                            Budget

                                                                                            Careers and Employees

                                                                                            Office of Civil Rights

                                                                                            Doing Business

                                                                      Acquisition and Financial Assistance

                                                                                            Emergency Management

 Facebook

 Twitter

 Linkedin

 Digg

 Reddit

 Pinterest

 Email

Frequently Asked Questions

Label

        Menu

Label

      Close

U.S. Geological Survey

        Science

                                                                                            Science Explorer

                                                                                            Mission Areas

                                                                                            Programs

                                                                                            Regions

                                                                                            Science Centers

                                                                                            Observatories

                                                                                            Laboratories

                                                                                            Frequently Asked Questions

                                                                                            Educational Resources

                                                                                            Special Topics

        Products

                                                                                            Data

                                                                                            Maps

                                                                                            Multimedia Gallery

                                                                                            Publications

                                                                                            Web Tools

                                                                                            Software

                                                                                            U.S. Board on Geographic Names

                                                                                            The National Map

                                                                                            USGS Library

                                                                                            USGS Store

                                                                                            Park Passes

        News

                                                                                            News Releases

                                                                                            Featured Stories

                                                                                            Science Snippets

                                                                                            Technical Announcements

                                                                                            Media Contacts

        Connect

                                                                                            Headquarters

                                                                                            Locations

                                                                                            Staff Profiles

                                                                                            Social Media

                                                                                            Careers

                                                                                            Contact Us

        About

                                                                                            About Us

                                                                                            Survey Manual

                                                                                            Key Officials

                                                                                            Organization

                                                                                            Congressional

                                                                                            Budget

                                                                                            Careers and Employees

                                                                                            Office of Civil Rights

                                                                                            Doing Business

                                                                                            Emergency Management

        Latest Earthquakes

      Share Social Media

 Facebook

 Twitter

 Linkedin

 Digg

 Reddit

 Pinterest

 Email

Breadcrumb

                                            Earthquake Hazards Program

    Earthquake Hazards Program

View animations for selected glossary terms

                                          0-9
                                                        A
                                                        B
                                                        C
                                                        D
                                                        E
                                                        F
                                                        G
                                                        H
                                                        I
                                                        J
                                                        K
                                                        L
                                                        M
                                                        N
                                                        O
                                                        P
                                                        Q
                                                        R
                                                        S
                                                        T
                                                        U
                                                        V
                                                        W
                                                        X
                                                        Y
                                                        Z

A

Acceleration/peak acceleration

When you push on the gas pedal in the car or put on the brakes, the car goes faster or slower. When it is changing from one speed to another, it is accelerating (faster) or decelerating (slower). This change from one speed, or velocity, to another is called acceleration. Technically, then, acceleration is how much the velocity changes in a unit time.

During an earthquake when the ground is shaking, it also experiences acceleration. The peak acceleration is the largest increase in velocity recorded by a particular station during an earthquake.

Accelerogram

The recording of the acceleration of the ground during an earthquake.

Accelerograph

An instrument that records the acceleration of the ground during an earthquake, also commonly called an accelerometer.

Accretionary wedge

Sediments, the top layer of material on a tectonic plate, that accumulate and deform where oceanic and continental plates collide. These sediments are scraped off the top of the downgoing oceanic crustal plate and are appended to the edge of the continental plate.

Active fault

A fault that is likely to have another earthquake sometime in the future. Faults are commonly considered to be active if they have moved one or more times in the last 10,000 years.

Aftershocks

Earthquakes that follow the largest shock of an earthquake sequence. They are smaller than the mainshock and within 1-2 rupture lengths distance from the mainshock. Aftershocks can continue over a period of weeks, months, or years. In general, the larger the mainshock, the larger and more numerous the aftershocks, and the longer they will continue.

Alluvium

Loose gravel, sand, silt, or clay deposited by current or past streams.

Amplification

Shaking levels at a site may be increased, or amplified, by focusing of seismic energy caused by the geometry of the sediment velocity structure, such as basin subsurface topography, or by surface topography.

Amplitude

The size of the wiggles on an earthquake recording.

Arc

A chain of volcanoes (volcanic arc) that sometimes forms on the land when an oceanic plate collides with a continental plate and then slides down underneath it (subduction)

Aseismic

A fault on which no earthquakes have been observed.

Asperity

An area on a fault that is stuck. The earthquake rupture usually begins at an asperity.

Asthenosphere

The ductile part of the earth just below the lithosphere, including the upper mantle. The asthenosphere is about 180 km thick.

Attenuation

When you throw a pebble in a pond, it makes waves on the surface that move out from the place where the pebble entered the water. The waves are largest where they are formed and gradually get smaller as they move away. This decrease in size, or amplitude, of the waves is called attenuation. Seismic waves also become attenuated as they move away from the earthquake source.

B

Backarc

The region landward of the volcanic chain on the other side from the subduction zone.

Basement

Harder and usually older igneous and metamorphic rocks that underlie the main sedimentary rock sequences (softer and usually younger) of a region and extend downward to the base of the crust.

Bedrock

Relatively hard, solid rock that commonly underlies softer rock, sediment, or soil; a subset of the basement.

Benioff zone

A dipping planar (flat) zone of earthquakes that is produced by the interaction of a downgoing oceanic crustal plate with a continental plate. These earthquakes can be produced by slip along the subduction thrust fault or by slip on faults within the downgoing plate as a result of bending and extension as the plate is pulled into the mantle. Also known as the Wadati-Benioff zone.

Blind thrust fault

A thrust fault that does not rupture all the way up to the surface so there is no evidence of it on the ground. It is "buried" under the uppermost layers of rock in the crust.

Body wave

A seismic wave that moves through the interior of the earth, as opposed to surface waves that travel near the earth's surface. P and S waves are body waves. Each type of wave shakes the ground in different ways.

Brittle-ductile boundary

The depth in the crust where the crust changes from being brittle (tending to break) above, to being ductile (tending to bend) below. Most earthquakes occur in the brittle portion of the crust above the brittle-ductile boundary.

C

Carbon 14 age

An absolute age obtained for geologic materials containing bits or pieces of carbon using measurements of the proportion of radioactive carbon (14 C) to daughter carbon (12 C). These dates are independently calibrated with calendar dates. This is used to determine when past earthquakes occurred on a fault.

Compressional stress

The stress that squeezes something. It is the stress component perpendicular to a given surface, such as a fault plane, that results from forces applied perpendicular to the surface or from remote forces transmitted through the surrounding rock.

Core

The innermost part of the earth. The outer core extends from 2500 to 3500 miles below the earth's surface and is liquid metal. The inner core is the central 500 miles and is solid metal. (See also Earthquake ABC)

Creep/fault creep

Slow, more or less continuous movement occurring on faults due to ongoing tectonic deformation. Faults that are creeping do not tend to have large earthquakes.

Crust

The outermost major layer of the earth, ranging from about 10 to 65 km in thickness worldwide. The uppermost 15-35 km of crust is brittle enough to produce earthquakes.

D

Deformation

A change in the original shape of a material. When we are talking about earthquakes, deformation is due to stress and strain.

Dip

The angle that a planar geologic surface (for example, a fault) is inclined from the horizontal.

Directivity

An effect of a fault rupturing whereby earthquake ground motion in the direction of rupture propagation is more severe than that in other directions from the earthquake source.

Displacement

The difference between the initial position of a reference point and any later position. The amount any point affected by an earthquake has moved from where it was before the earthquake.

E

Earthquake

A term used to describe both sudden slip on a fault AND the ground shaking that occurs from the radiated seismic energy during the slipping event. The sudden slip can be caused by stress changes in the earth or volcanic/magmatic activity.

Earthquake hazard

Anything associated with an earthquake that may affect the normal activities of people. This includes surface faulting, ground shaking, landslide, liquefaction, tectonic deformation, tsunamis, and seiches.

Earthquake risk

The probable building damage, and number of people that are expected to be hurt or killed if a likely earthquake on a particular fault occurs. Earthquake risk and earthquake hazard are occasionally incorrectly used interchangeably.

Epicenter

The point on the earth's surface vertically above the hypocenter (or focus), point in the crust where a seismic rupture begins.

F

Fault

A fracture along which the blocks of crust on either side have moved relative to one another parallel to the fracture.

Fault gouge

Crushed and ground-up rock produced by friction between the two sides when a fault moves.

Fault plane

The planar (flat) surface along which there is slip during an earthquake.

Fault scarp

The feature on the surface of the earth that looks like a step caused by slip on the fault.

Fault trace

The intersection of a fault with the ground surface; also, the line commonly plotted on geologic maps to represent a fault.

First motion

On a seismogram, the first motion is the direction of ground motion as the P wave arrives at the seismometer. Upward ground motion indicates an expansion in the source region; downward motion indicates a contraction.

Focal depth

The depth of an earthquake hypocenter.

Focal mechanism solution/fault plane solution

A way of showing the fault and the direction of slip on it from an earthquake, using circles with two intersecting curves that look like beach balls. Also called a focal-mechanism solution.

See also moment tensor

Forearc

The region between the subduction zone and the volcanic chain (volcanic arc).

Foreshocks

Relatively smaller earthquakes that precede the largest earthquake in a series, which is termed the mainshock. Not all mainshocks have foreshocks.

Frequency

The number of times something happens in a certain period of time, such as the ground shaking up and down or back and forth during an earthquake.

G

G or g

The acceleration of gravity 9.8 (m/s2) or the strength of the gravitational field (N/kg) (which it turns out is equivalent).

When acceleration acts on a physical body, the body experiences the acceleration as a force. The force we are most experienced with is the force of gravity, which causes us to have weight.

The equation for the force of gravity is F = mg, at the surface of the earth, or F = GMm/r2 at a distance r from the center of the earth (where r is greater than the radius of the earth). G is the proportionality constant 6.67x10-11 (N-m2/kg2) in Newton's law of gravity.

When there is an earthquake, the forces caused by the shaking can be measured as a percentage of gravity, or percent g.

For example: The shaking at a particular location is measured as an acceleration of 11 feet per second, or 11*12*2.54 cm/sec/sec = 335 cm/sec/sec. The acceleration due to gravity is 980 cm/sec/sec, so the measured shaking is 335/980, or 0.34 g.  As a percentage, this is 34% g.

Geodesy/geodetic

The science of determining the size and shape of the earth and the precise location of points on its surface. / The use of geodesy for measurements.

Geologic time scale

A chronological sequence of geologic events usually represented in the form of a chart showing names of various rock layers and indicating the estimated duration of each geologic unit.

Geology

The study of the planet earth- the materials it is made of, the processes that act on those materials, the products formed, and the history of the planet and its life forms since its origin.

Geomorphology

The study of the character and origin of landforms, such as mountains, valleys, etc.

Geophysics

The branch of earth science which employs physical measurements and mathematical models to explore and analyze the structure and dynamics of the solid Earth and similar bodies and their fluid envelopes.

Geotechnical

Referring to the use of scientific methods and engineering principles to acquire, interpret, and apply knowledge of earth materials for solving engineering problems.

Graben

A down-dropped block of the earth's crust resulting from extension, or pulling, of the crust.

Gravity

The attraction between two masses, such as the earth and an object on its surface. Commonly referred to as the acceleration of gravity. Changes in the gravity field can be used to infer information about the structure of the earth's lithosphere and upper mantle.

Great circle

The shortest path between two points on the surface of a sphere lies along a great circle.

Ground failure

A general reference to landslides, liquefaction, lateral spreads, and any other consequence of shaking that affects the stability of the ground.

Ground motion

The movement of the earth's surface from earthquakes or explosions. Ground motion is produced by waves that are generated by sudden slip on a fault or sudden pressure at the explosive source and travel through the earth and along its surface.

H

Halfspace

A mathematical model used to approximate the earth when performing some calculations in seismology. The model is much simpler than the real earth.

Harmonic tremor

Continuous rhythmic earthquakes that can be detected by seismographs. Harmonic tremors often precede or accompany volcanic eruptions.

Hertz (Hz)

A unit of measurement named in honor of Heinrich Hertz, the German physicist who in 1887 first produced electromagnetic waves. Expresses the frequency in cycles per second; 1 Hz = 1 cycle of rise and fall of a wave per second .

Holocene

The past 10,000 years. It includes most of the time since the end of the most recent ice age. If slip has occurred on a fault during the Holocene, the fault is commonly considered active.

Horst

A horst is found together with a graben in an extensional environment. The graben are the downdropped blocks and the horst are the upthrown blocks that lie next to the graben.

Hypocenter/focus

The point within the earth where an earthquake rupture starts. The epicenter is the point directly above it at the surface of the Earth. Also commonly termed the focus.

I

Intensity/Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale (MMI)

A number (written as a Roman numeral) describing the severity of an earthquake in terms of its effects on the earth's surface and on humans and their structures. Several scales exist, but the ones most commonly used in the United States are the Modified Mercalli scale and the Rossi-Forel scale. There are many intensities for an earthquake, depending on where you are, unlike the magnitude, which is one number for each earthquake.

Interplate

Pertains to processes between the earth's crustal plates.

Interplate coupling

The ability of a fault between two plates to lock and accumulate stress. Strong interplate coupling means that the fault is locked and capable of accumulating stress, whereas weak coupling means that the fault is unlocked or only capable of accumulating low stress.

Intraplate

Pertains to processes within the plates.

Isoseismal (line)

A contour or line on a map bounding points of equal intensity for a particular earthquake.

K

Kinematic

The general movement patterns and directions of the earth's rocks that produce rock deformation.

L

Landslide

A movement of surface material down a slope.

Late Quaternary

Refers informally to the past 0.5-1.0 million years. Faults that have slipped during this time are sometimes considered active.

Lateral spread or flow

Terms referring to landslides that commonly form on gentle slopes and that have rapid fluid-like flow movement, like water.

Least-squares fit

When plotting data points on a graph, the least-squares-fit is the line or curve that comes closest to going through all the points.

Left-lateral

If you were to stand on the fault and look along its length, this is a type of strike-slip fault where the left block moves toward you and the right block moves away. See also right-lateral.

Lifelines

Structures that are important or critical for a community to function, such as roadways, pipelines, powerlines, sewers, communications, and port facilities.

Liquefaction

A process by which water-saturated sediment temporarily loses strength and acts as a fluid, like when you wiggle your toes in the wet sand near the water at the beach. This effect can be caused by earthquake shaking.

Lithology

The description of rock composition (what it is made of) and texture.

Lithosphere

The outer solid part of the earth, including the crust and uppermost mantle. The lithosphere is about 100 km thick, although its thickness is age dependent (older lithosphere is thicker).The lithosphere below the crust is brittle enough at some locations to produce earthquakes by faulting, such as within a subducted oceanic plate.

Locked fault

A fault that is not slipping because frictional resistance on the fault is greater than the shear stress across the fault (it is stuck). Such faults may store strain for extended periods that is eventually released in an earthquake when frictional resistance is overcome.

Love wave

A surface wave having a horizontal motion that is transverse (or perpendicular) to the direction the wave is traveling.

M

Ma

An abbreviation for one million years ago (Megannum).

Magnetic polarity reversal

A change of the earth's magnetic field to the opposite polarity. This has occurred at irregular intervals during geologic time. Polarity reversals can be preserved in sequences of magnetized rocks and compared with standard polarity-change time scales to estimate geologic ages of the rocks. Rocks created along the oceanic spreading ridges commonly preserve this pattern of polarity reversals as they cool, and this pattern can be used to determine the rate of ocean ridge spreading. The reversal patterns recorded in the rocks are termed sea-floor magnetic lineaments.

Magnitude

A number that characterizes the relative size of an earthquake. Magnitude is based on measurement of the maximum motion recorded by a seismograph. Several scales have been defined, but the most commonly used are (1) local magnitude (ML), commonly referred to as "Richter magnitude", (2) surface-wave magnitude (Ms), (3) body-wave magnitude (Mb), and (4) moment magnitude (Mw). Scales 1-3 have limited range and applicability and do not satisfactorily measure the size of the largest earthquakes. The moment magnitude (Mw) scale, based on the concept of seismic moment, is uniformly applicable to all sizes of earthquakes but is more difficult to compute than the other types. All magnitude scales should yield approximately the same value for any given earthquake.

Mainshock

The largest earthquake in a sequence, sometimes preceded by one or more foreshocks, and almost always followed by many aftershocks.

Mantle

The part of the earth's interior between the metallic outer core and the crust.

Microzonation

The identification of separate individual areas having different potentials for hazardous earthquake effects.

Moho

The boundary between the crust and the mantle in the earth. This is a depth where seismic waves change velocity and there is also a change in chemical composition. Also termed the Mohorovicic' discontinuity after the Croatian seismologist Andrija Mohorovicic' (1857-1936) who discovered it. The boundary is between 25 and 60 km deep beneath the continents and between 5 and 8 km deep beneath the ocean floor.

Moment tensor

A mathematical representation of the movement on a fault during an earthquake, comprising of nine generalized couples, or nine sets of two vectors. The tensor depends of the source strength and fault orientation. It is often represented with "beach balls" just like the focal mechanism (or fault plane solution).

N

Natural frequency

The frequency at which a particular object or system vibrates when pushed by a single force or impulse, and not influenced by other external forces or by damping. If you hold a slinky by one end and let it hang down and then give it one push up from the bottom, the rate of up-and-down motion is its natural frequency.

Normal fault/dip-slip fault/thrust fault

Normal, or dip-slip, faults are inclined fractures where the blocks have mostly shifted vertically. If the rock mass above an inclined fault moves down, the fault is termed normal, whereas if the rock above the fault moves up, the fault is termed reverse. A thrust fault is a reverse fault with a dip of 45 degrees or less. Oblique-slip faults have significant components of different slip styles.

Normal stress

That stress component perpendicular to a given plane. If you lean against a door after you close it, you are applying normal stress to the door. Normal stress can either be compressional or tensional.

O

Oceanic spreading ridge

The fracture zone along the ocean bottom where molten mantle material comes to the surface, thus creating new crust. This fracture can be seen beneath the ocean as a line of ridges that form as molten rock reaches the ocean bottom and solidifies.

Oceanic trench

A linear depression of the sea floor caused by the subduction of one plate under another.

P

P wave/compressional wave

A P wave, or compressional wave, is a seismic body wave that shakes the ground back and forth in the same direction and the opposite direction as the direction the wave is moving.

Paleoseismicity

Earthquakes recorded geologically, most of them unknown from human descriptions or seismograms. Geologic records of past earthquakes can include faulted layers of sediment and rock, injections of liquefied sand, landslides, abruptly raised or lowered shorelines, and tsunami deposits.

Pedogenic

Pedogenic means pertaining to processes that add, transfer, transform, or remove soil constituents.

Period

The time interval required for one full cycle of a wave.

Plate tectonics

The theory supported by a wide range of evidence that considers the earth's crust and upper mantle to be composed of several large, thin, relatively rigid plates that move relative to one another. Slip on faults that define the plate boundaries commonly results in earthquakes. Several styles of faults bound the plates, including thrust faults along which plate material is subducted or consumed in the mantle, oceanic spreading ridges along which new crustal material is produced, and transform faults that accommodate horizontal slip (strike slip) between adjoining plates.

Pleistocene

The time period between about 10,000 years before present and about 1,650,000 years before present. As a descriptive term applied to rocks or faults, it marks the period of rock formation or the time of most recent fault slip, respectively. Faults of Pleistocene age may be considered active though their activity rates are commonly lower than younger faults.

Poisson distribution

A probability distribution that characterizes discrete events occurring independently of one another in time.

Q

Q

The inverse of attenuation. A high Q means a low attenuation.

Quaternary

The geologic time period comprising about the last 1.65 million years.

R

Radiometric

Pertaining to the measurement of geologic time by the analysis of certain radioisotopes in rocks and their known rates of decay.

Rayleigh wave

A seismic surface wave causing the ground to shake in an elliptical motion, with no transverse, or perpendicular, motion.

Recurrence interval/return period

The recurrence interval, or return period, is the average time span between earthquake occurrences on a fault or in a source zone.

Reflection

The energy or wave from an earthquake that has been returned (reflected) from an boundary between two different materials within the earth, just as a mirror reflects light.

Refraction

Refraction is (1) the deflection, or bending, of the ray path of a seismic wave caused by its passage from one material to another having different elastic properties. (2) bending of a tsunami wave front owing to variations in the water depth along a coastline.

Regression analysis

A statistical technique applied to data to determine, for predictive purposes, the degree of correlation of a dependent variable with one or more independent variables, in other words, to see if there is a strong or weak cause and effect relationship between to things. See also: least-squares.

Residual

The difference between the measured and predicted values of some quantity.

Richter scale

The Richter magnitude scale was developed in 1935 by Charles F. Richter of the California Institute of Technology as a mathematical device to compare the size of earthquakes. The magnitude of an earthquake is determined from the logarithm of the amplitude of waves recorded by seismographs. Adjustments are included for the variation in the distance between the various seismographs and the epicenter of the earthquakes. On the Richter Scale, magnitude is expressed in whole numbers and decimal fractions. For example, a magnitude 5.3 might be computed for a moderate earthquake, and a strong earthquake might be rated as magnitude 6.3. Because of the logarithmic basis of the scale, each whole number increase in magnitude represents a tenfold increase in measured amplitude; as an estimate of energy, each whole number step in the magnitude scale corresponds to the release of about 31 times more energy than the amount associated with the preceding whole number value.

Right-lateral

If you were to stand on the fault and look along its length, this is a type of strike-slip fault where the right block moves toward you and the left block moves away.

Ring of Fire

The "Ring of Fire", also called the Circum-Pacific belt, is the zone of earthquakes surrounding the Pacific Ocean- about 90% of the world's earthquakes occur there. The next most seismic region (5-6% of earthquakes) is the Alpide belt (extends from Mediterranean region, eastward through Turkey, Iran, and northern India.

Rupture front

The instantaneous boundary between the slipping and locked parts of a fault during an earthquake. Rupture in one direction on the fault is referred to as unilateral. Rupture may radiate outward in a circular manner or it may radiate toward the two ends of the fault from an interior point, behavior referred to as bilateral.

Rupture velocity

The speed at which a rupture front moves across the surface of the fault during an earthquake.

S

S wave/shear wave

An S wave, or shear wave, is a seismic body wave that shakes the ground back and forth perpendicular to the direction the wave is moving.

Sand boil

Sand and water that come out onto the ground surface during an earthquake as a result of liquefaction at shallow depth.

Sea-floor spreading

Sea-floor spreading is what happens at the mid-oceanic ridge where a divergent boundary is causing two plates to move away from one another resulting in spreading of the sea floor. As the plates move apart, new material wells up and cools onto the edge of the plates.

Secular

Refers to long-term changes that take place slowly and imperceptibly. Commonly used to describe changes in elevation, tilt, and stress or strain rates that are related to long-term tectonic deformation. For example, a mountain that is growing is getting taller so slowly that we cannot see it happen, but if we were to measure the elevation one year and then the next, we could see that it has grown taller.

Segmentation

The breaking up of a fault along its length into several smaller faults. This can happen as a result of other faults crossing it, topography changes, or bends in the strike of the faults. Segmentation can limit the length of faulting in a single earthquake to some fraction of the total fault length, thus also limiting the size of the earthquake.

Seiche

The sloshing of a closed body of water from earthquake shaking. Swimming pools often have seiches during earthquakes.

Seismic gap

A section of a fault that has produced earthquakes in the past but is now quiet. For some seismic gaps, no earthquakes have been observed historically, but it is believed that the fault segment is capable of producing earthquakes on some other basis, such as plate-motion information or strain measurements.

Seismic moment

A measure of the size of an earthquake based on the area of fault rupture, the average amount of slip, and the force that was required to overcome the friction sticking the rocks together that were offset by faulting. Seismic moment can also be calculated from the amplitude spectra of seismic waves.

Seismic refraction

A seismic refraction or seismic reflection line is a set of seismographs usually lined up along the earth's surface to record seismic waves generated by an explosion for the purpose of recording reflections and refractions of these waves from velocity discontinuities within the earth. The data collected can be used to infer the internal structure of the earth.

Seismic wave

An elastic wave generated by an impulse such as an earthquake or an explosion. Seismic waves may travel either along or near the earth's surface (Rayleigh and Love waves) or through the earth's interior (P and S waves).

Seismic zone

An area of seismicity probably sharing a common cause. Example: "The New Madrid Seismic Zone."

Seismicity

The geographic and historical distribution of earthquakes.

Seismogenic

Capable of generating earthquakes. The base of the seismogenic zone is the top of the more ductile asthenosphere.

Seismogram

A record written by a seismograph in response to ground motions produced by an earthquake, explosion, or other ground-motion sources.

Seismology

The study of earthquakes and the structure of the earth, by both naturally and artificially generated seismic waves.

Seismometer/seismograph

A seismometer, or seismograph, is an instrument used to detect and record earthquakes. Generally, it consists of a mass attached to a fixed base. During an earthquake, the base moves and the mass does not. The motion of the base with respect to the mass is commonly transformed into an electrical voltage. The electrical voltage is recorded on paper, magnetic tape, or another recording medium. This record is proportional to the motion of the seismometer mass relative to the earth, but it can be mathematically converted to a record of the absolute motion of the ground. Seismograph generally refers to the seismometer and its recording device as a single unit.

Shadow zone

The area of the earth from angular distances of 104 to 140 degrees from a given earthquake that does not receive any direct P waves. The shadow zone results from S waves being stopped entirely by the liquid core and P waves being bent (refracted) by the liquid core.

Shear stress

The stress component parallel to a given surface, such as a fault plane, that results from forces applied parallel to the surface or from remote forces transmitted through the surrounding rock.

Slab

The oceanic crustal plate that underthrusts the continental plate in a subduction zone and is consumed by the earth's mantle.

Slickensides

Polished striated rock surfaces caused by one rock mass moving across another on a fault.

Slip

The relative displacement of formerly adjacent points on opposite sides of a fault, measured on the fault surface.

Slip model

A kinematic model that describes the amount, distribution, and timing of slip associated with an earthquake.

Slip rate

How fast the two sides of a fault are slipping relative to one another, as determined from geodetic measurements, from offset man-made structures, or from offset geologic features whose age can be estimated. It is measured parallel to the predominant slip direction or estimated from the vertical or horizontal offset of geologic markers.

Soil

Soil is (1) In engineering, all unconsolidated material above bedrock. (2) In soil science, naturally occurring layers of mineral and (or) organic constituents that differ from the underlying parent material in their physical, chemical, mineralogical, and morphological character because of pedogenic processes (3) In other words, dirt.

Soil profile

The vertical arrangement of layers of soil down to the bedrock.

Source

The term for the released forces that generate acoustic or seismic waves, also called the earthquake source.

Spectral acceleration (SA)

PGA (peak acceleration) is what is experienced by a particle on the ground. SA (spectral acceleration) is approximately what is experienced by a building, as modeled by a particle on a massless vertical rod having the same natural period of vibration as the building.

Spectrum

A curve showing amplitude and phase as a function of frequency or period, or how much of each type of shaking there is from an earthquake.

Standard deviation

How much a set of data is different from the curve it should make when plotted on a graph. Or, the square root of the average of the squares of deviations about the mean of a set of data. Standard deviation is a statistical measure of spread or variability.

Station

The place where a geophysical instrument is located.

Stick-slip

The fast movement that occurs between two sides of a fault when the two sides of the fault become unstuck. The rock becomes distorted, or bent, but holds its position until the earthquake occurs. When the rock snaps back into an unstrained position it is called elastic rebound. Stick-slip displacement on a fault radiates energy in the form of seismic waves, creating an earthquake.

Stochastic

A term applied to processes that have random characteristics.

Strain

The small changes in length and volume associated with deformation of the earth by tectonic stresses or by the passage of seismic waves.

Strain rate

How fast the lithosphere is being deformed from plate tectonic movement.

Stress

The force per unit area acting on a plane within a body. Six values are required to characterize completely the stress at a point: three normal components and three shear components.

Stress drop

The difference between the stress across a fault before and after an earthquake.

Strike

The trend or bearing, relative to north, of the line defined by the intersection of a planar geologic surface (for example, a fault or a bed) and a horizontal surface such as the ground.

Strike-slip fault

A vertical (or nearly vertical) fracture where the blocks have mostly moved horizontally. If the block opposite an observer looking across the fault moves to the right, the slip style is termed right lateral; if the block moves to the left, the motion is termed left lateral.

Strong motion

Ground motion of sufficient amplitude and duration to be potentially damaging to a building or other structure.

Subduction

The process of the oceanic lithosphere colliding with and descending beneath the continental lithosphere.

Subduction zone

The place where two lithospheric plates come together, one riding over the other. Most volcanoes on land occur parallel to and inland from the boundary between the two plates.

Surface faulting

Displacement that reaches the earth's surface during slip along a fault. Commonly occurs with shallow earthquakes, those with an epicenter less than 20 km. Surface faulting also may accompany aseismic creep or natural or man-induced subsidence.

Surface wave

A seismic wave that is trapped near the surface of the earth.

T

Tectonic

Refers to rock-deforming processes and resulting structures that occur over large sections of the lithosphere.

Tectonic plates

The large, thin, relatively rigid plates that move relative to one another on the outer surface of the Earth.

Teleseismic

Pertains to earthquakes at distances greater than 1,000 km from the measurement site.

Tensional stress

The stress that tends to pull something apart. It is the stress component perpendicular to a given surface, such as a fault plane, that results from forces applied perpendicular to the surface or from remote forces transmitted through the surrounding rock.

Time history

The sequence of values of any time-varying quantity (such as a ground motion measurement) measured at a set of fixed times. Also termed time series.

Transform fault

A special variety of strike-slip fault that accommodates relative horizontal slip between other tectonic elements, such as oceanic crustal plates. Often extend from oceanic ridges.

Traveltime curve

A graph of arrival times, commonly P or S waves, recorded at different points as a function of distance from the seismic source. Seismic velocities within the earth can be computed from the slopes of the resulting curves.

Tsunami

A sea wave of local or distant origin that results from large-scale seafloor displacements associated with large earthquakes, major submarine slides, or exploding volcanic islands.

Tsunami magnitude (Mt)

The tsunami magnitude, or Mt, is a number used to compare sizes of tsunamis generated by different earthquakes and calculated from the logarithm of the maximum amplitude of the tsunami wave measured by a tide gauge distant from the tsunami source.

Tsunamigenic

Refers to those earthquakes, commonly along major subduction zone plate boundaries such as those bordering the Pacific Ocean, that can generate tsunamis.

Turbidites

Sea-bottom deposits formed by massive slope failures. Rivers flowing into the ocean deposit sediments on the continenal shelf and slope. These slopes fail in response to excessive sedimentation load and sometimes earthquake shaking, sending the sediments sliding down to the ocean bottom to create a turbidite. Carbon dating of turbidites has been shown to provide a good method to determine the date of very old earthquakes.

V

Velocity

How fast a point on the ground is shaking as a result of an earthquake.

Velocity structure

A generalized regional model of the earth's crust that represents crustal structure using layers having different assumed seismic velocities.

W

Wavefront

The instantaneous boundary between the seismic waves in the earth material, and the material that the seismic energy has not yet reached.

Wavelength

The distance between successive points of equal amplitude and phase on a wave (for example, crest to crest or trough to trough).

Y

YBP

Abbreviation for "years before present".

    Back to Top

          Accessibility

          FOIA

          Site Policies

          Privacy Policy

          Site Map

          DOI and USGS link policies apply

          No FEAR Act

          USA.gov

          Vulnerability Disclosure

          Careers and Employment

          Doing Business

          Emergency Management

          Office of Civil Rights

                  U.S. Geological Survey

                  U.S. Department of the Interior

Contact USGS

                    answers.usgs.gov

    Was this page helpful?

