SOURCE: https://archive.org/download/bim_eighteenth-century_voyage-en-syrie-et-en-e_volney-c-f_1798_1/bim_eighteenth-century_voyage-en-syrie-et-en-e_volney-c-f_1798_1_djvu.txt

TRAVEL

THROUGH _ WW 1 a;

.

r SYRIA,
IN THE YEARS 1783, 1704, AND 1765.

CONTAINING.

THE PRESENT NATURAL AND POLITICAL STATE OF THOSE

' COUNTRIES, THEIR PRODUCTIONS, ARTS, MAN UA.
TURES, AND COMMERCE; WITH OBSERVATIONS .
ox THE MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND

| GOVERNMENT OF THE

x URKS AND ARAB
By M. C- F. VOLNEY.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.

IN TWO VOLUMES,

—

VOL. I.

NEW-YORX ?

PRINTED BY JOHN, TIEBOUT,

For EVERT DUYCKIN CK, & Coz Bookſellers & Stationers,

1798.

— ob Hy + EEE! args; VF SIRE? b

0
;

1

October 1786.

F IVE years ago, being ſtill young, a ſmall inherit-

ance, which fell to me, put mein poſſeſſion of a ſum of
money. The difficulty was, how to employ H.—
Some of my friends adviſed me to enjoy the capital,
others to purchaſe an annuity; but, on reflection, I
tho't the ſum too inconſiderable to make any ſenſible
addition to my income, and too great to be diſſipated
in frivolous expenſes. Some fortunate circumſtances
had habituated me to ſtudy ; I had acquired a taſte,
and even a paſhon for knowledge, and this acceſſion

to my fortune appeared to me a freſh means of grati-

fying my inclination, and opening a new way to im-
provement. I had read, and frequently heard re-
peated, that of all the methods of adorning the mind,
and forming the judgment, travelling is the moſt
efficacious; 1 determined, therefore, on a plan of
travelling, but to what part of the world I ſhould
direct my courſe remained ſtill to be choſen : I wiſhed
the ſcene of my obſervations to be new, or at leaſt
brilliant. My own country, and the neighbouring
nations, feemed to me either too well known, or too
eaſy of acceſs: the riſing States of America, and the
ſavages, were not without their temptations 3 but

other conſiderations determined me in favour of Aſia,

Syria eſpecially, and Egypt, both with a view to
what they once have been, and what they now are,

2 7 7
a | .
#

Tv " IBREEAGE
appeared to me a field equally adapted to thoſe poli- ;
tical and moral obſervations with which I wiſhed to
occupy my mind. TT hoſe are the countries,“ aid
IJ. in which the greater part of the opinions that
& govern us at this day have had their origin. In
5 them, thoſe religious ideas took their riſe, which
© have operated ſo powerfully on our private and
& pablic mannere, on our laws, and our ſocial ſtate.
* It will be intereſti g. therefore, to be acquainted
& with the countries where they originated, the cuſ-
„ toms and manners which gave them birth, and the
* * ſpirir and character of the nations from whom they

* have been received as ſacred : to examine to what
* degree this ſpirit, theſe manners, and theſe cuſtoms,
© ate altered or fetained ; to aſcertain the influence
of climate, the effects of the government, and the
< caufes of the various habits and prejudices of theſe
countries; in a word, to judge from their preſeri -
e ſtate, what was their fituation in former times.”

On the other hand, conſidering the political eir-
eumſtances of the Turkifh empire, for the laſt twenty
Wor: arid reflecting on their poſhble conſequences,
it appeared to me equaliy curious and uſeful to acquire
corre notions of its internal government, in order
to form a juſt eſtimate of its real power and reſources,
With thete views I ſet ont for Egypt, about the end
of 1782. After continuing ſeven months at Cairo,
finding too many obſtacles to a proper examination
of the interior parts of the country, and too little
sfliſtance in learning Arabic, I determined to proceed
into Syria. The more tranquil ſtate of that province
cor reſponded better with my intentions. Eight months
reſidence among the Druſes, in an Arabian convent,
rendered the Arabic familiar to me, and enabled me
to travel through all Syria during a whole year. On
my return to France, after an abſence of near three
years, imagining my reſearches might prove of ſome
88 l reſolved to PRI 2 lew 8 on the

PpRPTACE. 8
5 preſent ſtate of Syria and Egypt; and I was confirms
_ed in this reſolution by the difficulty attending travels

ling in thoſe countries, which have, therefore, but
ſeldom been viſited, and are but imperfectly known.

"=P ravellers, in general, have directed their reſearches

more to examine their antiquities, than their preſent
ſituation; and almoſt all, haſtily paſſing through them;
„ ben deficient in the two principal means of ac:
quiring knowledge, time, and the language of the
country. Without poſſeſſing the language, it is im-
poſſible to appreciate either the genius or the characs
ter of a nation. Interpreters can neper ſupply the
defect of a direct communication. And without cons
tinuing a ſufficient time, no traveller can form a
| ſound judgment, for the novelty of every thing around
nus naturally confounds and aſtoniſnes. The firit tus
_ mult muſt ſubſide, and the objects which pats”.
themſelves be repeatedly examined, before we can be
certain the ideas we have formed are juſt. To ſee
well is an art which requires more e than is

commonly imagined. *
On my return to France, 1 found chat 2 late travels

ler had anticipated me, with reſpe& to Egypz, by a
firſt volume of Letters on that country. He has fince

publiſhed two others; but, as the field is extenſive
and fertile, there {till remain ſome novelties to glean;
and on ſubjects already treated, the world may _
| bly not be averſe to hear two witneſſes.

Syria, though not leſs intereſting than Egypt, is

| undoubtedly a more novel ſubjet. What has been

already written on it by ſome wegs is now groun
obſolete, and, at beſt, very imperfect. I had at firſt
determined to relate only what I myſelf had ſeen ; but

deſirous for the ſatisfaction of my readers, 10 com-

plete my deſcription of that province, I was unwil-

»

ling to deprive myſelf of the obſervations of others,

| * M. Savary. | | | £ "oe .

vi PREFACE.

when, from -what 1 had” ſeen mylelf, 1 caulk not
doubt their veracity.
In my relation, 1 have endeavoured to maintain the 7
Tpirit with which I conducted my reſearches into facts;
that is, an impartial love of truth. I have reſtrained
myſelf from indulging any ſallies of the imagination,
though I am no ſtranger to the power of ſuch illu-
ſion over the generality of readers; but I am of
opinion that travels belong to the department of hif-
' tory, and not that of romance. | have not therefore
deſcribed countries as more beautiful than they ap-
peared to me; I have not repreſented their inhabi-
tants more virtuous, nor more wicked than I found
them, and I have perhaps been enabled to fee them
| ſuch as they really are, fince I have never received
from them either benefits or injuries.
As to the form of this work, I have not followed
the method uſual in books of travels, though, per-
haps, the molt ſimple. I have rejected, as too prolix,

boi the order and the details of an itinerary, as well

as all perſonal adventures; I have only exhibited ge-
neral views, as better calculated to combine facts and
ideas, and from a deſire of ſaving the time of the
Teader, amid the prodigious ſucceſſion of new puh

cations. 5 1 N 61

4

EGYPT any Y RIA.

J Egypt in general, and the City of Alexandrig.

| I. is in vain that we attempt to prepare ourſelves, by
the peruſal of books, for a more intimate acquaintance
with the cuſtams and manners of nations; the effect
of narratives upon the mind, will always be very dif-
ferent from that of objects upon the ſenſes. The
images the former preſent, have neither correctneſs
in the deſign, ror livelineſs in the colouring; they are
always indiſtinct, and leave but a fugitive impreſſion,
very eaſily effaced. This we mare particularly expe-_
rience, when we are ſtrangers to the objects to be laid
before us; for the imagination, in that caſe, finding
no terms of compariſon ready formed, 1 „
to collect and compoſe new ideas; and, in this op-
ration, ill directed, and haſtily executed, it 1s diffi-
cult not to confound the traits, and disfigure the forms.
 Ought we then to be aſtoniſhed, if, on beholding the
models themſelves, we are unable to diſcover any re-
ſemblance between the originals and the copies, ang
if every impreſſion bears the character of novelty ?

= TRAVELS IN

Such is 7 fituation of a ſtranger who arrives, by
Tea, in Turkey. In vain has he read hiſtories and tra-
vels; in vain has he, from their defcriptions, endea-
youred to repreſent to himſelf the aſpect of the coun-
tries, the appearance of the cities, the dreſſes and man-

ners of the inhabitants; he is new to all theſe objects,

and dazzled with their variety; every idea he has form-
ed to himſelf vaniſhes, and he remains abſorbes i in ſur-
prize and aſtoniſhment. _

No place is more proper to 8 this effect and
prove the truth of this remark, than Alexandria in
Egypt. The name of this city, which recalls to me-
mory the genius of one of the moſt wonderful of
men ; the name of the country. which reminds us
of ſo many great events; the pictureſque appearance
of the place itſelf; the ſpreading palm-trees ; the
terraced houſes, which ſeem to have no roof; the
lofty ſlender minarets, every thing announces to the
traveller that he is in another world; a variety of no-
vel objects preſent themſelves to every ſenſe; he
Bears a language whoſe barbarous ſounds, and ſharp
and guttural accents, offend his ear; he fees drefſes
of the moſt unnſual and whimfical kind, and figures
of the ſtrangeſt appearance. Inſtead of our naked
faces, our heads ſwelled out with hair, our triangu-
lar bead-dreſſes, and our ſhort, and cloſe habits,
he views, with aſtoniſhment, tanned viſages, with
beards and multachios, bundles of ſtuff rolled up
in folds on their bald heads; long garments, which,
reaching from the neck to the heels, ſerve rather 5
veil — clothe the body, pipes of fix feet long, with
which every one is provided, hidequs camels, which
carry water in leathern pouches, and faddled and
bridled aſſes, which lightly trip along with their riders,
in ſlippers; he obſerves their markets ill ſupplied with
dates, and round flat little loaves ; a filthy drove of
half ſtarved dogs roaming. throw the ſtreets, and a
kind of wandering phantoms, which, under 2 nog

: over AND SYRIA. 9
b *
piece of drapery, diſcover noching human, but two
eyes, which ſhew that they are women. Amid this
croud of unuſual objects, his mind is incapable of re-
flection; nor is it until he has reached his place of re-
fence, ſo deſirable on landing after a long voyage,
that, becoming more calm, he reflects on the narrow,
ill paved ſtreets, the low houſes which, though not
calculated to admit much light, are ſtill more obſeur-
ed by lattice wotk, the meager and fwarthy inhabi-
tants who walk bare-footed, without other clothing
than a blue ſhirt faſtened with a leathern girdle, or 2
red handkerchief, while the univerſal air of miſery,
ſo manifeſt in all he meets, and the myſtery which
reigns around their houſes, point out to him the rapa-
city of oppreſſion, and the diſtruſt attendant upon fla-
very. But his whole attention is ſoon attrafted by
thoſe vaſt ruins which appear on the land fide of the
city. In our countries, ruins are an object of curioſi-
ty: Scarcely can we diſcover, in unfrequented places,
ſome ancient caſtle, whoſe decay announces rather the
deſertion of its maſter, than the wretehedneſs of the
neighbourhood. In Alexandria, on the contrary, we
no ſooner leave the New Town, than we are aſtoniſh-
ed at the fight of an immenſe extent of ground over-
ſpread with ruins. In a walk of two hours, you fol.
low a double line of walls and towers, which form
the circumference of the ancient Alexandria. - The
earth is covered with the remains of loity buildings
deſtroyed ; _ whole fronts erumbling down, roofs fallen
in, battlements decayed, and the ſtones corroded and
disfiguted by ſaltpette. The traveller paſſes over a
vaſt plain, furrowed with trenches, pierced with wells,
divided by walls in ruins, covered over with ancient
columns, and modern tombs, amid palm- trees, and
nopals,“ and where no living creature is to be met
with, but owls, bats and jackalls. The ahn

. vdr called * the cechineal tree,

117
Hy
3

mattes

accuſtumed to this ſcene, Wedel it without emotion; 5
but the ſtranger, in whom the recollection of anci-

ent ages is revived by the novilty of the objects around
him, feels a ſenſation, which not unfrequently dif-
folves him in tears, inſpiring reflections which fill his
heart with ſadneſs, while his ſoul is e by their

, ſublimity.

I ſhall not here repeat the deſeriptions, given by all

travellers, of the remarkable antiquities of Means.

The reader will find in Norden, Pocock, Niebuht, and

in the Letters lately publiſhed by Mr. Savary, every
neceſſary detail on the baths of Cleopatra, the two
obeliſks that bear her name, the catacombs, the reſer-
voirs, and the Pillar, improperly called Pom pey's“
Pillar. "Theſe names are majsſtic; but the originals
1 oy no means correſpond with the figures we have ſeen

them. The pillar alone, from the boldneſs of its

. its prodigious circumference, and the ſoli-
tude with which it is ſurrounded, impreſſes a genuine
mom ot reſpect and admiration.

In its modern ſtate, Alexandria is the emporium of

4 a conſiderable commerce. It is the harbour for all
che commodities exported from Egypt by the Mediter-
tanean, except the rice of Damietta. The Europeans

have eſtabliſhments there, where factors diſpoſe of our
merchandize by barter. Veſſels are conſtantly to be

met with there from Marſeilles, Leghorn, Venice, Ra-

| guia, and the dominions of the Grand Seignior; but it
is dangerous to winter there. The new port, the only
harbour for the Europeans, is clogged up with ſand,

inſomuch that in ſtormy weather ſhips are liable to
bilge 3 and the bottom * allo rockey, the cables

211 ought for the. furure to be called the Pillar of Seren

ſince Mr. Savary has proved that it belongs to that Emperor.
 Fravellers differ with rebpeE to the dimentions of this column ;
Hut the calculation the moſt. generally admitted at Alexandrin,

makes the height of the ſhaft, with the capital, mw mw, Wr the |

£ucumterencs 28 feet, 3 inches.

„

—

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 11

ſoon chafe and part, ſo that one veſſel driving againſt

a ſecond, and that againſt a third, they are perhaps
al loſt. Of this there was a fatal inſtance ſixteen or
eighteen years ago, when two-and-forty veſſels were
daſhed to pieces on the mole in a gale of wind from the-

north-weſt, and numbers ſince have been loſt there at
different times. The old port, the entrance to which
is covered by a neck of land called the Cape of Figs,*

is not ſubje& to this inconvenience; but the Turks

admit no ſhips into it but thoſe of Muſſelmen. It will
perhaps be aſked, in Europe, why do they not repair
the New Port? The anſwer i is, that in Turkey, they

deſtroy every thing and repair nothing. 'The old har-
bour will be deſtroyed likewiſe, as the ballaſt of veſlels
has been continually thrown into it for the laſt two - -

hundred years. The ſpirit of the Turkiſh government ,

is to ruin the labours of paſt ages, and deſtroy the
hopes of future times, becauſe the barbarity of i ignor-
ant deſpotiſm never conſiders to-morrow.

In time of war, Alexandria is of no importance; no

1 cation is to be ſeen; even the Pharos, with its
lofty towers, cannot be defended. It has not four
cannon fit for ſervice, nor a gunner who knows how

to point them. The five hundred Jauifaries, who

ſhould form the garriſon, reduced to half that num-
ber, know nothing but how to ſmoke a pipe. It is
fortunate for the Turks that the Franks find their in-
tereſt in preſerving this city. A ſingle Ruſſian or

Malteſe frigate would ſuffice to lay it in aſhes; but

the conqueſt would be of no value. A foreign power
could not maintain itſelf there, as the country is with-

out water. This mult be brought from the Nile by -

the Kalidj, or canal of twelve leagues, which conveys.

it thither every year at the time of the inundation.
It fills the vaults or reſervoirs dug under the ancient

city, and this proviſion muſt ſerve till the next year.

Kas el-tin, pronounced teen.

= A} TRAVELS" IN

It is evident, therefore, that were a foreign power to
take poſſeſlion, the canal would be ſhut, and all ſup- 1
plies of water cut off. =
It is this canal alone which connects Alexandria
with Egypt; for. from its fituation without the Delta,
and the nature of the foil, it really belongs to the de-
' feris of Africa; its environs are ſandy ; fat and ſterile;
without trees and without houles, where we meet
with nothing but the plant “ which yields the Kali,
and à row of palm trees, which follows the courſe of

| the Kalidj, or canal. 5 1
I Ve do not 1eally enter Egypt until we arrive at 1
i bim, called by the natives Raſbid: there the fands |
3 peculiar to Africa end, and a black, fat, and loamy |
i foil, the diſtinguiſhing charaRerittic of Egypt, begins: =
Wi there; alſo, for the firſt time, we behold the waters of |
| the celebrated Nile; which, rolling between two ſteep |
i banks, confiderably rbſembles the Seine between Au-
cdteuil and Paſſay. The woods of palm. trees, on each

l tide, the orchards, watered by its fireams, the lemon,

ö the orange, the banana, the peach, and other trees,
(buy their perpetual verdure, render Roſetta aſtoniſh-
| igly delighttul, and its beauties appear fill more

fl charming by its contraſt with Alexandria, and the fea

h we have juſt left; and from hence to Cairo, every
object tends to increaſe the effect.

l As we aſcend the river we begin to acquire 3 ge-
* neral idea of the ſoil, The climate, and productions of ̃
il this celebrated country. Nothing more reſembles its
j appearance than the marthes of the lower Loire, or the |
| plains of Flanders; inſtead however of the numerous |
ly trees and country houſes of the latter, we muſt imagine
| ſome thin woods of palms and ſyca mores, and a few 4
j villages of mud-walled cottages, built on artificial 1
mounds. All tins part of Egypt! is fo level, and ſo |
9 Glaſs-wort. called by the Arabs el-Vali, from whence the

name of the {alt al. kali,

EGYPT AND SYRIA. #3

low, that we are not three leagues from the coaſt when
we diſcover the palm-trees, and the fands on wich.

they grow; from thence, as we proceed up the river;
the declivity is ſo gentle, that the water does not flow
faſter than a league an hour. As for the proſpect of

the country, it Offers little variety; nothing is to be

{een but palm-trees, fingle, or in clumps, which be?

come more rare in proportion as you advance: wretch-

ed villages compoſed of mud- walled huts, and a bound?
leſs plain, which at different ſeaſons is an ocean of freſſt
water, a miry moraſs, a verdant field, or a duſty de“

fart; and on every ſide an extenſive and foggy hori-

on, where the eye is wearied and diſguſted; at length,
towards the junction of the two branches ofthe river

the mountains of Grand Cairo are diſcovered in the
eaſt, and to the ſouth-weſt, three detached maſſes ap-
pear, which, from their traingular form are known to

be the Pyramids. We now enter a valley which turns

to the ſouthward, between two chains of parallel emi-
nences. That to the eaſt, which extends to the Red
Sea, merits the name of a mountain from its precipitate
elevation, and that of deſart from its naked and fa-

vage alpec; * but the weſtern is nothing but a ridge
of rock, covered with ſand, which has been very pro-

perly termed a natural mound; or cauſeway. To de-

toribe Egypt in two te let the reader i imagine, on

one tide, a narrow {ca and rocks; on the other, im-

menſe plains of ſand, and in the middle, a river flowing

through a valley of one hundred and fifty leagues in

length, and from three to ſeven wide, which at the dif-

tance of thirty leagues from the ſea, ſeparates into two
arms, the branches of which wander over a ſoil free

from obitacles, and almoſt without declivity.

The prevailing taſte for natural hiſtory, now, to the
honour of the preſent age, become ſo general, demands
doubtleſs tome details on the nature of the foil, and the

= Called in Arabic 3 or hewn mountain,

14 \ TRAVELS IN. =

„
Rs 85 *

minerals of this extenſive country. But, unfortunate-
by, the manner of travelling here is ill adapted to pro-
mote ſuch reſcarches. It is not the ſarie in turkey
as in Europe: with vs. travels are agreeable excurſions;
there, they are difficuit and dangerous undertakings,

 elpecially for Europeans, whom the ſuperſtitious na-
tives believe to be ſorcerers, come to diſcover by magic,
trealures which the Genii have concealed under the

ruins. This ridiculous but deep rooted opinion, add.
ed to perpetual wars and diſturbances, deprives the tra-
veller of ſecurity, and prevents every difcovery. No
one dares even walk alone in the fields; nor can he 3
| pours any body to accompany him. We are con»

| fined therefore to the banks of the river, and a route
I frequented by every one, which can afford no new in-
0 formation. It is only by comparing what we have
| ſeen ourſelves with the obſervations made by others :
0 | that ſome general ideas can be acquired.
in After having made this compariſon, we ſhall find

9 Teaſon to conclude that the baſis of all Egypt, from

ji Aſouan, (the ancient 8 ene) to the Mediteranean, is a
ſy continued bed of calcareous None, of a whitiſh hue,
iſh and ſomewhat foft, containing ſhells analogous to thoſe
Wh found in the two neighbouring eas This quality is
i diſcoverable in the Pyramids, and in the Lybian rock
jy on which they are founded. This ſtone is likewiſe to be
N found in the Ciſterns, in the Catacombs of Alexandria,

0 and in the projecting fhelves upon the coaſt, We may
mit allo obſerve it in the Eaſtern mountain, in the latitude

| - of Cairo, and the materials with which that city is
i built. It is this calcareous ſtone, in ſhort, which forms
0 the immenſe quarries that extend from Saouadi to
Manfalout, for the ſpace of upwards of twenty, five
0 leagues, according to the teſtimony of Father Sicard.
ji That miſſionary informs us, allo, that marble: 18 tound |
Ii
0 »Theſe ſhells conſiſt principally of GE, vollen, bivalves,
I and a ſpecies in the form of lentils, See Shaw's Travels.

EGYPT AND/SYRIA. 1 5

in the valley of Carts,* at the foot of the mountains
bordering on the Red Sea, and in the mountains to the

north-eaſt of A/ouan. Between that place and the Ca-

taract are the principal quarries of Red granite z but
there mult be others lower down, for, on the oppoſite

fhore of the Red Sea, the mountains of Oreb, of
Sinai, and their dependencies}, at two days journey
towards the north, are formed of it. Not far from

Aſouan, to the norch- welt, is a quarry of ſerpentine
ſtone, employed in its native ſtate by the inhabitants to
make veſſels which will ſtand ' the fire. And in the
| ſame parallel, on the Red Sea, was formerly a mine of
emeralds, all traces of which are now loſt. Copper is
the only meral of this country mentioned by the an-

cients. The road to Suez is the part of it where the

greateſt quantity of what are cailed Egyptian flints, or
pebbles, is found, though the bottom be of a calcare⸗
ous ſtone, hard and ſonorous; there likewiſe thoſe
{tones are found, which from their form, have been ta-
ken for petrified wood. In fact , they do reſemble logs

cut flanting at theends,and full of ſmall holes, and might
eaſily be taken for petrifactions; ; but chance throwing
in my way a conſiderable quantity of theſe, in the road
of the Arabs, called Haovatatf, I carefully examined

them, and am convinced they are real minerals$.
The two lakes of Natron, deſcribed by Father 81. 2

card, are more intereſting objects; they are ſituated
in the deſart of Shayat, or St. Macarius, to the weſt
of the Delta. Their bed is a ſort of natural trench,
three or four leagues long, by a quarter wide, the bot-
tom of which is ſolid and ſtony. It is dry for nine

months in che year, but, in winter, there oozes from

the earth a water of a reddiſh violet colour, which fills

„See Savary's Letters.

I The former is grey, ſpotted with black, and ſometimes red.
| "8 Each tribe has its particular road, to avoid diſputes,

Beſides, there do not exiſt ten trees in this deſart, and it

PRs incapable of producing MP

| | „
il 16 pp ˙ IN; ©

the lake to the height of five or ſix feet; ks return
of the great heats cauſing this to evaporate; there re-
mains a bed of falt two feet thick, and very hard,
which is broken with bars of iron. Thirty thouſand
quintals are procured from the n every year. "his
phenomenon, which indicates a fol impregnated with
falt, is common throughout all Egypt. In every part
of it, on digging, a brackiſh water is found, contain-
ing natron, marine ſalt, and a little nitre. Even when
the gardens are overflowed, for the ſake of watering
them, the ſurface of the ground, after the evapora-
tion and abſorption of the water, appears glazed over
With ſalt; and this foil, like that of the whole conti-
nent of Africa and ee e ſeems either to be com-
poſed of ſalt, or to produce it.
In the midſt of theſe minerals of various .
in the midſt of that fine and reddiſh coloured ſand
peculiar to Africa, the earth of the, valley through
| which the Nile flows, diſcovers properties which prove
it of a diſtinct claſs. Its blackiſh colour, its clayey,

cementing quality, demonſtrate its foreign origin;
and, in fact, it is brought by the river from the heart

of Abyſſinia; as if Nature had determined artfully to
1 form an habitable iſland in a country to which ſhe had Þ|
denied every thing. Without this fat and light mud, |
Egypt never could have produced any thing ; that
| alone {ſeems to contain the ſeeds of vegetation and le,
j cundity; and theſe 8218 are nin to the river, by
|| Which it is depoſited.

— —E—jĩ—— — een Agios
* * — — — -
— — —

EGYPT: AN SYRIA, ©

c H A P. Ul.
o the Nie, and rhe enlargement f the Date

| P 8 e a polleleath ela of
Egypt depends upon the Nile; that alone provides for
the greateſt neceſſity of animal life, the want of was
ter, io irequently, and ſo diſtreſsfully, experienced in
warm climates. The Nile alone, without the aid of
rain, every where ſupplies vegetation with moiſture,
the earth, during the three months inundation, im-
bibing a ſufficient quantity of water for the reſt of the
year. Were it not for this overflowing, only a very
mall part of the country could be cultivated, and even
that would require prodigious labour; it is with rea-
ſon, therefore, it has been ſtiled the ſource of plenty,
f happineſs, and of lite itſelf. Had Albuquerque,
the Portugueſe, been able to execute his project, of
turning its courſe from Ethiopia into the Red Sea“,
this country, now ſo rich, would have become a
lavage deſert, ſurrounded by ſolitudes. If we reflect
on the ule man makes of his powers, we ſhall ſee lit-
tle reaſon to regret that Nature has granted him no
nore!
It is with reaſon, . chat the Egyptians kunt
aways profeſſed, and ſtill retain, a religious venera-
tion for the Nile; but an European mult be pardon-
ed, if, on hearing them boaſt of its beauty, he ſmiles
at their ignorance. Never will thele troubled and

See Savary: 8 Letters, T.

+ They cala it holy, bleſſed, an and, on 1 appearance
of the new waters, that is, on the opening * the canals, mo-
thers are ſeen plunging their children into the current, from a
beider that theſe waters Have a purifying and MVing virtue, fuch
che ancients attributed to every river. |

1171

48 e TRAVELS IN:

muddy waters have for him the charm of tranſparent

fountains and limpid ſtreams; never, except from ſome
extraordinary excitement, will a ſwarthy Egyptian
uoman, dripping from theſe yellow and muddy wa-
ters, remind him of the bathing Naiads. For fix
| months of the year the water of the river is fo thick
that it muſt have time to ſettle before it can be drank“:
and, during the three months which precede the 1n-
undation, reduced to an inconfiderable depth, it grows

heated, becomes green, fœtid, and full of worms, and
It is neceſſary to have recourſe to that which has been
before drawn, and preſerved in ciſterns. At all times,
people of dativacy' take care to PRI it, and cool

it by evaporation, 4
Travellers and hiſtorians have written is much on
the Nile, and its phenomena, that I was at firſt incli-
ned to think the ſubject exhauſted ; but, as ideas vary
reſpecting the moſt invariable facts; ; frequently while
there remains nothing. new to ſay, there is ſtill ſome-

thing to correct. Such appears to me to be the caſe,
with ſome opinions of M. Savary, in the letters he has

lately publiſhed. The poſitions he endeavours o

* Bitter A "THESE are WY ule of for this AFR with which
the veſſel is rubbed, and the water then becomes really light
and good. But nothing but thirſt, or prejudice, could induce
any perſon to give it the preference to that of our fountains and
Urge rivers, ſuch as the Seine, and ara Loire. DIES

+ Earthen veſſels, unglaged, are kept ly in every
| partment, from whence the water continually tranſpires ; his
tranſpiration produces the more coolneſs in proportion as it is
more conſiderable; for this reaſon, theſe veſſels are often {ul-

pended in paſſages where there are currents of air, and under

the ſhade of trees. In ſeveral parts of Syria they drink the

Water Which has tranſpired ; in Egypt they drink that which

remains; beſides, in no country is ſo much water uſed, The

firſt thing an Egyptian does, on entering his houſe, is to lay

hold of the kolla, (the pitcher of water) and take a hearty draught .

of it; and, thanks to their perpetual perſpiration, they feel no

inconvenience from the practice.

*

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 449

eſtabliſh concerning the enlargement, and riſe of the
Delta, are ſo different from the concluſions I have de-
duced from the facts and authorities he quotes, that I
thipk it my duty to ſubmit our contradictory opinions

to the tribunal of the public. This diſcuſſion ſeems to
me the more neceſſary, as a reſidence of two years,
upon the ſpot, gives a weight to the teſtimony of Sava-
ry, which would ſoon become authority: let us ſtate

the queſtions, and treat, in the firſt place, of the ex-
tenſion, or enlargement of the Delta.
A Greek hiſtorian, to whom we are indebted for

almoſt all our knowledge of ancient Egypt, and whoſe

authority every day's obſervation confirms, wrote
thus, two-and-twenty centuries ago: © That part of
85 Egypt frequented by the Greeks, (the Delta) is an
« acquired land, the gift of the river, as is all the

e Ne country, along its banks, for three Gays

fail up the Nile*”?” “
The reaſons he alledges in ſupport of this *

prove that it was not founded on prejudice. © In
fact,“ adds he, ** the foil of Egypt, which is a black

and fat mud, is abſolutely different, both from that

« of Africa, which is a red ſand, and that of Arabia,

*« which is clayey and ſtony.—This mud is brought
from Ethiopia, by the Nile.— And the ſhells found
in the deſart ſufficiently prove that the ſea formerly |
« extended farther into the country.“

In admitting this encroachment of the river, to

conformable to probability, Herodotus has not deter-
mined its proportions. Theſe M. Savary has ima-

gined himſelf able to tupply ; 4 let us examine his rea-

ſoning.

While it encreaſed in height, Egypt”, ſays 4

* augmented in length likewiſe; to prove which,
55 among leveral facts which hiſtory has Pow [

0 Ned lib. 11. p. 105. edit Welling,
+ See Letters on 38 ;

lt
90
zl
00
.
19
1
i!
1
179
il
; :
m1
' 11
HI |
| 1
[itt |
1
19
7756
| [44 |
N
UNE
[/ |
ite
14
14 1
2
T3661
1

| ſhall ſelect only one. During the reign of Pſaninie:
e ricus, the Mileſians, with thirty ſhips, landed at the
* mouth of the Bolbitine branch, at preſent the

20 OO TRAVELS IN

© branch of Roſetta, where they fortified themſelves,

and built a city, which they called Metelis, (Strabo, |
“ lib. 17.) now named Faoiia, but which, in the
|." Coptic vocabularies, is ſtill called Meſſil. This
city, which was formerly a ſea port, ſtands, at pre-
ſent, nine leagues from the ſhore; which ſpace the

6c Delta has lengthened, from the age of Pſammeticus :

eto the preſent.”

Nothing ſo accurate at art ſight as this rezſoning ;
but, on recurring to the original, M. Savary's authori-
ty, we find, that the principal fact is wanting; the
following is a literal tranſlation of the text of Strabo“.

Beyond the Bolbitine mouth, is a low, ſand:

cc cape, called the horn of the lamb, which ſtretches
pretty far (into the ſea); beyond that, the watch
© tower of Perſeus, and the wall of the Mileſians;
for the Mileſians, in the reign of Cyaxares, King of
ee the Medes, cotemporary with Pſammeticus, King
of Egypt, arriving at the Bolbitine mouth, with
4 thirty veſſels, landed there, and erected the work
% which bears their name. Some time after, having
c advanced into the Saitic Nome, and vanquiſhed
© TInarus, in a naval battle, they founded the city of
„ Naucratis, a little above Schedia. Beyond the wall
of the Mileſians, as we approach the Sebennytic
© mouth, are lakes, one of which 1 is named the Bu-
Stic
Such is the paſſage of Strabo, relitive to the Mile-
| Gans; : No mention is made of Metelis, of which not
even the name is to be found in his Whole work.
Danvillef has copied it from Ptolemy , — does not

* Strabonis Geograph. interp. Caſaubon. Edit. 10 707. Lib, 17

p- 1153.
f Sce the excellent Memoire of Danville, on Egypt, i in 40.

1765, P. 77

c

EGYPT AND SYRIA. | 21

adhs it to the Mileſians; ; and unleſs M. „Sana can

prove the identity of Metelis, and the Mileſian wall,
by reſearches made upon the ſpot, his concluſions |

ought not to be admitted.

He is of opinion, too, ha Homer affords Hh a
ſimilar teſtimony in thoſe paſſages wherein he ſpeaks

of the diſtance of the iſle of Pharos from Egypt“;
the reader ſhall judge, whether this is better founded; ;

J quote the tranſlation of Madame Dacierj, which

though leſs brilliant, is more literal than any other, ,
and our buſineſs is with the literal. Menelaus 1 is made
to ſpeak thus:

„In the E oppoſite the Nile, there i is

c a certain iſland, called Pharos; diſtant from one of
„„ the mouths. of that river about as far as a veſſel

% can fail in one day before the wind.” —and, ſoon

| after, Proteus ſays to Menelaus : © Inflexible Deſtiny |

66

does not permit you to reviſit your dear country—
until you ſhall have returned again into the river

«© Egyptus, and offered unblemiſhed Nn en to the
“ 1mmortals.””

He ſaid,” reſumes n 00 and my "ROO
„ was ſeized with grief and ſadneſs, becauſe this God

** commanded me to return into the river Egyptus,

the way to which is difficult and dangerous.“

From theſe paſſages, and eſpecially from the former,

M. Savary would infer that the Pharos, which, at
preſent joins the main land, was at that time very re-
mote from it; but when Homer ipeaks of the diſtance
of this iſland, he does not mean its diſtance from the

thore oppoſite, as the traveller has tranſlated him, but

from the land of Egypt, and the river Nile. In the
lecond place, by a day's fail, we muſt not underſtand
the indefinite ſpace, which the veſſels, or, more pro-

perly ſpeaking, the boats, of the ancients could pals

through 1 in a day; the Greeks uſed this expreſſion to

* gee Savary $ Letters, 9 7 4 Oc, lib, 4

115

22 - TRAVELS IN -

denote a certain fixed diſtance of five - hundred and
forty ſtadia. Herodotus“, who clearly afcertains this

ſixteen hundred and twenty ſtadia, arifing from this
computation, agree with the more accurate meaſure

half a degree, we ſhall find this meaſure 1s the diſ-

where we have reaſon to place the city which gave
name to the Bolbitine mouth; and it is remarkable

diſpoſed to maintain it, we ſhould {till have to explain

fact, gives us an example of it, when he ſays that the

Nile has encroached upon the ſea the whole extent of

the country for three days fail up the river; and the

of fifteen hundred ftadia, which he gives us, in ano-
ther place, as the diftance of Heliopolis from the ſea.
Now, taking, with Danville, the five hundred and
forty ſtadia for twenty-ſeven thouſand toiſes, or near

tance of the Pharos from the Nile; it extends exactly
to two-thirds of a league above Roſetta, a ſituation

that it was this which the Greeks frequented, and
where the Mileſians landed, a century and a half af-
ter Homer. It is, therefore, far from being proved,
that the increaſe of the Delta, or of the Continent,
was fo rapid as has been imagined; and, if we were

how this ſhore, which has not gained half a league
from the days of Alexander, ſhouid have gained eleven
in the far ſhorter period from the time of Menelaus to
that conqueror?.

A more ſatisfactory eſtimate of this encroachment-
might have been deduced from the nen ot

* Herod, lib. 11. p. 106 onal 107.

+ This only 1,300 toiſes too much,

+ It may be objected Homer is not exact when he ſays the
Pharos was oppblite the Nile; but, in his excule, it may be ur-
ged, that when he calls Egypt the extremity of the world, he
cannot mean to ipeak with preciſion, In the ſecond place, the
Canopic branch ran formerly by the lakes, opening itſelf a paſ-
ſage near Aboukir; and if, as the view of the country leads me
to think, it paſſed even to the welt of Aboukir, which muſt
have been an iſland, Homer migh n ſey, with: -revion, that the.
Pharos was oppoſite the RUE,

3

wi

.

%

N
8.25

8775

2 ,

1

REG

1 © x
73

„
v

$ Ak

228

24 gp
1285

ir”

pr

—_
28 2

& „
3

** ls.

5 k

the aſtronomi
travelled for tif

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 27

. Egypt. given by e the following are his

words. The breadth of Egypt, along the ſea coaſt,
from the Gulph of Plinthine, to the Lake Serbonis;

near Mount Cafius, is three thouſand fix hundred
« ſtadia; and its length, from the lea to Heliopolis,

<© fifteen hundred ſtadia.“

Let us confine ourſelves to this last meaſure, which ;

alone concerns the preſent diſpute. Danville has
proved, with that ſagacity which was peculiar to him,

that the ſtadium of Herodotus is equivalent to be-

tween fifty and fifty-one French toiſes; and taking it
at the latter eſtimation, the fifteen hundred ſtadia are

equal to ſeventy- ſix thouſand toifes, which after the

rate of fifty-ſeven thouſand to a degree, gives one de-

gree and near twenty minutes and a half. Now, from
18 of Mr. Niebuhr, Who
ing of Denmark, in 1761*, the

difference of latitude between Heliopolis, (now called

Materea) and the ſea being one degree twenty- nine
minutes, at Dimietta, and one degree twenty-four at

= Roſetta, there is a difference, on one fide, of three
minutes and a half, or a league and a half, encroach-
= ment; and eight mi».utes and a half, or three leagues
and a half, on the other; that is to ſay, the ancient

ſhore anſwers to eleven thouſand eight hundred toiſes

below Roſetta, which correſponds very nearly to the
Tenſe in which I underſtand the paſſage in Homer, :

while on the branch of Damietta it falls nine hundred
and fifty toiſes below that city. It is true, that in

meaſuring immediately on the map, the line of the
more will be found three leagues higher on the ſide of
= Roſetta, and falls on Damietta itſelf, which is oeca-
! fioned by the angle produced by the difference of
: We But, in that caſe, Bolbitinum, mentioned

„See Travels i in Arabia, by C. N. ebuhr, in 410. tom. 1. which

muſt be diſtinguiſhed from the By * of Gn: * the

lame; 2 vol, in 4to.

24 - TRAVELS IN

11

in

Delta. It muſt not be denied that the relations of the 4

rately, reſearches ſimilar to thoſe of the Comte de
Choiſeul, on the Meanderf, would be neceſſary; the

and a greater difficulty than all is, that the ſandy ſoil,

ing able to learn any tradition even of the name of
the place}. This appears to me to have been the caſe
with the Whole of the adjacent deſert. This tract,
formerly interſected by large canals, and filled with

of every obſtacle, and which frequently buries the

of Danville, we cannot be certain he 1s right in the

by Herodotus, i isnot within its preſcribed 8 and,
it is no longer true, that Buſiris (Abouſir) was fitua-
ted, as Herodotus has told us*, in the middle of the

ancients, and the knowledge we have of the country,
are not ſufficiently preciſe exactly to determine the
ſucceſſive encroachments. In order to reaſon accu-

ground ſhould be dug into, but ſuch labours require
means and opportunities which few travellers poſſeſs;

which forms the lower Delta, undergoes great chan-
ges every day. Theſe are not entirely owing to the
Nile and the ſea; the wind itſelf is a very powerful
agent, which ſometimes choak upgghe canals, and
drives back the river, as it has doit the Canopic |
branch. At others, it amaſſes the ſand, and buries the
ruins, ſo that their very remembrance is loſt. Mr. vx
Niebuhr relates a remarkable inſtance of this. While 2
he was at Roſetta, in 1762, he diſcovered by. chance,
under the ſandy hillocks to the ſouthward of that city,
ſeveral ancient ruins, and, amone others, twenty fine

marble colums of Grecian workmanſhip, without be-

towns, preſents nothing but hillecks of a yellowiſh
fand, very fine, which the wind heaps up at the foot

palm-trees ; wherefore, notwithſtanding the labours

lituations he has aſſigned to leveral ancient e. |

* Lib. ii. p. 12g.
See Voyage ene de Ia Entre tom. 2.
3 Fats ſituation agrees very w ell with that of Bolbitinum, |

-”

city which is

4

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 25

M. Savary has been much” more exact in what he
has cited concerning one of the changes the Nile has
undergone“, by which it appears, that river formerly
flowed entirely through Lybia, to the ſouth of Mem-

phis. But the relation of Herodotus himſelf, on whoſe

authority this depends, is not without difficulties.
When that hiſtorian, therefore, aſſerts, after the prieſts
of Heliopolis, that Menes, the firſt king of Egypt,

1 dammed up the elbow, formed by the river, two
leagues and a quarter (one hundred ſtadia) above
Memphisf, and dug a new channel, to the eaſtward

of that city, does it not follow that Memphis was at

that time ſituated in a barren deſert, far diſtant from
any water? And how improbable. is ſuch an hypo-
= theſis. Can we literally believe in theſe immenſe

works of gs, wk is ſuppoſed to have founded a

tioned as exiſting before his time;
who is imagined to have dug canals and lakes, thrown
bridges over rivers, and erected palaces, towers and

temples ; and all this in the a 15. age of the nation,
and the infancy of all the arts? Is not this Menes
| himſelf an hiſtorical chimera, and are not all the re-

lations of the prieſts, concerning this remote anti-

quity, wholly mythological? I am inclined to think,
therefore, that the turning the courſe of the Nile, by

Moenes, was no more than a diverſion of ſome ſmaller

branch, to increaſe the inundation of the Delta; and

this conjecture feems the more probable, ſince, not-

= withſtanding the teſtimony of Herodotus, this part of

the valley, ſeen from the Pyramids, preſents nothing

which could have been an obſtruction to the courſe of
the river. Beſides, I cannot but think that M. Savary

preſumes too much, when he makes the great chan»
nel, called dahr bela ma, or river without water, ter-

minate at the mound before-mentioned, above Mem-
Pais and OP it to have been the ancient bed of

* Letter i Ko” | 4 Rat ii. ny *

— — "_

—
— ——

—
— 2

— — — —— —2 ys
CIO pg F
"" GXIRCTI ä * pulſe. 2 b Ls
— —ͤ = — r ——
Y - — : © — —
2 — —ꝓ— — * 9

—
—— —

*
—

— —

—

— 7
—
— y

— —— _

— ee - a —
— -
— * 1 = > 2 _
? .

IS EEG — —
— —
.,. *

the ſand and mud carried along B

26 —

the Nile. Every traveller, cited by Danville, places
that termination at the Lake of Fayoum, of which it
appears a more natural continuation“. To have
proved this poſition, he ſhould have viſited the places

themſelves, and I never heard, at Cairo, that M. Sa-

vary advanced farther to the ſouthward than the Py-
ramids of Djiza. The formation of the Delta, which

he deduces from this alteration, is equally repugnant
to probability; tor, in this ſudden change, why ſhould

we imagine, the * enormous weight of the waters,
* diſcharging themſelves into this gulph+. would im-

** pel thoſe of the ſea?” The meeting of two maſ-
ſes of a fluid produces nothing but a mixture, from
which a common level ſoon reſults; if we imagine
the water increaſed, we can only po that more
Jand will be covered. It is true, Savary adds,
the Nile, were
* accumulated, and the Delta, very inconſiderable
Eat firſt, roſe from the ſea, by encroaching on its

limits,“ But how does an iſland riſe out of the

ſea? Running waters level much more than they heap

up. This leads us to the queſtion of the elevation.

CHAP. Ill.
1 the R mA 15 the Delta.

4 Wh 'Us, on hole. antharky this hypo-
theſis is founded, has not very ſatisfactorily explained

2 In ra eee man inclined. fromeninfeetbion of
the map, to believe that this was the ancient courſe of the ri-

ver: as for the petrefactions of maſts and whole veſſels, men-
-*oned by Father Sicard, theſe, to gain credit, ought to be at-

teſted by more enlightened travellers than that. .
ty Letters on EgYPts

a @ w

e

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 27 |

che fact, but he has a paſſage of which M. Savary has
availed himſelf to draw certain poſitive concluſions

the following is his reaſoning :
© In the time of Mcoeris, who lived five hundred

. years before the Trojan war“, eight cubits were
fufficient to overflow the whole Delta (Herodot. lib
2. ); fifteen were neceſſary in the age of Herodo-
„ tus; under the Roman empire, ſixteen; under the

i Arabs, ſeventeen? eighteen cubits is the ſtandard
of abundance at this day; and the Nile ſometimes
5 riſes to two-and-twenty. Thus, in the ſpace of

= < 3284 years, we ſee the Delta has riſen fourteen
© cubits.”

True, if we a the fats as they are ſtated; but,

= on a careful examination, we ſhall find crcumbiigdia
which invalidgte both the premiſes and concluſion.

Let u the text of Herodotus :
*The Egyytian prieſts,” ſays that authort, mw  Þ
„ port, that in the reign of King Meeris, the Nile in-

© undated the Delta, if it only roſe to eight cubits.
* Ar preſent it does not overflow it unleſs it attain

C ſixteen, or at leaſt fifteen. Now, from the death

of Meeris to this time, nine hundred years have
not yet elapſed.” |

Let us calculate from theſe materials.

Os Meeris to Herodotus - - goo years,
From Herodotus to the year 1777, two

thouſand two hundred and thirty-

ſeven, or, if he wil! 2 240 85
Total, 3.140

0 Why « this difference of one hundred PC forty-four |
years exceſs in the calculation of M. Savary? Why
does he uſe other numbers than thoſe of his author P

Bur let us pas over the chronology. |

* Letter]. 1 | %
Lib. 2. p. 109. .
e 5

28 TRAVELS. in

In the time of bead Gama. cubits were ne-
ceſſary, or at leaſt fifteen, to overflow the Delta. Ihe
fame number was ſufficient in the time of the Ro-
mans : fifteen and fixteen are invariably the meaſure.

„ Before the time of Petronius,”* fays Strabo“,
** plenty was not kaown in the Delta, unleſs the Nile
© role to fourteen cubits. But this Governor, ob-
% taining Dy art what nature denied, under his pre-
e fecture, plenty has been known at twelve.” The
Arabs tell us the fame. A book in Arabic ſtill exiſts,
which contains a table of all the riſings of the Nile,
from the firſt year of the Hegira (A. D. 622), down
to the year (. . 1470); ; and this work aſcer-
tains that, in the lateſt times, as often as the Nile has
fourteen cubits depth in its channel, there is a harveſt
ſufficient for the year; that, if it reaches fixteen,
there is ſufficient for two years; but when it falls
ſhort of fourteen, or exceeds eighteen, there is a fa-
mine; which correſponds exactly with the account of |
Herodotus. The book I quote 1s Arabic, but its con-
tents are in every one's hands, who chooſes to con-
ſult the word Nile, in the Bibliotheque Orientale of

D'Herbelot, or the Extracts from ee in

Doctor Shaw's Trav els.

Nor is the meaſure of theſe cubits uncertain. Pre-
ret, Danville, and M. Bailli, have proved that the
Egyptain cubit, being invariably twenty-four digits, is
Equal to twenty and a halt French inches ; and the

en cubit, called draa maſri, is preciſely divided
into twenty-four digits, and amounts to twenty and a
balf of our inches. But the columns with which the

riſe of the Nile is meaſured, have undergone an alte- 9

ration, which we muſt not omit to notice.

3 Lib. 25
7 1 have meaſured ſeveral of 18 lk a bied de Roi, Land-
ard foot of copper; but I feund they all varied from one to
thice lines. The Draa Jeambon ili is of Wenty- Firs di , or
twenty-iour inches, wanting e one line.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 2 9.

In the earlier ages, and while the Arab govern. :
ed Egypt,” fays Kalkaſendas, © they perceived that.
when the Nile did not attain the ſtandard necefiiry*
for plenty, every one was anxious to lay in ſufficient.
** proviſion for the year, which occaſioned great in-
e conveniencies. Complaints of this were made to

gc the Calif Omar, who gave orders to Amrou to en-

5e quire into the matter; and he reported as follows:
Having made the reſearches you commanded, we
„have found, that when the Nile riſes to fourteen.
5 cubits, it produces a ſufficient haryeſt for the year;
* when it attains ſixteen cubits, we have plenty ; ; but”
„that at twelve and eighteen dearth enſues. | We,
** alſo find that the cuſtom of making known the:
Ye height of the waters by procla mation, is produe-
0 tive of many irregularities, and | 1s very diſadvanta-
** geous to commerce.“

Omar, to remedy this abuſe, was poſſi bly inclined
to aboliſh theſe proclamations ; but that not being
practicable, he deviſed an expedient, ſuggeſted by
Abohes to produce the ſame effect. Until then
the me afuring column, called the Nilometer*, had been
divided into cubits of twenty-four digits each; Omar

ordered this to be deſtroyed, and ſubſtituting another

in its place, which he erected in the ifland of Raouda,
he commanded that the twelve lower cubits ſhould
conſiſt of twenty-eight digits, inſtead of twenty-four,
while the upper remained of the uſual number; hence;
when the riſe of the Nile appeared, by the column, to

be twelve cubits, it was really fourteen 3 for theſe
twelve cubits being each four digits too jong, there
was an exceſs of forty-eight digits, or two cubits,
Therefore, when fourteen cubits, the meaſure of a
| ſufficient harveſt, were proclaimed, the inundation was
really at the height for plenty, and the multitude, al-
ways eaſily deceived by words, never ſuſpected the im-

* In Arabic, mekias, or m'aſure,

30 TRAVELS IN

poſition. But this alteration could not eſcape the
Arabian hiſtorians, who tell us the columns of the

Said, or Upper Egypt, continued to be divided by

twenty-four digits; that the height of eighteen cubits

(old ſtyle) was always injurious; and that nineteen

was very rare, and almoſt a prodigy*. 5
Nothing therefore is leſs certain than the progreſ-
ſive changes here alledged, and which are rendered
improbable by a known fact, which is, that in the long
period of eighteen centuries, the riſe of the Nile never
varied. How does it happen then that it is ſo differ-

ent at preſent? How can it ſo ſoon have altered from

fifteen to twenty-two cubits, ſince the year one thou-
ſand four hundred and ſeventy-three? This problem
is, in my opinion, eaſy of ſolution ; not from phyſical
changes, but from other circumſtances. It is not the

Nile but the column and meaſures which have

varied. The myſtery in which the Mekias is enveloped |

by the Turks, has prevented the greater part of tra-

vellers from diſcovering the truth; but Pocock, Who
obtained a fight of it in 1739, relates that the ſcale
of cubits was inaccurate and unequal. He even ob-

| ſerves it appeared to him to be new, a circumſtance

which may lead us to imagine the Turks, in imitation __
of Omar, have made ſome recent alteration. In ſhort,
there is a fact which removes every doubt, for M.
Niebuhrj, whom the world will not eaſily ſuſpect of
falſehood or miſtake, having meaſured, in 1762, the

marks of the inundation, on a wall at Djiza (Giza), b
found that, on the firſt of June, the Nile had fallen

15 Dodtor Pocock, who bas ſeveral good obſervations on the
Nile, has entirely miſtaken the meaning of the text of Kalka-

ſendas; from an obſcure paflage he has been led to conclude,
that the Nilometer, in the time of Omar, was only twelve cu-

bits, and this error has led him into a number ef falſe con jec-

tures. Poceck's Travels, vol. 1. 29.

Voyage en Arabie, tom. I. p. 102.

| EGYPT AND SYRIA. 31

: recs -four French feet. But twenty-four feet, redu-
ced to cubits, at the rate of twenty inches and a half
_ each, give preciſely fourteen cubits one inch. It is
true there {till remains eighteen days decreaſe ; but by
eſtimating that at half a cubit, agreeable to what has
been obſerved by Pocock“ we have only fourteen
cubits and a half, which correſponds exactiy with the
ancient calculation.

There is another aſſertion of M. Savary? s to which, :
likewiſe, I cannot ſubſcribe without reſtriction. Since
<« have been in Egypt,“ ſays he, Letter I. I have
Z <© twice made the tour of the Delta; I have even croſ-
YM < ſdit by the canal of Menouf, The river tho? full
to the brim, in the great branches of Roſetta and
« Damietta, and thoſe which run through the interior
* parts of the country; only overflowed the land
„where it lay low, or where banks had been raiſed to
e ſtopits waters, and throw them over the ice fields,”

Hence he concludes, © that the preſent poſition of the
„Delta is the beſt poſſible for agriculture ; ſince, ceaſ-
ing to be overflowed, this iſland has a yearly gain
of the three months during which the Thebias is
% inundated.“ It muſt be confeſſed that nothing can
de more extraordinary than this gain. If the Delta
has gained by being no longer overflowed, why was
the inundation at all times fo anxiouſly deſired ?
“ This is ſupplied by the banks.“ But the Delta
muſt not be compared to the marſhes of the Seine.
The water is only on a level with the land towards the
ſea; every where elſe it is below the level, and the

more riſes as you aſcend the river. In ſhort, if 4 may

give my teſtimony, I muſt declare that, when I went
rom Cairo to Roſetta, byt the canal of Manouf, I ob.

* The 17th of May, eleven pikes {or cubits) of the ER
were above the water, and the gd of June eleven and a half : in
ſeventeen days therefore there was a difference of half a  cubit,
. Pocock's TT yo!. I. p. 256. |

1111

—— 2 ——— — — * — 3
— — —

—
—

— — —

* . .
— — — — — - — — — — — - * . . . * —
— — - . . - . — . 2 - — - — — ” —
— — . — . 7 . — —— = 7 — — ne * we — -
— — — OM” — —— — - — — - > — — —— —— —— - — — — —— — — - « —_— - * m. * - - - — — —
> ” . ar. 3-4 , * .
*
Lins : 7 — 1 Le" . —
— 5 * - 2 . 7 - - —
Wl « - — — — — — 4 — 299 —4
— — — es 1 . yo

— — .
.

—
— — —

— —

—

—

— — - —
—— —2—2— — —— 2

+ -- TRAVELS IN

ſerved on the 26th, 27th, and 28th of September,
1783, that, notwith ſtanding the waters had decreaſed
upwards of a fort night, the cou intry was ftill partly
under water, and ſtill diſcovered in the places left dry,
the traces of the inundation. What M. Savary obſer-
ved can therefore only be attributed to an indifferent
Inundation; nor ought we to imagine, either that
the riſing has changed the ftate of the Delta,“ or that
the Egyptians can have no water but what is procured
PY artificial means, as expenſive as inſufficient.+
It now remains for us to explain the difficulty of
the eight cubits in the ti ne of Mœris; and I can-
not help thinking this ariſes from cauſes of the fame.

nature. It appears that, ſubſequent to this Prince,

an alteration 88 place 1 in the meaſures of the coun-
try, and one cubit was riade into two. This conjec-

ture is the more probable fince, in the time of Mozris, ;

Egypt was not united into one kingdom; there were
at leaſt three between Aſouan and the ſoa: Seſoſtris,
Who was poſterior to Meœris, conquered and united
them. ut, after this Prince; t they were again di.
vided; and Mis diviſion ſubſiſted till the reign of
Plammeticus. Such a change in the meaſures of
Egypt accords perfectly with the character of Sefof-
tris, who effected a general revolution in the govern-
ment, eſtabliſhed new laws, and a new adminiſtration,
ralfad mounds and cauſeways, on which to build vil-
lages and towns,” and dug 0 great a number of ca-

* The bed of the river itlelf has riſen, like the reſt of. the /

| FOUNIry

F In the lower Delta, the country is watered by means of
fingle wheels, becauſe the Water is on a level with the land; but

in the upper Delta, it is neceſſary to apply chain-buckets to the

wheels, or raiſe the water by moveable pumps. There is a

great Buder on the road from Roletta to Cairo and it is

10 Ficiently evident this laborious method Nee no Hr
He *

8

is

* , —
E e 4 EI ILEGIS TT UE A CL
J ͤ Con Sn PEE eres
5 2 5

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 33

nals, according to Herodotus“, that the Egyptians

laid aſide uſing wheel nee which they had all

then employed.
Ir will be proper likewiſe to obſerve-that the 8

of inundation are not the ſame through all Egypt.

On the contrary; a gradual diminution obtains as the
river approaches the ſea. Ar Aſouan (Syene), the
overflow is more conſiderable, by one ſixth, than at

Grand Cairo; and, when the depth of water, at this
latter city, is twenty-ſeven feet, it is ſcarcely four at

Roſetta and Damietta. The reaſon of this is, that

beſides the quantity of water abſorbed by the grounds,
as it flows, the river, confined in one fingle bed, and
within a narrow valley, rifes higher 1n the upper coun-
try; whereas, when it paſſed Cairo, being no longer
obſtructed by the mountains, and ſeparating into A

thouſand branches, it neceſſarily loſes in depth what

it acquires in ſurface.

The reader will conclude, douttttels; from what 1
have ſaid, that writers have flattered themſelves too
much in ſuppoſing they could fix the preciſe limits of
the enlargement and riſe of the Delta. But, though

J would reject all illuſory circumſtances, I am far

{rom denying the fact to be well founded; it is too
plain from reaſon, and an examination of the coun-

try. The riſe of the ground appears to me demon-

{trated by an obſervation on which little ſtreſs has

been laid. In going from Roſetta to Cairo, when

the waters are low, as in the month of March, we
may remark, as we go up the river, that the ſhore Tiles

_ gradually above the water; fo that, if it overflowed

two feet at Roſetta, it overflows from three to four at

7M Herodotus, lib 2, This circumſtance has greally embar=
roffed; our pur: chronologiſts, who place Seloſtris before
Moies, in whoſe time chariots ſtill ſubſiſted in Egypt; but it is

088 the fault of Herodotus if his ſyſtem of chronology, the bets

al ant quity, has not been underſtood.

1

mo

—
— —

I

34 TRAVELS IN

Faoua, and upwards of twelve at Cairo.* Now; by
reaſoning from this fact, we may deduce the proof of
an increate by ſediment ; for the layer of mud being
in proportion to the thickneſs of the ſheets of water
by which it is depoſited, muſt be more or leſs conſi-
derable as theſe are of a greater or leſs depth; and

we have ſeen that the like gradation 1 is obſervable from

Aſouan to the ſea.

On the other band, the increaſs of the Delta mani-
teſts itſelf in a ſtriking manner, by the form of Egypt,
along the Meditertanean. When we conſider its fi-
gure on the map, we perceive, that the country,
which is in the line of the river, and evidently form-
ed of foreign materials, has aſſumed a ſemi-circulat
ſhape, and that the ſhores of Arabia and Africa, on

each fide, have a direction towards the bottom of tje

Delta, which manifeſtly diſcovers this country was
formerly 2 gulph, that, in time, has been filled up.
This accumulation is common to all rivers, and is to
de accounted for in the ſame manner in all: the rain
water, and the ſnow, deſcending from the mountain
into vallies, hurry inceſſantly along with them the
earth they waſh away in their deſcent. The heavier |
parts, ſuch as pebbles and ſands, ſoon ſtop, unleſs
forced along by a rapid current. But when the
waters meet only with a fine ahd light earth, they
carry away large quantities with the greateſt facility.
The Nile meeting with ſuch a kind of earth, in Abyf.
finia, and the interior parts of Africa, its waters are
loaded, and its bed filled with it; nay, it is frequently
fo embarraſſed with this ſediment, as to be ſtraighten-
ed in its courſe. But, when the inundation reſtores |
to it its natural energy, it drives the mud that has ac- |

It would be curious to aſcertain in what proportion it con-
rinues up to Aſouan. Some Copts whom I have mterrogated |
dn the ſubject, aſſured me that it was much higher rough. © all
the Said than at Cario.

„

/ he Ge Rn, I, 108

e ot Ah SS. oy

A, EA BY I ri. A

e

EGYPT. AND SYRIA. 35

cuinulated towards the ſea, at the ſame time that it
brings down more for the enſuing ſeaſon ; and this,
arrived at its mouths, heaps up, and forms ſhoals,
where, the declivity does not allow ſufficient action to
the current, and where the ſea produces an equili-
brium of reſiſtance. The ſtagnation which follows,

occaſions the groſſer particles, which till then had

floated, to ſink, and this takes place more particularly

in thoſe places where there is leaſt motion, as towards
the ſhores, till the ſides become gradually enriched by
the ſpoils of the upper country, and of the Delta

itſelt ; for, if the Nile takes from Abyſſinia, to give to

the Thebais, i it likewiſe takes from the Thebais to give
to the Delta, and from the Delta to carry to the ſea.
Wherever its waters have a current, it deſpoils the

ſame territory it enriches. As we aſcend towards

Cairo, when the river is low, we may obſerve on each
ide the banks worn ſteep, and crumbling in large
flakes. The Nile, which undermines them, depriv-
ing their light earth of ſupport, it falls i into the bed

of the river, for when the water is high the earth

imbibes it; and when the ſun and drought return,

cracks and moulders away in great flakes, which are
hurried along by the Nile, Thus are ſeveral canals

choaked up, and others enlarged, while the bed of

the river continually riſes. This is the caſe with the
moſt frequented of theſe at preſent, I mean that which
runs from Nadir to the branch of Damietta. This
canal, at firſt dug by the hand of man, is in feveral
places become as wide as the Seine. It ſupplies even
the mother branch, which runs from Batn-el-Bakara

to Nadir, and which is filling up ſo fait, that if it be
not ſpeedily cleanſed, it will ſoon become firm ground:

the reaſon of this is, that the river tends perpetually
to the right line, in which it has the greateſt force;

wherefore it has preferred the Bolbitine, which was at
firſt but an artificial canal, to the Canopic branch.“

* Icrodot. lib. 11.

36 TRAVELS IN

From the mechaniſm of the river, it further reſul:s
that the principal encroachment muſt be formed in
the line of the moſt conſiderable mouths, and of the
ſtrongeſt current; and the aſpeck of the country is

conformable with this theory. If we caſt our eye on
the map, we ſhall perceive that the projection of the
lands is chiefly in the direction of the branches of
Roſetta and Damietta. The lateral and intermediate

country continues to be lakes and moraſſes unſeparat-

ed, between the Continent and the ſea, becauſe the
ſmall canals, which termirate there, have been able
to produce only an imperfect accumulation; for this
mud and ſediment caufe a very flow riſe: nor would
this indeed ever ſuffice to elevate them above the wa-
ter, without the addition of a more powerful agent,
which 1s the ſea, that perpetually raiſes the level of
the low banks above its own waters. For the waves,
beating on the ſhore, repel the ſand and mud which
they meet ; their daſhing afterwards accumulates that
lender bank, and gives it an elevation which it never
would have attained in ſtill waters. The truth of
this is manifeſt to every perſon who walks on the edge
of the ſea, on a low and changing ſhore ; but the ſea
muſt have no current on the beach: for if it loſes in
thoſe parts where it is in eddy, it gains in thoſe where
it is in motion. When the ſhoals are at length form-
ed on the level of the water, human induſtry ſoon
endeavours their improvement. But inſtead of ſay-
ing it raiſes their level above the water, we ought to
fay, it ſinks the level of the water, ſince the canals
which are excavated collect, in narrow channels, thoſe
waters which were ſpread over a great extent of
ground.“

135 The great number of canals may be the cauſe of variation
in the degrees of the inundation for if there be many, and
thoſe deep ones, the water will run off quicker, and rile leis;
if there be few, and thoſe ſhallew, the contrary will happen.

9

87

Iv EEE
Wee

2

W Ms 023 C
4 9 . : 8
— — ß ACTIN os 8
. ͤ os a NCC 3 ON FTE 5
1 4 : F-85543 by e 1 1 xe a if od 5 a g 55 — © 1 N * . - 7
8 wes ee 5 4 — = 8 N Har 0 r nn 2 3 R - 1? . I; Tis Sy * * 2
- 4 K * 8 o : - P - > 8 S « * ” > * * * : > 8 4
. 1 ” 5 (WS. "> N * 2 a C x x - .
” N * 6 * F 9 * 8 7 —_—— 1 N RY *

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 37

There. remains unqueſtionably many obſervations
to make, or to reconſider, in this country; but, as I
have already ſaid, they are attended with great diffi-
culties, to overcame which, much time, expenſe, and
a{dreis are neceſſary; and in many reſpects, the ne-

e obſtacles are even more inſuperable than the

{indamental. Baron de Tott experienced the truth
0: this very lately, with relpect to the Nilometer. In
„ain did he indeavour to ſeduce the guardians; in
rain did ne give and promiſe ſequins to the cryers, in

order to obtain the true heights of the Nile; their con-

tradictory reports proved either their deceit, or their
univerial ignorance. It will be obſerved, perhaps,
that meaſuring columns might be erected in private
houſes ; but ſuch experiments, ſimple in theory, are

impoſible. 1 in practice: they would expoſe to too ſeri-

os dangers. Even the curioſity natural to the
Frans every day renders the Turks more jealous.
{ney are purſuaded we have formed deſigns on their

country; and the invaſions of the Ruſſians, added
to popular prejudice, ſtrengthens their ſuſpicions. It

is generally believed, at this moment, throughout
their empire, that the predicted hour is arrived,

when the power and religion of the Muſſulmen are

about to be deſtroyed, and that the Tellow King is

coming to eſtabliſh a new empire, &c. &c. But it is

time to reſume our ſubject.
I paſs ſlightly over the ſeaſon“ of the inundation,

which is fo well known; its inſenſible increaſe, ſo

unlike the ſudden ſwellings of our rivers ; its diverſi-

ties, according to which it is ſometimes feeble, ſome-
times ſtrong, and ſometimes even entirely tails; a

very rare caſe, but of which two or three aß

have happened. All theſe particulars are too well

1 1 is fixed preciſely 10 the: 19th of June, but it weed bs
aiihcult to determine the firſt inſtant of it ſo exactly as the
Co; pts with to do. c

i

tf 4 | THE
e
Renne

{4 ien
pt itt
, 1

Wine

—
——— ns hn ot
—

TRAVELS IN

known io be tepeated ; it is known likewiſe that tlie
cauſes of rhis PRENomMEnon, which were an enigma
to the ancients“, are no longer ſo to the Europeans.

Since travellers have informed them that Abyſſinia

and the adjacent part of Africa, are deluged with
rain in May, June, and July, they have, with reaſon,

concluded, that it muſt be theſe rains, which, by the

fituation of the country, abounding with a thouſand
rivers, collect together in the fame valley, direct
their courſe to diſtant ſhores, and preſent the Open:
dous fight of a maſs of water, which employs thre

months in draining off. We leave to Grecian na-

turaliſts their Ain of the northerly or Eteſian winds,

which, by a pretended preſſure, ſtayed the courſe of
the river; it is aſtoniſhing that even they ſhould ever
have admitted this explication, for the wind, acting
only on the ſurface of the water, can never prevent

the inferior maſs from obeying the laws of gravity.
Ia vain have ſome moderns alledged the example of

the Mediterranean, which, from the continuance of
eaſterly winds, leaves dry the coaſt of Syria, a foot,
or a foot and a half, to gain as much on thoſe of
Spain and Province, on which weſterly winds have
a contrary effect ; there is no compariſon to be made
between a ſea without declivity, and a river; between
the valt ſurface of the Mediterranean, and that ot
the Nile; between twenty. * feet and .
inches.

* Democritus, eee, had conjeRured the true : cauſe. Sosa
Digdorus Sicuſus, lib. 12 | -

n

9 # -

me. Eo SS SE

I
r 3
n
. 2 1 8
8 e

EGYPT AND sYRIA. 39

0 HAP. IV.

Of the Winds and their Pbænomena.

T HE 3 winds, which blow at ated. peri

ods every year, anſwer a more certain and effeQual

purpole z that of carrying into Abyſſinia a prodigious

quantity of clouds. From the month of April to
july we fee theſe inceſſantly aſcending towards the
fouth, and might be ſometimes tempted to expect
rain from them; but this parched country requeſts in

vain from them a benefaction which is to return upon

it under a different form. Never does it rain in the

Delta in ſummer, and but rarely, and in ſmall quan-
tities, during the whole courſe of the year. The year
1761, obſerved by M. Niebuhr, was an extraordinary

caſe, which is ſtill frequently mentioned. The acci-

dents occaſioned by the rains in Lower Egypt, in

which a number of villages, built with earth, crumb-

led to pieces, afford a ſufficient proof that this abun-
dance of water is there looked upon as very rare. It

muſt be obſerved, likewiſe, that it rains ſtill leſs as
you aſcend towindh the Said. Thus, rain is more
trequent at Alexandria and Roſetta than at Cairo,

and at Cairo than at Miniah, and is almoſt a prodigy

at Djirdja. As for us, the inhabitants of humid

countries, we cannot conceive how it is poſſible for
à country to ſubſiſt without rain“; Ch in Egypt,
| beſides the quantity of water which the earth imbibes

at the inundation, the dews which fall in the ſummer.

; air ne for — The e called

* When rain falls in Egypt and in Paleſtine, there is ge

neral Joy among the people : they aſſemble together in tle
ſtreets, they ſing, are all in motion, and ſhout ya allah CIS.
nobarch ! thay 1 is to lay, 9 Go2! 0 Ble Hed! Bs

them, as if it had rained.
theſe dews are more or leſs heavy, according to the

40 © TRAVELSUIN:

Paſtekes, afford a remarkable proof of this; for

though they have frequently nothing under them but
helle
dews as well as the rains, are more copious towards
the fea, and leis conſiderable in proportion to their

A dry duſt, yet their leaves are always freſh.

but differ from them by being more
At Alexandria,

diſtance from it;
abundant inf ier than in winter.

aſter ſunſet, in the month of April, the clothes ex-

poled to the ait, and the terraces are ſoaked with
Like the rains, again,

prevailing wind. The foutherly and ſouth-eaſterly
produce none; the north wind a great-deal, and the
welterly {till more.

which the firſt croiles, and the
other traverſes Iengthway s. I nnd, even on compar-
ing my oblervations on this lubject in Province, in

Syrla, and in Egypt, with thoſe of M. Niebuhr in Arabia
and at Bombay, that this relative poſition of the ſeas
and continents is the cauſe of the various qualities of
one and the tame wind, which produces rain in one

COUNIYY, while it is invariably dry in another; a re-

mark which deranges not a little the ſyſtems of both
ancient and modern allrologers e en the influ-
ence of the planets.
Another phznomenon, no lefs remarkable, is the

penodical return of each wind, and 1ts appropriation,

1o to ſpeak, to certain ſeaſons of the year. Egypc
and Syria prelent, in this alp, a regularity v wor-

thy of attention.

In Egypt, when the ſun . the tropic A

Cancer, the winds which, before blew from the ealt,

change od the north, and become conltant in that.

point. In June they always blow from the north

Thele varieties are eaſily explain-
ed, by obſerving that the two former proceed from
the delerts of Africa and Arabia, which afford not a
drop of water ; that the northerly and weſterly winds,
on the contrary, convey over Egypt the vapours from
the Mediterranean,

3

EGYPT AND/SYRIA. | 41

and notthwelt ; this; therefone ji] is the proper ſeaſon i
for going up the Levant, and a veſſel. may expect to
anchor in Cyprus or at Alexandria, the fourteenth,

nay, ſometimes the eleventh day, after her departure
from Marſeilles. The winds continue northerly in
July, but vary ſometimes toward the welt, and ſome-
times toward the eaſt. About the end. of july,
during all the month of Auguſt, and half of 8
ber, they remain conſtantly in the north, and are
moderate; briiker in the day, however, and weaker
at night. At this period an univerſal calm Feigns
on the Mediterranean, fo that {hips would be ſeven-
ty or eighty days in returning to France.

Towards the end of September, when the ſun re-
paſſes the line, the winds return to the eaſt; and,

ugh not fixed, blow more regularly from that
than : any other point, except the north. Veſſels avail
themſelves of this ſeaſon, which laſts all October and
part of November, to return to Europe; and the nun
o Marſeilles is from thirty to five-and-thirty days.
As the ſun approaches the other tropic, the winds
become more variable and more tempeſtuous; they
W moſt. utually blow from the north, the north-weſt,
and weſt, in which points they continue during che
months of December, January, and February, which
is the winter ſeaſon in Egypt, as well as with us.
The vapours of the Mediterranean, condenſed by the
coldneſs of the atmoſphere, deſcend in miſts and

W rains. Towards the end of February and in March,
Z when the ſun returns towards the equatar, the winds

3 are more frequently ſoutherly than at any other ſea-
ſon. During this laſt month, and that of April, the
he ſouth-eaſterly, ſouth, and ſouth-weſterly wines

prevail; and at times the weſt, north, and eaſt; the

þ | latter of which becomes the molt prevalent about
the end of April; and during May it divides with
ide north the empire of the ſea, and renders the

. TRAVELS IN

paſſage to France Rill more expeditious chan at the
other equinox.

Of the hot Wind, ar Kamen ls

The ſoutherly winds of which I have been hich; |
ing, are known in Egypt by the general name of |
coinds of fifty (days )* not that they laſt fifty days Y
without intermiſſion, but becauſe they prevail more
frequently in the fifty days preceding and follow-
ing the equinox. Travellers have mentioned them
under the denomination of peiſonous winds+ ; or,
more correctly, hot winds of the deſart. Such, in
fact, is their quality; ; and their heat is ſometimes ſo
exceſſive, that it is difficult to form any idea of its vi-
otence without having experienced it; but it may be
compared co the heat of a large oven at the moment
of drawing out the bread. When thefe winds be-
gin to blow, the atmoſphere aſſumes an alarming al-
pect. The iky, at other times fo clear, in this cli-
mate, becomes dark and heavy ; the ſun loſes his
iplendour, and appears of a violet colour. The air
is not cloudy, but grey and thick, and is, in fact,
tilled with an extremely ſubtle duſt, which penetrates
every where. This wind, always light and rapid,
is not at firſt remarkably hot, but it increaſes in heat
in proportion as it continues. All animated bodies
toon dilcover it, by the change it produces in them.
The lungs, oleh a too rarefied air no longer ex- |

pands, arc contracted, and become painful. 3 1

* In Andbie hanſe » but the & repreſents the e jo: ta or
the German c. |

+ The Arabs of the defer 6511 chem ſemoum, or poiſon; | 5 :
1 Turks /amyela, or wind of Syria, from which is formed 3

the Samiel wind. Baron de Tott tranſlates this word the wind þ

of Damoſcus, which is the capital of Syria, See allo Note ® io
Chapter J. of our author's account of Syria, where el Shom is
kad to be the Arabic name of the city of Damaſcus. 1. |

nd
ed
ind |
© (o i |
223

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 43

ration is ſhort and difficult, the ſkin parched ad dry,
and the body conſumed by an internal heat. In vain
is recourſe had to large draughts of water; nothin!

can reſtore perſpiration. In vain 1s coolneſs ſought
for; all bodies in which 1t 1s uſual to find it, deceive

the hand that touches them. Marble, iron, water,

notwithſtanding the ſun no longer appears, are hot.
The ſtreets are deſerted, and the dead ſilence of night
reigns every where. The inhabitants of towns and

villages ſhut themſelves up in their houſes, and thoſe
of the deſert in their tents, or in wells dug in the
earth, where they wait the termination of this de-

ſtructive heat. It uſually laſts three days, but if it
exceeds that time it becomes inſupportable. Woe to

the traveller whom this wind ſurprizes remote from
| ſhelter; he muſt ſuffer all its horrible effects, which

ſometimes are mortal. The danger is molt eminent

when it blows in ſqualls, for then the rapidity of the
wind increaſes the heat to ſuch a degree, as to cauſe
ſudden death. This death is a real ſuffocation; the

lungs being empty, are convulſed, the circulation
diſordered, and the whole maſs of blood driven by
the heart towards the head and breaſt ; whence that
. ern ee at the noſe and mouth which happens
after death. This wind is eſpecially deſtructive to

perſons of a plethoric habit, and thoſe in whom

fatigue has deſtroyed the tone of the muſcles and the |
_ veſſels. The corpſe remains a long time warm, ſwells,

turns blue, and is eaſily ſeparated; all which are
ſigns of that putrid fermentation which takes place

in animal bodies when the humours become ſtagnant.
| Theſe accidents are to be avoided, by ſtopping the

noſe and mouth with handkerchieh'; an eſhcacious

method likewiſe is that practiſed by the camels, which
bury their noſes in the ſand, and Sw) them there till
the ſquall is over.

Another quality of this wit" is its extreme aridity ; ;
which is ſuch, that water Prinkled o on the floor eva-

as — —
— — * —
— — — — —
* 2 —— —

. A 8. *
— —ůů >
—— —— wc, ._ —

— - — 2 — wh — —
— ——— ——— x —

-
— Ie — — * =>
—xꝛů ———— ———ů—
2
3 Sees

— — I nn mere

at Mecca, from the eaſt ;

| Bagdad
varieties, which ſeem embarraſſing at firit fight, on re-
flection, turniſth the means of ſolving the enigma.

the action of the ſun upon the ſands,
winds produce not the fame effects at every ſeaſon.
In Kgypt, for example, I am aſſured, that the ſoutherly
Wine 98 s in December and January are as cold as thoſe
froꝛſi the north; and the reaſon of this is, that the
ſun having reached the ſouthern tropic, no longer
burns up the northren parts of Africa, and that abyſ-
ſinia, which is extremely mountainous, 18 covered

TRAVELS IN

44 85
porates in a few minutes ; by this extreme dryneſs,
it withers and ſtrips all che plants, and, by exhaling

too ſuddenly the emanations from animal bodies,

criips the ſkin, cloſes the pores, and cauſes that fe-

veriſh heat which i is the invariable effect of ſuppreficd

perſpiration.
Theſe hot winds are not peculiar to Egypt ;
blow likewiſe in Syria; more frequently, however
Yria; 9 4 7

near the ſea, and in the delert, than on the mountains.
M. Niebuhr met with them in Arabia,
and in the Diarbekir: they are alſo known! in Perſia,
in the reſt of Africa, and even in Spain; every where
their effects are ſimilar,
cording to the Gtuation of the country.

at Bombay,

but their direction varies ac-
In Egypt,
the moſt violent proceed from the ſouth-ſouth-weit ;

at Surat, Irom the north ;
at Baſſoia, from the north-weſt ;

and in Syria from the ſouth-eaſt. Theſe

We 3 Þ on examination, that theſe winds always

proceed from deſart continents; and in fact, it is

natural that the air which covers the immenſe plains

of Lybia and Arabia, meeting there neither with rivu—
lets, nor lakes, nor foreſts, but ſcorched by the rays
of a burning lun, and the reflection of the ſand ſhould

acquire a prodigious degree of heat and aridity; and

it any cauſe intervenes to ſet it in motion, it cannot
but carry with 1t the deſtructive qualities it has im-
it is ſo true that theſe qualities are owing to
that theſe ſame

bibed;

they

from the weſt at

17 88885

EP - | pane pnuend. Ws

4

i We

CCF 1 108, Pn

1 pay ical ſtate of this country.

| EGYPT AND SYRIA. 45 |

with ſow. The ſun mult approach the ee to
produce theſe phænomena. From a ſimilar reaſon,
the ſouth winds has much leſs effect in Cyprus,
where it arrives cooled by the vapours of the Medi-
terranean. That from the north poſſeſſes its charac-

tereſtic qualities in this iſland, where the inhabitants

complain that its heat is inſupportable in ſummer,
while it is freezing cold in winter; which evidently
ariſes from the tate of Aſia Minor, which in ſummer

is burnt up, and in winter covered with ice. In fact,

this ſubject offers a multitude of problems, calculated
to excite the curioſity of the naturaliſt.— Would it
not, for inſtance, be intereſting to know;
rſt, Whence proceeds this connection of the lea
ſons, and the progreſs of the ſun, with the various

winds, and the points from whence they blow?

2dly, Why, throughout the Mediterranean, does

the wind molt frequently blow from the north, inſo-

much, that we may ſay it continues in that point nine
months out of twelve?
3dly, Why do the caſterly u winds return ſo regular-

iy "after the equinoxes; and why are the winds, in n
general, higher at this period? _ 4

4thly, Why are the dews more abundant in ſum-
mer than i in winter; and why, ſince the clouds are
cauſed by the evaporation of the ſea, and that evapo-
ration is more copious in ſummer than in winter, why,
notwithſtanding, are there more clouds: in winter than
in ſummer?

Sthly, In ſliort, why is rain 1 ſo rare in Egypt, and
why do the clouds rather collect in Abyſinia ?

But it is time to coriplete our obſervations on the

| mnt Wi
ce

10 little vated above the level of the ſea.

es

cn AP. v.
Of the 1 and Air.

T HE climate of Egypt is, 75 3 eftcemed

extremely hot, ſince in July and Auguſt, Reaumur's

thermometer ſtands, in the moſt temperate apart.

ments,
point.

at 24 and 25 degrees above the freezing
In the Said it riſes ſtill higher, though I can

aſſert nothing preciſe in that reſpect. The height of

the fun, which, in ſummer, nearly approaches the

zenith, is doubtleſs a primary cauſe of this heat; but

when we conſider that, in other countries, inde

the ſame latitude, the wear? is leſs, we may conclude
there exiſts a ſecondary cauſe, equally powerful with

the former, and this, perhaps, 1s the country being

2ccount, two ſeaſons only ſhould be, diſtinguiſhed i in
Egypt; the ſpring and ſummer, that is to ſay, the
cool . and the hot.

of this ſeaſon the air is inflamed,
and the heat oppreſſive
The body ſweats profuſely even under the lighteſt

the {ky ſparkling,

dreſs, and in a ſtate of the moſt profound fs, =

And this perſpiration becomes ſo neceſſary, that the
ſlighteſt ſuppreſſion of it is a ſerious malady ; inſo-
much, that, the ordinary ſalute ** How do you do?“

_ ought in Egypt to be: * How do you ſweat ?”” The
departure of the ſun tempers, in ſome degree, theſe

heats. The vapours of the earth ſoaked by the Nile,
and thoſe brought by the weſt, and northweſt winds,

abſorbing the fire diſperſed throughout the atmoſ-

phere, produce an agreeable treſhnels, and e even Pier

On this

The latter continues from
March to November; and even from the end of Fe-
bruary, the ſun is not ſupportable, for an European,

at nine o'clock in the morning. During the whole

to all e ee to it.

3

L

N act

(d Us w hd =» + (0.

* .
PU
*
.
- "4
wy
N
3
NED
SECS:
4 T' ©
1
3
4
" 30s *
2
29
8
>>
[7
*
7
4

EGYPT AND SYRIA. — '

eing cod if. we may credit the natives, and ſome

European merchants ; but the Egyptians, 3

naked, and accuſtomed to perſpire, ſhiver at the

Icaſt coolneſs. Ihe thermometer, which, at the
loweſt, in the month of February, ſtands at 15 eighth
or ninth degree of Reaumur's ſcale, above the freezing

point, enables us to determine with certainty, and

ue may pronounce, that ſnow, and hail, are phæno-
mena Which no Egyptian has ſeen in fifty years.

s for our merchants, their ſenſibility 1 is owing to

their. improper uſe of furs, which is carried ſo far,

that, in winter they have frequently two or three

= coverings of foxes-ſkin, and, even in ſummer, retain
= the ermine or petit eris ; in; excuſe. for this, they
plead the chillneſs they experience in the ſhade, as
an indiſpenſible reaſon; and in fa, the northerly
and weſterly currents of air, which almoſt continually

prevail, cauſe a pretty conſiderable coolneſs out of the

un; but the ſecret and real reaſon is, that the peliſſe
is to be conſidered as the lace of 'F urkey, the favour-
ite object of luxury; it is the ſign of opulence, and

the etiquette of dignity; for the inveſtiture of impor-
tant offices is always accompanied with the preſent of

a pelifle, as if they were to ſay to him to whom they

give it, he is now arrived at ſo great eminence, he
need concern himſelf with nothing, but perſpire at his
eaſe.

it might naturally be imagined that Egypt, from

_ theſe heats, and its wet and marihy condition for three
months, muſt be an unhealthy country; this was my

firſt idea on my arrival there; and, when I beheld,
at Cairo, the houſes of our merchants ranged along

the Kalidj, where the water ſtagnates till the month

of April, I made no doubt that the exhalations thence
ariſing, muſt cauſe many maladies ; but experience
proves the fallacy of this theory; the vapours of the
ſtagnant waters, fo fatal in Cyprus, and Alexandret-

ta, have not the ſame effect in E g ypt. This ap-

48 * +» TRAVELS INR

pears to me to be owing to the natural dryneſs of the
air, to the proximity of Africa, and Arabia, which
inceſſantly draw off the humidity, and the perpetual
currents of wind, which meet with no obſtacle. This
aridity is ſuch, that feſh meat expoſed, even in ſum-
mer, to the north wind, does not putrefy, but dries
up, and becomes hard as wood. In the deſerts, dead
carcaſſes are found dried in this manner, which are
ſo light, that a man may eaſily lift with one hand the
entire body of a camel.

The air, beſides poſſeſſing this dying Kalt ap-
pears to be ſtrongly impregnated with falts, the proofs
of which are every where apparent. The ſtones are
corroded by natrum, and in moiſt places long cryſtal-
lizations of it are to be found, which might be taken
for ſalt-petre. The wall of the Jeſuits garden, at
Cairo, built with earth and bricks, is every where
covered with a cruſt of this natrum, as thick as a
 crown-piece ; and when this garden has been over-
flowed by the waters of the Kalidj, the ground, after
they have drained off, appears ſparkling on every ſide

with white cryſtals, which certainly were not brought

- . — — roy — - — — — — — — — — — - » 5 Ig
— ” . —— — — — — — 4——— — ——— - * —— — — IINS — - * — —
—ͤ——U—ä — — — — - “¹3 nn ee — — — > — — — — — — _— So 3 : * _— — —
— a — — — . ue
: - EO
1 . . . > —'D -- Coo — — — —— — Dy ra ——
— — ä — — = — — « — — 2 - - — — ho. 2 4
— — —— = — ———ꝓũͤ —— —— — —— — — — — — — ” a + a
— — — — — > - -
— tin 2 nn, —

= - —— — rnb => rates tbe own gone wen — — — — - = —
0 — — — 2 — - — 5 wor * — — — OE . — - 2 — —
— RT. a. Wat 0 2 . —.— 2 ̃ ͤ .. ———. .. IS 5 . Fen es re Fon en Be
. ——— CRIES. ESRC . —— — - — — ae Sane. —
nds, — 2 22 " 2 2 jo a ——— — — + <= —— — ho - AY —
Ceres ery — 3 2 8 — —— 7 Oo —— — — — N

Erna

— —

—
r
0

— _
2

—
SS
—

— — —

= — — —„ꝝ ——— —

2

———
— apa —
—
2

Nn
A
ll
tink \
$1215
# } :
(oh :
if; 1
1
it
|
94
*

— — —
—̃
1

————
* *
no —
2

thither by the water, ſince it ſhews no ſign ot alt,
either to the taſte, or in diſtillation.

It is no doubt, this property of the air, 80 the
earth, which added to the heat, gives vegetation and
activity almoſt incredible in our cold chmates. Wher-
ever plants have water, the rapidity of their growth is
prodigious. Whoever. has traveiled to Cairo, or
Roſetta, knows, that the ſpecies of gourd called kara,
will, in twenty- foor hours, ſend out ſhoots near four
inches long; but it is worthy obſervation, that this
foil appears extremely unfavonrable to all exotics.
Foreign plants degenerate there torn : the truth of

 * Tt muſt be bed, however, that the air near the ſea is.
infinitely leſs dry than higher up the country: Thus, at Alex-
ancria, and Rolette, iron cannot be expoled fourand. twenty
hours tro the air, without ruling.

—

EGYPT AND 8YRIA. 49

which remark is proved by daily experience. Our
merchants are vbliged every year to renew their ſeeds,
and to ſend to Malta for their cauli- flowers, beet-
root, carrot, and ſalſify: theſe, when ſown, ſucceed
| at firſt very well; but if you again ſow the ſeed they
produce, the plants run up tall and weak. The ſame
happens to apricots, pears, and peaches, when tranſ-
| ported to Roſetta. The vegetation of this earth
{cems too violent for ſpungy and pulpy fruits, which
ould be gradually accuſtomed, by the arts of cul-
dure, to the ſoil and climate. 5

CHAP MM.

_ RE ; ;

1 the various Inhabitants of Egypt.

Auw thoſe revolutions which all nations have

|
— —
— — — og —
ww . Tr — — a8 8

— —̃̃ — — —

rn ee Ü2Ä5 —
— —ͤ—„— — 4
— = 1 3

— — —
—

— — ——

2 — —
— —

— 1 — — 5 2
2 — —̃ — — —

—
——
— — ——— —

Bil | |
i 0 il
fl Wi {hl

Y | 100 t
$i "ny 11 ;

'
ith 1.1 HH

0

| Hy "bt
14 .
; .
;

which we have ſubſtituted that of Tartars.

- Bedouin Arabs ;

— =

— —ũ3— — — —

mamoun having
guards, a himſelf eee to quit —— on

be

TRAVELS IN

tion of ſhepherds, continually wandering, like the
they have ſhewn themſelves, in
every age, brave and formidable warriors.

But the Arabs were more fortunate.
force of arms, impoſed on them their religion:

even obliged them to pay tribute. But the empire
falling into confuſion, the rebel governors had re-

courſe to their aid to refiſt the power of the Caliphs,
and they took part in every conteſt; nor were they
long in acquiring the aſcendant this might be ex-
pected to give them: for, continually encamped,
and with arms in their hands, they became a war-

like people, and initiated in every military manceu-
vre. Like the Bedouins, they
tribes, or camps, called,
of which we have made Horde,; and theſe tribes, al-

lied or at variance, according to their jeveral inter-
Hence .
we ſee, in their hiſtory, ſeveral nations, all equally |E
called Turks, alternately attacking, deſtroying and MR
To avoid this confuſion, I
mall confine the name of Turks to thoſe of Conſtanti-

eſts, were perpetually engaged in wars.

expelling each other.

nople, and ſhall * that of Tur kmen to their Be

deceſſors.
Some hordes of Turkmen, then, Lala been in-

troducbd into the Arabian empire, proceeded in a

ſhort. time to give law to thoſe who had called them
This the Ca-

in, either as mercenaries or allies.
liphs themſelves experienced in a remarkable in-
(tance. Motazzam“,
taken a body of Turkmen for his

his *

Neither

Cyrus nor Alexander were able to ſubdue them.
About eighty
years after Mahomet, they invaded, by order of the

Caliph Waled I. the country of the Turks, and, by
they

were divided into
in their language, ordov, |

brother and ſucceſſor of Al-

5
Ea

BEA

3

.
| 2

n
2

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 6

account of their diſorders ; and, after his time, their
power and infolence increaſed to ſuch a degree, that

= they became the diſpoſers of the throne and life

of their Princes, and murdered three of them in leſs
than thirty years. The Caliphs, when freed from

= this firſt bondage, did not profit by their experience;
for, about the year 935, Radi B'ellah“ having again
= reſigned his authority to a Turkman, his ſucceflors

were entangled in their former chains; and guard-
ed by the Emirs-el-omara, poſſeſſed only the ſhadow
of power. Amid the diſorders of this - anarchy,
a multitude of 'Turkmen hordes penetrated into the
empire, and founded different independant ſtates,

in the Kerman, and the Koraſan ; at Iconium, Alep- 2D.

po, Damaſcus, and in Egypt. |
Till then, the preſent Turks, diſtinguiſhed by the

name of Ogouzians, had remained to the eaſt of the

Caſpian, and toward the Djihoun ; but, about the
beginning of the thirteenth century, Djenkiz-kan 7

-1 having united all the tribes of Upper Tartary againſt

the Princes of Balk and Samarcand, the Ogouzians

5 : did not think proper to wait for the Mogols, but be-

gan their march under their Chief Soliman, and,
driving their herds before them, encamped (in 1214)

5 in the Aderbedjan, to the number of fifty thouſand
horſemen. The Mogols followed them, and puſhed
ME them itill farther to the weſt, into Armenia. Soli-

man being drowned (in 1220), in endeavouring to
paſs the Euphrates on horſeback, Ertogrul, his ſon

took the command of the hard and advanced into

the plains of Aſia Minor, to which he was allured by

the abundant paſturage they afforded for his cattle.

The good conduct of this chief procured him, in

theſe countries, a power and reſpe& which made his

alliance ſought after by other Princes. Among theſe

8 Was the Turkman Ala-el- din, Sultan of Iconium.

* Who Delights in Cd.

—

— —
— ——ũ —
— —

—
— — — — 8

— -- — — — — — — ery

| 0%

(| y
J
1 0 |

| {! | {oh 0

4 l, My il

|
'

[
$4 N |
+ .
10

1

—

—

—

*
— —
—— Aye

——— —

—— K—-—

———
— —

17 Wi
"mn; i i
Pit if!

= — Ahn AG IEG TI Ge

62

now finding

end to the Caliphat 1 in the POEM of Moſtazem.

TRAVELS IN

Ala. el. din, finding himſelf old, and haraſſed by the

Tartars of Djenkiz-kan, granted lands to the Turks

under Ertogrul, and even made their chief general of
all his troops. Ertogrul proved himſelf deſerving the
confidence of the Sultan, vanquiſhed the Mogols,
acquired ſtill greater power and reputation, and tranſ-

mitted his honours to his fon Oſman, who received

from Ala-el-din, ſucceſſor of the former of that
name, the Kofetan, drum, and horſetails, which are
ſymbols of command among all the Tartars. This
Oſman, to dittinguiſh the Turks, his followers, from
the others, gave them the name of Oſmanles, from
which we have made Oftomans* ; which new name
ſoon became formidable to the Greeks of Conſtanti-
nople, from whom Oſman conquered a ſufficient ex.
tent of territory to found a powerful kingdom, He
ſoon beſtowed on it that title, by aſſuming, in 1 300,

the dignity of Sultan, which dates abſolute ſove-

reign.
No one is ignorant in what manner bis focceſfory;

the heirs of his ambition and activity, continued to
aggrandize themſelves at the expenſe of the Greeks ;

till, continually depriving them of whole provinces in
Europe and Aſia, they at length ſhut them up within
the walls of Conſtantinople; and Mahomet II. fon
of Amurath, having taken that city in 1453, annihi-
lated this branch of the Roman empire. The Turks,

themſelves diſengaged from the affairs 3B
of Europe, turned their ambitious arms to the ſouth-
ern provinces. Bagdad ſubjugated by the Tartars,
had been without Caliphs for two hundred years},
but a new power, eſtabliſhed in Perſia, had ſucceeded

to a part of their domains; and, another, formed in

% This change of the 5 to the 6 8 from the original letter
being the Engliſh th, which exprels ſometimes by ts
ſometimes by 5,

+ In 123, Holagoukan, a deſcendant of Djenkiz, putt an

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 3 63

EK Foypt, fo : early 48 the tenth century, and ſubſiſting,

at that time, under the name of nen had
ſeized on Syria. Let

The Turks determined to deſpoil theſe two rivals.
Bayazid, the ſon of Mahomet, executed a part of

this plan, by taking Armenia from the Sofi of Perſia,

and Selim his ſon completed it, by the conqueſt of
the Mamlouks. This Sultan having drawn them

near to Aleppo, in 1517, under pretext of defiring

their aſſiſtance in the war with Perſia, ſuddenly turn,

ed his arms againſt them, and took from them ſuc-
= ceſlively Syria and Egypt, whither he purſued them,
= From that time the Turks eſtabliſhed themſelves in
W that country; but they are not ſettled much among
the villages. We rarely meet with any individuals of
that nation, except at Cairo; there they exerciſe the
arts, and occupy the religious and military employ-
ments. Formerly they alſo were advanced to poſts
under government, but within the laſt thirty years, a
tacit revolution has taken place, which, without tak.

ing from them the title, has deprived them of the

reality of power.

This revolution has been effected by a fourth and

laſt race, of which it now remains for us to ſpeak,

The individuals of it, all born, at the foot 'of Mount
Caucaſus, are diſtinguiſhed from the other inhabitants

by the flaxen colour of their hair, which 1s entirely

different from that of the natives of Egypt. Theſe
were found there by the Crufaders in the thirteenth

century, and called by them Mamelus, or, more cor-
realy, Mamlouks. After remaining almoſt annihi-

lated for two hundred and thirty years, under the
government of the Ottomans, they have found means

to regain their conſequence. The hiſtory of this

= claſs of ſoldiers, the events which firſt brought them
= into Egypt, the manner in which they have continued,
= and re-eſtabliſhed themſelves in that country, and the

5 nature of their government, are political phænomena

n

1

1 154 6

1 'tt :

IF] yz

iz [

1540

Mo.

1 E
4
14 1
1 J
fy i! : : 1
117 $4
fl; 1 \|
: q ;, SL
ii
WIE
1.3 7

ee
MM Weg |

it
TR
"

WIT
—
=D
== — — EE ins —
- SS . — ry £

Indus, and Tartarian deſerts.
| prophet, which preſcribed them their- abſolutions,
faſts, and prayers, did not teach them either the ſci-
ence of legiſlation, or thoſe principles of natural mo-
rality ich are the ſolid foundations of empires and
The Arabs knew how to conquer, but by
no means to govern: wherefore the misſhapen edi-
fice of their power ſoon mouldered into ruins.
vaſt empire of the Caliphs, paſſing from deſpotiſm to
anarchy, was diſmembered on every ſide; and the
temporal governors, undeceived reſpecting the ſanc-
tity of their ſpiritual chief, every where erected
themſelves into third aan and formed independent 7
ſtates. |

ſocieties.

64 TRAVELS IN

of ſo very r a nature, that they well deſerve

we ſhould beſtow a few pages in giving a diſtinct ac-
count of them.

CHAP. VIL
4 anne of the hi ory of the Mane

7 HE Greeks of Conſtantinople, debaſed by a del.

potic and bigoted government, had ſeen, in the courſe

of the ſeventh century, the fineſt provinces of their
The Arabs, in-

flamed by the fanaticiſm of their religion, and ſtill

empire fall a prey to a new people.

more by the enjoyment of luxuries, to which they
had hitherto been ſtrangers, conquered, in eighty
years, the whole north of Africa, as far as the Cana-
ries, and all the ſouth of Aſia,

Egypt was not the laſt to follow this example; *

but it Was not till 969 * 3 that a regular power was |

* 7 CE

2, according to D*'Herbelot,

quite to the river
But the book of the

1
N
0 * 6 *
3
6 8
F 5%
8 n
: 2 ”.
; Aa
, 98
3
are
=
,

7-52

rv AND Vl RI. 63

-tabliſhed, in that country, in the perſon of prin-

5 ces, who, aſſuming the name of Fatmite Caliphs, dif-

puted, even the title of their dignity, with thoſe of

Bagdad. The latter at this period, ſtripped of their
authority, by the Turkman foldiers, were no longer
capable of oppoſing their pretenfions. Thus did the
Egyptian Caliphs peaceably obtain poſſeſſion of that
rich country, of which they might have formed a
= powerful ſtate. But the whole hiſtory of the Arabs
= uniformly tends to prove that this nation never
knew the ſcience of government. The ſovereigns
= of Egypt, no leſs deſpotic than thoſe of Bagdad, pro-
E cceded, by like ſteps, to the ſame deſtruction. They |

took part in the quarrels of religious ſects ; they

even ſet up new ones, and endeavoured ' to make
= proſelytes by perfecution. One of them, called

Halem b\amr ellah* was ſo abſurdly extravagant as

| to declare himſelf an incarnate God, and barbarous

enough to fet fire to Cairo, for his amuſement.

5 Others diff pated the public treaſure in a capricious

luxury. The people whom they oppreſfed, held

them in abhorrence, and their own courtiers, em
W boldened by their weakneſs, were eager to ſhare
their ſpoils. Thus it happened to Adhad-el-din,
the laſt of that race. After having been invaded

by the cruſaders who had impoſed on him a tribute,

15 a one of his generals, whom he had diſmiſſed his ſer-

vice, threatened to deprive him of a power of which

he ſhewed himſelf ſo unworthy. - Knowing, that he
Was incapable of reſiſting by himſelf, and unable
to confide in a nation he had allienated from him,
he had recourſe to foreigners. In vain did reaſon
1 and experience dictate to him that theſe, once em- |

* C by order of Cod—This is the apoſtle Pp _ 8

mM Drufes, See the curious account of that ſingular people, pub-
WE iſhed in 1786, from the Manuſcript: of Mr, Venture de Paradis.
and Printed for Nalini

66 TRAVELS iN

ployed as his defenders, would ſoon: become the
maſters of his perſon ; one falſe ſtep neceflarily led
to a ſecond. He called in that tribe of Turkmen
who had enſlaved the Bagdad Caliphs, and implored
the aid of Nour-el-din, the ſovereign of Aleppo, who,
already ravaging Egypt haſtened to ſend an army |
into that country. Theſe troops effectually deliver- |
ed Adhad from the tribute of the Franks, and the
menaces of his general. But the Caliph foon found
he had only changed his enemies; they left him
nothing but the ſhadow of power; and Selah-el-din,
who took the command of the army! in 1171, con-
cluded by ſtrangling him. Thus, the Egyptian x
Arabs were ſubjected to ſtrangers, whoſe princes Þ
commenced a new dynaſty in the perſon of Selah-
_el-din. :
During abs aa in Egypt, b while 1
- the. cruſaders. were, by their ill conduct, laying the
foundation for their expulſion from Syria, other revo-
Intions were, preparing in upper Aſia. Djenkiz-
Kan, become the ſole chief of almoſt all the Tartar
hordes, was only waiting for a favourable opportu- 1
nity to invade the neighbouring ſtates; an inſult com-
mitted on fome merchants, under his proteQion, de-
termined him to turn his arms againſt the ſultan of
Balk, and che eaſtern part of Perſia; which coun-
tries, about the year 1218, became the theatre of
one of the moſt bloody devaſtations recorded in hil-
tory, The Mogols, ſword in hand, pillaging, mur- W
dering, and burning without diſtinfion, either of
age or ſex, reduced the whole country of Sihoun,
quite to the Tigris, to a heap of aſhes; and pafling W
to the north of the Caſpian ſea, extended their ra-
Tavzes even into Ruſſia and the Cuban. This ex pe-
dition, which took place in 275 eventually int1o-
duced the Mamlouks into Egyp The Tartars,
weary. of maſſacreing, had 3 back with them
a prodigious quantity of young flaves, of both ſexes; |

:
o
:
»
:
|
-
:
;
:
:
- ft
.
oh!
"
, {
l o
j!
. i,
iy
|
:
,
:
i
,
:
i! F
.
, '
;
111 4
IN
Nn
1
110 15
1 1}
| "
10
13 Os
WH. 1;
TEE
N '
: £
1
4
þ
: #7
: i :
: ear
: :
"
} {44 it
144 int
| 1
it
:
| }
14 4
14 :
:
|
|
Ii
17
[i
85?
IT
'"
T7
FBiH(6 is :
ae
Nn
" 14) .
1
[174
1
in.
Teh: iy; *
:
$1613 01448
s 11! i?
9h
"$441 177
7 £488
11
Ne
1 4
| ow
7 17
.
1
iy 1
146 [
HT
ri
: | .
C56
: :
>
* ?
{+
mn
$114
g
14
1
ra v4 17
F! :
os
ih *
4 «4 14
Fern
my!
4
16111
F434
41 1
HM
"me
\ : :
þ 33 i :
171.
Het
: ui
14
1 -
:
»+ {04
i? 141
++ 414
1
:
:
ry :
3
1
x
1
.
:
1
1 |
"oh
iy

— — - — — — * — — — — — — — *
— 5 — — < — — Is wn — REG — -
— oe — « f - — — —
— — ee ee en — — ——
" — 5 — — — — — —_—
2 — ; — — — ETPIISSY —

— os bo

—— — — -- o — — — — — —
- — * — — — 2
— — — —— — ä—äͤ— — — e
> ht - —
— — — —— — wa — — — —— ==
a — — —

— *
— = | — —
— —
- —

EGYPT AND SYRIA; 67

| their camps, and the markets of Aſia, were full of
them. The ſucceſſors of Selah-el-din, who, in the

quality of Turkmen, correſponded with the coaſts
of the Caſpian ſea, perceived they had now an op-
portunity of forming, at a cheap rate a body of

foldiers of tried courage, and remarkable beauty ;z
and about the year 1230, one of them purchaſed
to the number of twelve thouſand of theſe young
men, who were Tcherkaffes, (Circaſhans), Mingre-
lians and Abazans.
| litary exerciſes, and ſoon obtained a body of the

He had them trained up to mi-

handſomeſt, and beſt ſoldiers in Aſia, though at the
ſame time, the moſt mutinous, as he very ſoon ex-

: * perienced. This ſoldiery, like the Pretorian bands,

preſently gave laws to their maſter. They became

ſtill more inſolent under his ſucceſſor, whom they
depoſed in 1250; and ſhortly after the diſaſter of

Saint Louis, ſlew the laſt Turkman prince, and

ſubſtituted one of their own chiefs, with the title of
Sultan“, retaining themſelves that of n
which ſignifies military ſlaves f.

Such is the militia of ſlaves, converted into deſ-
pots, who, for many centuries, have continued to

decide the fate of Egypt. From their firſt eſtabliſh=

ment, the effects corraſpeadil with the means.
Without any other bond of union than the intereſt

. of the moment, or any public right to authority,
hiſ- 8 but that of conqueſt, the Mamlouks had no other
ur- rule of conqueſt and government, than the violence
- off of a licentious and inſolent ſoldiery. The firſt lea-
dun, der whom they elected, having found employment
ling
why E 35 T he old French writers 1 Soldan as Sade of this
-pe- 5 word, by the frequeet chance of of into ou ; as in fel fou, mol,
110. : mou, Ke. | |
ars, 7 Mamlouk, the participle paſſive of malak, to poſſes, Gig."
niſies one poſſeſſed by, or the property of, another ; which
dem = gives the ſenſe of flave, But thele are to be diſtinguiſhed from
es; BF Comcltic ſlaves, or bl acks, who are called Add,

15

0 0 e ö

= TRAVELS IN

for their turbulent ſpirit i in the congoatt of Syriz,
reigned ſeventeen years; but ſince him not one of

them has governed ſo long. The ſword, the how-
ſtring, or poiſon, public murder, or private aſſaſſina-

tion, have been the fate of a ſeries of tyrants, forty-ſeven
of whom are innumerated in the ſpace of two hun-
dred and fifty-ſeven years. At length, in 1517,
Selim, Sultan of the Ottomans, having taken and
hanged Toumam Bey, their laſt chief, puta Period

to that dynaſty.

Agreeably to hs rs of Turkiſh policy, Se-

hes ſhould have exterminated the whole body of
Mamlouks; but more refined views induced him,
in this inſtance, to depart from that ſanguinary cuſs
tom. He was ſenſible that if he eſtabliſhed a Pacha

in Egypt, with the ſame authority as the Pachas in

the other Provinces, the diſtance from the capital
would be a ſtrong temptation io revolt. Jo prevent
this inconvenience, he projected fuch a form of go-
vernment that the power, being diſtributed among
the different members of the ſtate, ſhould preſerve
ſuch an equilebrium as ſhould keep them all depen-
dent on himſelf. The remnant of the Mamlouks,
Who had eſcaped his firſt maſſacre, appeared proper
tor this purpoſe ; and he next eſtabliſhed a Divan,
or Council of Regency, compoſed of the Pacha and
the chiefs of. the ſeven military corps. The office
of the Pacha was to notify to this council the orders
of the Porte, to expedite the tribute to Conſtanti-
nople, to watch over the ſafety of the country againſt
foreign enemies, and to counteract the ambitious views
of the different parties; on the other hand, the
members of the council poſſeſſed the right of reject-

ing the orders of the Pacha, on aſſigning their rea-
ſons, nay, even of depoſing him; they alſo muſt

ratify all civil or political ordinances. As for the
Mamiouks, it was agreed that from them ſhould be

5 9 =
2 4

9

.

%%% BITE IET 5 ['c *;

E CE RN VLu4 8 9:5
a at BILE TE ans I
BALE We fr AS, 5
. e ;
Yo LS ener are 0 ns: OY

to 5 * SEES . r.

r cc OH WON TE
DEE os ng i Te EI WT Lo
E TR EI BE tel
FCC
38 - 4s IIS Ee Et

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 69

choſen the twenty-four governors, or Beys“, of the
provinees : to them was entruſted the care of reſ-
training the Arabs, ſuperintending the collection of
the tributes, and the whole civil government of the
country but their authority was purely paſſive, and
they were only to be conſidered as the inſtruments
of the determinations of the council. One of them,

_ reſiding at Cairo, was to bear the title of Shaik-cl.

beledf, which ſhould be rendered Governor of the City,
in a ſenſe merely civil, that is to ſay, UNSECONITER

* with any idea of military power.

The Sultan likewiſe eſtabliſhed tributes, one part of
which was deſtined to pay twenty thouſand infantry,

and a corps of twelve thouſand cavalry, reſident in the

country; the other, to procure from Mecca and Me-

dina, the ſupplies of corn neceſſary for them; and
the third, to ſwell the Kaſna, or treaſure of Conſtan- N
tinople, and to ſupport the luxury of the ſeraglio. In
other reſpects, the people, who were to provide for
theſe expenſes, have been conſidered, as M. Savary
very well obſerves, only as mere paſſive agents, and
remain in ſubjection, as heretofore, to all the rigours
of a military deſpotiſm.

This form of government has not in correſponded
with the views of Selim, ſince it has ſubſiſted about

two centuries; but for the laſt fifty years, the Porte,
having relaxed from its vigilance, innovations have
taken place; the Mamlouks have increaſed, become
maſters of all the riches and ſtrength of the country,

and, in ſhort, gained ſuch an aſcendency over the.

Ottomans, that the power of the latter is reduced
5 almoſt to . To conceive the nature of .

This word che author . writes Bek, but we e have re ·
tained the moſt cuſtomary ſpelling, though the other 1s Pre
bably neareſt the true pronunciation. 2

+ Shaik properly ſigniſies an old man, ee jſt: it has
the leme accoption it in che caſt as ene and means a logd or
chief.

TRAVELS IN

79

revolution, we muſt conſider the manner in which the

Mamlouks are continued and multiplied i in Egypt.

On ſeeing them ſubſifting in this country tor ſeye-
ral centuries, we ſhould be led to imagine their race
is preſerved by the ordinary means; but if their firſt

eſtabliſhment was a ſingular event, their continuation

is not leſs extraordinary. During five hundred and
fifty
not one of them has left ſubſiſting
not exiſt one ſingle family

iſſue; there does

ſecond deſcent. Almoſt the ſame thing happens to

the Turks; and it is obſerved that they can only ſecure

the continuance of their families, by marrying women

who are natives, which Mamlouks have always dif-

dained“. Let the naturaliſt explain why men, well
formed, and married to healthy women, are unable
to naturalize on the banks of the Nile, a race born
at t the foot of Mount Caucaſus ! and let It be remem-

| * The wives of the Mamlouks, are, like them, ſlaves brought
from Georgia, Mingrelia, &c.

amongſt us, and we muſt believe it on the credit of Fame.

viſible there than the others, and to this no doubt the reputa-
tion they have for beauty is greatly owing.
nity of learning ſome particulars concerning them from the wife
of one of our merchants at Cairo, Who, by dealing in the laces
and ſtuffs of Lyons, had accels to all the Harems.

years that there have been Mamlouks in Egypt,

of them in the ſecond
generation; all their children periſh in the firſt or

Ther beauty is a conſtant topic
But
an European, who nas only been in Turkey, has no right to
give his teſtimony on the lubjeft. Theſe women are more in-

I had an opportu-

This lady,

who has more than one claim to form a corre judgment of them,

aſſured me, that, among a thouland, or twelve hundred, choſen

women ſhe had leen, ſhe had not found ten real beauties. But
the Turks are not difficult: provided a woman be fair, ſhe is
handtome ; and if ſhe be fat, ſhe 1s enchanting : : her counte-
mance is like the full moon; her haunches are like cuſhions,”

fay they, to expreſs the ſuperlative of beauty, They may be
ſaid to meaſure them by the quintal.
verb worthy the notice of naturaliſts; “

thy eyes, but for plealure an Egyptian.”

Take a fair female for
Experience has prov-

ed to them, that the Northern women ate colder than thoſe of

= the South,

whe have beſides a pro-

I AY 2 8
n
„

5
r .
r 8

e
5
D
3
r
, ; vets
# r 1

N

5
EF

8 ig
5

Dre Cc +
A
E
. $A Bee! ey AS Oy ee A PO Derg 4 ON
** * 058 S 8 TCT N
ro rot 5 * N = > y , tos |

6

EGYPT AND SYRIA, =

| bered, at the ſame time, that the plants of Europe,

in that country, are equally unable to continue their

ſpecies ! Some may retule to believe this extraordinary
fact, but it is not on that account leſs certain; nor

does it appear to be new. The ancients have made
obſervations of the ſame nature ; thus, when Hippo-
crates* aſſerts, that among the Scythians and Egyp-

tians, all the individuals reſemble each other, though
they are like no other nations; when he adds, that
in the countries inhabited by theſe two races of men,
the climate, ſeaſons, elements, and foil poſſeſs an uni-
formity no where elle. to be found, does he not re-
cognize that kind of excluſion of which 1 ſpeak ?
When ſuch countries impreſs ſo peculiar a character

on every thing native, is it not a reaſon why they

ſhould reject whatever is foreign? It ſeems, then, that
the only means of. naturalizing animals and plants,
would be to contract an affinity with the climate, by
alliance with the native ſpecies ; and this, as I have
before ſaid, the Mamlouks have conſtantly refuſed.

The means therefore by which they are perpetuated

| and multiplied, are the fame by which they were firſt
| eſtabliſhed; that is to ſay, when they die, they are
replaced by ſlaves brought from their original country.
From the time of the Mogols, this commerce has
been continued on the confines of the Cuban and the

Phaſisf, in the ſame manner as it is carried on in
Africa, by the wars among the numerous tribes, and
by the miſery of the inhabitants, who fell their own

Finldren for a ſubſiſtence.

>  Hippoerates, lb, de Acre, Locis et Auquis.

4 This country has been at all times a nurſery for llaves; ; it

furniſhed the Greeks, Romans, and ancient Alia with them,

© But is it not extraordinary to read in Herodotus, that formerly

= Colchis (now called Georgia), received black inhabitants from

Egypt, and to lee the lame country, at this day, make {6 dit
ezent a return? |

„ avs 1

I beſe flaves, of both ſexes, carried firſt to Con-
antinople, are afterwards diſperſed throughout the
empire, and purchaſed by the wealthy. The Turks,
when they ſubdued Egypt, ſhould undoubtedly have
prohibited this dangerous traffic: their omitting this
has been the cauſe of that reverſe of fortune which
ſeems about to diſpoſſeſs them of their conqueſt, and
which many political errors have been long preparing.
For a conſiderable time the Porte had neglected the
affairs of this province; and, in order to reſtrain the
Pachas, had ſuffered the Divan to extend its power,

till the chiefs of the Janiſaries and Azabs were left
without controul. The ſoldiers themſelves, become
citizens, by the marriages they had contracted, were
no longer the creatures of Conſtantinople; and à

change introduced into their diſcipline ſtill more in-

creaſed theſe diſorders.
At firſt, the ſeven military corps had one common
treaſury, and, though the ſociety was rich, indivi-
duals, not having any thing at their own diſpoſal,
could effect nothing. The chiefs, finding their pow-
er diminiſhed by this regulation, had intereſt enough
to get it aboliſned, and obtaining permiſſion to pol-
ſeſs diſtinct property, lands, and villages. And
theſe lands and villages depended on the Mamlouk

governors, it was neceſlary to conciliate them, to

prevent their oppreſſions. From that moment, the
Beys acquired an aſcendency over the ſoldiers, who,
tiil then, had treated them with diſdain; and this
could not but continually increaſe, ſince their go-
vernments procured them conſiderable riches. Theſe
they employed in creating themſelves friends and
creatures; they multiplied their flaves, and, after
emancipating them, employed all their intereſt ta
advance them in the army, and promote them ta
various employments. Theſe upſtarts, retaining for
their reſpective patrons the ſubmiſſive reverence uſual |

| EGYPT AND SYRIA. TJ

in the eaſt, Fara faQtions implicitly devoted to

their pleaſure.

By ſuch means Wini, one of the Kiayas,* or
veteran colonels of the Janiſaries, about the year
746, rendered himſelf, in reality, maſter of Egypt;
ie had ſo multiplied and advanced his freed men,
that, of the twenty-four Beys, which ſhould be their
number, no leſs than eight were of his houſe-
hold. His influence too was the mote certain, as
the Pacha always left vacancies in the number, in
order to receive the emoluments. On the other
hand, the largeſſes he beſtowed on the officers and
ſoldiers of his corps, attached them to his intereſt,
and Rodoan, the moſt powerful of the Azab colo- ;
nels, uniting himſelf with him, cempleated his power.

The Pacha, incapable of oppoſing this faction,

was now no more than a phantom, and the orders

ol the Sultan vaniſhed before thoſe of Ibrahim. At

his death, which happened in 1757, his houſe, that

is, his enfranchiſed flaves, divided among themſelves,
but united againſt all others, continued to give the
law. Rodoan, who had ſucceeded his colleague,
being expelled and flain by a party of young Beys,
ſceveral chiefs followed each other in a very ſhort
interval. At length about the year 1766, Ali Bey,
one of the principal actors in the troubles which at-
tracted the attention of Europe for ſeveral years,
& zained the decided aſcendency over his rivals, and,
0 under the titles of Emir-Hadj, and Shaik-el-Beled,
rendered himſelf abſolute maſter of the country.
be hiſtory of the Mamlouks being intimately con-
nected with his, I ſhall continue the former, by
© giving an e of the latter.

Dn The ads corps of the Janifaries, Azabs, &c. were

= commanded by Kiayas, who, after the firit year, laid down their
* e and became velerany, with a Voice in the Divan.

74 TTRAVELS IN

CHAP. VIII.

Summary of the Hiſtory of Ali Bey“.

. HE birth of Ali Bey is ſubject to the fame uncer-
tainty as that of the Mamlouks in general, who, fold
by their parents or carried off by their enemies; at a

Since this chapter was written, M. Savary has publiſhed
two more volumes on Egypt, in one of which is the life of
this laid Ali Bey. I expetted to have found in it particulars
proper to verify or correct my own narrative; but what was my
aſtoniſtiment to perceive, we have hardly a fingle circumſtance
in common ? This diſagreement was ſo much the more unpleaſ—
ing to me, ſince, as I have already differed from him on leveral
ether ſuhjects, it may feem, to many readers, as if I made a
point of contiadiflting that traveller, But, beſides that I am
not perſonally acquainted with M. Savary, I proteſt, that ſuch
partiality is no part of my character. How then does it happen
that, having been upon the ſame ſpot, having neceſſarily drawn
dur materials from like ſources, our acccunis ſhoulda be lo dif-
ferent? J confels, I cannot well diſcover the reaſon ; ail I can
| fay is, that during the fix manths I lived zt Cairo, 1 carefully
enquired of ſuch of our merchants, and Chriſtian traders, as;
fron long reſidence in the country, and being perlons of uns
derſtanding, appeared to me likely to give the moſt authentic
teſtimony. 1 found them agreed on the principal facts, and I
had the advaniaze of hearing the relations they gave me con-
trmed by a Venetian merchant (M. C. Roſetti) who was one
of the confidental friends of Ali Bey, and the counſellor and
promoter of his connections with the Ruſkans, and his projetts
reſpecting the commerce of India, In Syria I have met with
gest numbers who had been, eye-witneſfes of the principal
events in the hiſtory of Shaik-Daher aud Ali Bey; and, from
their teſtimony, have been able to aſcertain the degree of cre-
dit due to the information I received in Egypt. During eight
months Jreſided among the Druzes, I learnt from the Biſhop
_ of Aleppo, formerly Biſhop of Acre, a thouland anecdotes, the

more indubitable, as Ibrahim Sabbar, the miniſter of Dahe?,
was frequently in his houſe, In Paleſtine I have hved with
Ehriftiaus and Muffulmen, who had been officers under Daher,
were zt the firſt ſiege of Vafa ( Joppa) with Alt Bey, and de-
tended hat place in the ſecond againſt Mohammad Dry. 1

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 75

very early age, ſeldom remember much of their ori-
gin or their country; or if they do, conceal them.
The opinion the moſt general reſpecting Ali is, that
be was born among the Abazans, a people inhabiting

Mount Caucaſus, and which furniſhes the flaves in

pms requelt®.” T he merchants who carry on this

avg boa on the ſpot, and examitied all the neceſſary witneſ.
| ſes. I have received hiſtorical notes from the Venetian agent
at Vafa, who had a conſiderable ſhare in all thele troubles.
Theſe are the materials from which I have compiled my narra-
tive, Not but I have met with ſome circumſtances which are
differently related. But from ſuch what hiſtory is free ? Are
there not ten different relations of the battle of Fontenoy ? All
we can hope is to collect what is moſt probable ; for I cannot
but confeſs I have myſelf been frequently convinced, on this
occaſion, how difficult it 1s to aſcertain the real truth of any
hiſtorical factss.

Not but I have heard before end of the fiories related by
M. Savary, who cannot be accuſed of having invented them
= Himſelf, for his account is taken, word for word, from an Eng-
© liſh book, printed in 1783, and entitled A Hiftory of the Re-
= volt of Alt Bey, though there are only forty pages appropriated to
that ſubject, the remainder being common-place ks on the
manners and geography of the country. I was at Cairo when
the public papers gave an account of this work; and 1 well
recollect that when our merchants heard of Maria, wife of Alt
Bey; of the Greek Daoud, his father, and his finding his ſon,
as Jacob found Joleph, they were ſrangiy ſurpriſed, and laugh-
ed heartily at the tales trumped up in Europe. It is in vain,
therefore, for the Engliſh Factor, who was in Egypt in 1771,
to appeal to the authority of the Kiaya of Ali Bey, and a num
ber of Beys, whom we conſulted, without underſtanding Arabic, ©
he can never be looked upon as well informed.” 1 ſulpect him
the more ſince he ſets out with an unpardonable error, in affert-
| ing that the country of Abaza is the ſame as that of Amaſea;
| for one of theſe is a country of Caucaſus, ſtretching towards

the Cuban; and the other a city of ancient Cappadocia, or

modern Natolia. To conclude, we may find at Paris Memoir

of Ali Bey, collected by a perſon of diſtinction, Who has been
in Egypt, as well as M. Savary and myſelf, and thoſe Memoirs
will ſatisfy all doubts which may remain on this ſubject.

* The Turks hold the Tcherkafſes, or Circaſſian ſlaves, in
the higheſt eftimation; next to them the Abazans, next the

2

T6 r TRAVELS IN

trafic, brought him to one of their annual ſales, at
Cairo, where he was purchaled by the brothers Haac
and Louſef, Jews, employed in the cuſtom-houſe,

who made a preſent of him to Ibrahim Kiaya. It is

luppoſed he might then be about twelve or fourteen

rs old; but, in the caſt, neither Mahometans nor

Chriſtians keeping any regiſters of births, their pre-
ciſe age is never Known.

Ali performed for his patron the uſual ſervices of
the Mainlouks, which are nearly ſimilar to thoſe of

the pages to our Princes. He received the cuſtomary

education, which conſiſts in learning to manage a

horie well, fire the carbine and piſtol, throw the
dijerid, uſe the ſabre, and even a little reading and

Writing. In all thoſe exerciſes he diſplayed an aCti-

vity and fire which obtained him the ſurname of |

Djendali, or madman. But the ſolicitude of ambi-

tion ſoon moderated this exceſſive warmth. About

the age of eighteen or twenty, his patron ſuffered him
to let his beard grow, that is to fay, gave him his
freedom; for, among the Turks, to want muſtachios
and beard, is thought fit only for flaves and women ;
and hence ariſes the unfavourable impreſſion they
receive on the firſt ſight of an European. When he

had made him free, Ibrahim gave him a wite and
revenues, promoted him to the rank of Kachef, or
Governor of a diſtrict, and, at length, procured him

to be elected one of the four-and- -twenty Beys.

Theſe ſucceſſive promotions, and the power and

riches he acquired, awakened the ambition of Ali Bey.
The death of his patron, which happened in 1757,
opened a free courſe for his e. He engage ed

a 3 1 hm the Gaorgionsy «fea thaw the Ruſliaes
and the Poles, next the Hungarians and the Germans, then the

| Negroes, and, laſt of all, the Spaniards, Malteſe, and other

Franks, whom they « del pile as pere debauchees, idle, and

1 mutindus.

5 INE Us FY xy? © RS or ORE Fr oe £7
722 b... Sn STS CE 2,

8 2 5

5
Wes
$7
N
228
ee
8
ae
. .
.
8
4 LE
r
l
EET
3
.
3
RESTS
3
7
PF
- Ret .
3
5
8
9 wet *
*
N
ws
158
„
8
oF
ity
3
SY
3
3
Nin.
. 5
5
3
[ER
LOT
3
8
n
. s
1
N
8
SPEC
Wor, ef
ST.
N
2 a6
8
3
AEST?
3 ALE
N
2 ba S
Ws by
« S250
8
1
3 20
1
r
r
3
bar
6877)
Le W.
N
8
SUE,”
3
* * I
CER
1
ES: OV
„
32
r
x3 ras
1 1
7 ,
2 *
FEI
r
N >£
3
N 4
3
3
8
* 227 2.
FLAY
3
8
n
: 82 "to
.
Nee
2
8
3
3
1
3
CES
$1395 760
IN"
1
CNN
+ n
208 EN
Sh
8
<4 :
Wes,
8
© pe
2
Gs
E
E
3
.
3
1
.
LES
1
*
22
TON
0 PINE
T5520
MARY
*
pd 5
Y
8
e
7 —
93
„ *
7
8
8 5
X
4 py
5
pa
=
2
2
:
7
THEE
IANS
2X.
4 M 3
— ”
nA
{>
iS
r
8
BESS
Ir
24...
1 FF
ou
9
nag 4
. 75
NL
WR
:

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 7

in every intrigue for raiſing or diſplacing the chiets
and was the principal author of the ruin of Rodoany
Kiaya. After Rodoan, various factions alternately
advanced their leaders into his ſtation. He who”
occupied it in 1762, was Abd-el-Rahman, of little}
conſequence himſelf, but ſupported by ſeveral con-
federate houſes. Ali was then Shaik-el-Beled, and
ſeized the moment when Abd-el-Rahman was con-
ducting the caravan of Mecca to get him exiled; but
he himfelf had his turn, and was condemned 1 re-
tire to Gaza. Gaza, dependent on a Turkiſh Pacha,
was neither ſo agreeable nor ſo ſecure a reſidence as
to tempt him to make it his abode; he therefore
only made a feint of taking that route, and, on the
third day, turned towards the Said, where he was
joined by his partizans.
He reſided two years at Djirdja, where he matured
lis plans for obtaining and ſecuring that power to
hich he ſo ardently aſpired. The friends his mo-
ney had gained bim at Cairo having at length pro-
cured his recall, in 1766, he appeared ſuddenly in
that city, and, in one night ſlew four Beys, who
were his enemies, exiled four others, and became,
from that time, the chief of the moſt numerous par-
ty. As he had now poſſeſſed himſelf of the whole
authority, he reſolved to employ it ſtill further to
promote his ambitious views. No longer content=
ed with the trivial title of Bey, he could not ſub-
mit to the ſupremacy of the Porte, and aimed at
nothing leſs than the title of Sultan of Egypt. To this
object all his meaſures tended ; he expelled the Pa-
cha, who was only a ſhadow of repreſentation; he
refuſed the accuſtomed tribute; and, in L790» even
proceeded to coin money in his own name“.
* After the ruin of his affairs, his piaſters fell 20 per cent,
hecauie it was pretended they were tos much debaſed with alloy ;

but a .merchant {ent ten thouland of them. 0 Marſe: les, and
made 2 conſiderable profit by melting them down.
g . : 2 : " N

4 4 - 4
N i
| E RE EN. 7 *
5,6 þ £5 > Fu. «aro, OR” — * — _s * % 3 .
r 4 D — — ee — - —

> bn 85
— Le.

—— 4 Ä—4h.

0 —_—
N
* 1

alt Coleen fs 1

OP 1
Sf, Yee AE ©.

2.

B

. hc :
3

8 * 3
T . —— —

.
—8 IN > 4

3.

=:
3

*

15

. TRAVELS IN

The Porte did not ſee without indignation theſs
attacks on her authority; but open war alone could

Daher, eſtabliſhed in Acre, kept Syria in awe; and
the Divan of Conſtantinople, occupied with the af-

port of the Said had been occupied by Arab Shaiks
mam, had formed there a power capable of giving
_ diſturbance. Ali began by delivering himſelf fron:
this danger; and, under pretext that this Shaik con-
cealed a treaſure entruſted to him by Ibrahim Kiaya,
louks againſt him, in 1769, commanded by his fa-
both Hammam and his power.

expedition, which in its conſequences muſt have af-
fected Europe. Ali Bey fitted out ſome veſſels at
Suez, and, manning them with Mamlouks, ordered

the port of Mecca, which he was to wine on, while
a a body of cavalry, under the command of Moham-

an commerce; and this plan, which was ſuggeſted
by a young Venetian merchant,* who poſſeſſed his

made ee of the Culloms at Djedca,

repel them, and circumſtances were not favourable.

fairs of Poland, and the pretenſions of Ruſſia, be-
ſtowed its whole attention on the tranſactions in
the North. The uſual method of capidjis was had
recourſe to; but poiſon, or the poniard, always an-
ticipated the bow-ſtring they bore. Ali Bey, avail.

ing himſelf of theſe circumſtances, puſhed forward
his enterprizes with ſucceſs. For ſeveral years a

under little ſubjection. One of them, named Ham-

and that he harboured rebels, ſent a corps of Mam-
vourite Mohammad Bey, who deſtroyed i in one ar

The end of this year was productive of mother N

the Bey Haſſan to fail with them to Djedda, (Gedda),

mad Bey, marched by land to take poſſeſſion of |
| Mecca itſelf, which was given up to plunder. His pro-

ject was to render Djedda the emporium of the Indi-

| confidence, was to make Europe abandon the por» |

„M. C. Roſe; j 2 brother, Balthazar Roſetti, was 10 be |

GN,

9 1 \ En ns 222 er
o
F F
I os. PE > Ag 2X 2 = I ; 8

8

by Hers

wah &. aan FA a4 „

N

into a country, laws ſhould be eſtabliſhed.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 79

© ge by the cape of Good Hope, by ſubſtituting the

ancient route of the Mediterranean, and the Red

Sea; but the event has proved that the attempt was

too precipitate, and, that before gold is introduced

Ali, the vanquiſher of a petty prince of the Said,
and conqueror of the huts of Mecca, from this time

| thought himſelf formed to command the whole world.

His courtiers told him he was as powerful as the Sul.
tan of Canſtantinople, and he believed his courtiers.

Had he exerciſed his reaſon, he would have perceived
that Egypt, compared with the reſt of the empire,

conſtituted only a very inconſiderable ſtate, and that
the ſeven or eight thouſand cavalry ke commanded

were nothing when oppoſed to a hundred thouſand

ſanifaries, whom the Sultan has at his diſpoſal : but

the Mamlouks know nothing of geography; and Ali,

who viewed Egypt near, found it much larger than
Turkey at a diſtance. He determined therefore to

= commence his conqueſts ; Syria, which was in his
= neighbourhood, naturally preſented the firſt object,
and every thing was favourable to his views. The
war with the Ruſſians, which broke out in 1769,

occupied all the Turkiſh forces in the north. Shaik
Daher, in rebellion againſt the Porte, was a power-

ful and faithful ally; and the extortions of the Pacha

of Damaſcus, by diſpoſing thoſe he oppreſſed to re-
volt, afforded the moſt favourable opportunity of in-
vading his government, and meriting the title of the

deliverer of nations. LE
Ali ſaw perfectly well the advantage of this poſture

of affairs, and made no delay in putting his forces in

motion. All his meafures being at length taken, he

detached, in 1770, under the command of five Beys,
a corps of about five hundred Mamlouks, all cavalry,

(for they never march on foot), and ſent them to
take poſſeſſion of Gaza, in order to ſecure an en-

trance into Paleſtine. Oſman, Pacha of Damaſcus,

80 TRAVELS IN

no ater heard of the 8 than bw flew to arms.
The Mamlouks, terrified at bis activity, ande the
number of his troops, held themſelves in readineſs to
fly at the firſt attack ; but Daher, the moſt indefati-
Sable chief that Syria has ſeen for many centuries,
haſtened from Acre, and extricated them from their
embarraſſment. Oſman, who was encamped near
Yafa, fled without even offering battle; and Daher,
making himſelf maſter of Yata, Ramla, and all Pa-
leſline, opened a road for the grand army be EX-
pected.

This arrived about the end of February, 1771;
and the gazettes of that time, ſtating it at ſixty thou-
fand men, induced Europe to believe it was an army
ſimilar to thoſe of Ruſha or Germany; but the
Turks, and more eſpecially thoſe of Aſia, differ
ſtill more from the Europeans in their military
than their civil cuſtoms. Sixty thouſand men
with them are very far from being ſynonimous
with ſixty thouſand ſoldiers, as in our armies. That
of which we are now ſpeaking affords a proof of this:
it might amount in fact to forty thouſand men, which
may be claſſed as follows. Five thouſand Mamlouk
cavalry, which was the whole effective army ; about
fifteen hundred Barbary Arabs on foot, and no other
infantry, for the Turks are acquainted with none;
with them the cavalry is every thing. Beſides theſe,
cach Mamlouk having in his ſuite two footmen, arm-
ed with ſtaves, theſe would form a body of ten thou-
ſand valets; beſides a number of ſervants and ſerrad-
is, Or attendants on horſeback, for the Beys and
Kachefs, which may be eſtimated at two thouſand :
all the reſt were ſutlers, and the uſual train of fol-
lowers.
Buch was this army, as deſcribed to me in Paleſ.
tine by perions who had feen and followed it. It
was commanded by the friend of Ali, Mohammad
Bey, ſurnamed Alcudabab, or father of gold, from

r AND SYRIA, 8r

the luxury of his tent and capariſons. As to order
and diſcipline theſe muſt not be mentioned. The
armies of the Turks and Mamlouks are nothing but

a confuſed multitude of horſemen, without uniforms,
on horſes of all ſizes and colours, riding without

either keeping their ranks, or arg any regular
order. 5

This rabble took the road to Acre, leaving, wher-
ever they paſſed, ſufficient marks of their want of
diſcipline and rapacity. At Acre, a junction was

formed with the troops of Shaik Daher, which con-

ſilted of fifteen hundred Safadins*, on horſeback,
and commanded by his ſon Ali; twelve hundred

Motualis cavalry, having for their leader the Shaik

Naſif, and about one thouſand Mograbian infantry.
This union effected, and their plan concerted, they
proceeded towards Damaſcus ſome time in the month
ok April. Oſman had employed this interval in pre-
parations, and had, on his fide, collected an army

_ equally numerous and ill-regulated. 'The Pachas of

Said}, Tripoli, and Aleppo, had joined him with
their forces, and were waiting for che enemy under
the walls of Damaſcus.
The reader muſt not here figure to himſelf a num-
bow of complicated and artificial movements, ſuch as

thoſe which, within the laſt century, have reduced

war with us to a ſcience of ſyſtem and calculation.
The Aſiatics are unacquainted with the firſt elements
of this conduct, Their armies are mobs, their march-
es ravages, their campaigns mere inroads, and their
battles, bloody frays; the ſtrongeſt, or the moſt ad-
venturous party goes in ſearch of the other, which
not eee flies without offering reſiſtance; if

* Daher: 8 ſabjefts were called by this name, becauſe his ſaat
of government was originally at Safad, a village of Galilee.
+ Pronounced See, in French; in Engliſh Said, as above ;
it is the ancient Sidon. 25

oh > oF, — , BJ - L wo *
0. 2 3 * — "Is wa - as * - 2 — ne
.

{
?
U

2
—

82 | TRAVELS IN
they ſtand their ground, they engage pell-mell, dif.

charge their carbines, break their ſpears, and hack
each other with their ſabres, for they rarely have any

cannon ; and when they have they are but of little

fervice. A panic frequently diffuſes itſelf without
cauſe; one party flies, the other purſues, and ſhouts
victory: the vanquiſhed ſubmit to the will of the
conqueror, and the campaign often terminates with-
out a battle. JJV 8
Such, in a great meaſure, were the military opera-
tions in Syria, in 1771. The combined army of Ali
Bey and Daher marched to Damaſcus. The Pachas
waited for them; they approached, and, on the 6th
of June, a deciſive action took place: the Mamlouks

” * .

and Safadians ruſhed with ſo much fury on the Turks,

that, terrified at the carnage, they immediately took
to flight, and the Pachas were not the laſt in endea-
vouring to make their eſcape. The allies became
maſters of the country, and took poſſeſſion of the _
city without oppoſition, there being neither walls nor
ſoldiers to defend it. The caſtle alone reſiſted. Its
Tuined fortifications had not a ſingle cannon, much
leſs gunners; but it was ſurrounded by a muddy.
ditch, and behind the ruins were poſted a few muſque-
teers, and theſe alone were ſufficient to check this
army of cavalry. As the beſieged, however, were
already conquered by their fears, they capitulated the
third day, and the place was to be ſurrendered the
next morning, when at day-break a moft extraordt-
nary revolution took place. .
At the moment that the ſignal of ſurrender was
expected, Mohammad ſuddenly commanded a retreat,
and all his cavalty turned towards Egypt. In vain
did the aſtoniſhed Ali-Daher, and Naſif fly to de-
mand the cauſe of fo ſtrange a meaſure : the Mam-
louk made no other reply to their reiterated queſtions, |
than a haughty menace; and the whole army de-
camped in confuſion. Nor was this merely a retreat,

EGYPT: AND SYRIA. 83

but a polltiye flight; 0 they ſeemed as if botly purſued
by a victorious enemy ; the road from Damaſcus to Ca-
iro was covered with men on foot, ſcattered horſemen,
and ſtores and baggage they had abandoned. This
ſingular occurrence was attributed, at that time, to a
pretended report of the death of Ali Bey ; but the
real reſolution of the enigma was a ſecret conference
which paſſed at night in the tent of Mohammad Bey.
Ofman, finding himſelf too weak to oppoſe theſe
combined forces, had recourſe to artifice. He con-
trived to introduce to the Egyptian general a crafty
agent, who under pretence of propoſing terms of peace,
endeavoured to diſſeminate diſcord and revolt. He
inſinuated to Mohammad that the part he was acting

Was equally ill befitting his honour and contrary to

his intereſt ; that he was deceived in imagining the
Sultan would leave unpuniſhed the offences of Ali
Bey; that it was a facrilege to violate fo holy a city
as Damaſcus, one of the two gates of the Caaba“;
that he was aſtoniſhed that Mohammad ſhould prefer
the favour of the ſlave of a Sultan, to that of the Sul-
tan himſelf, and that he fhould fet up a ſecond maſter.
between him and his ſovereign; beſides, that it was
evident this maſter, by daily expoſing him to freſh

_ - dangers, was facrificing him both to his own per-

| ſonal ambition, and to the jealouſy of his Kiaya, the

Pg Cop t Rezk.

Theſe reaſons and eſpecially the two latter, which

were founded on indiſputable facts, made a ſtrong

impreſſion on Mohammad and his Beys : they im-
mediately held a council, and ſwore folemnly, by the
{abre and the Koran, to return without delay to Cairo.
| In conſequence of this determination, they decamp-
ed ſo ſuddenly, and abandoned their conqueſts with
lach precipitation, that the report of their coming

N The two great carivans Which make the pilgrimage to
Mecca * out from Cairo and Damaſcus, |

84 . TRAVELS IN

preceded their arrival at Cairo only by ſix a

Ali Bey was ſtruck with terror, and wiſhed to have

puniſhed his general upon the ſpot; but Mohammad
appeared fo well ſupported. that it was 1mpracticavle
to attempt any thing againſt his perſon ; it was ne-
cellary to diffemble, and Ali Bey ſubmitted to this
with the leis difficulty, as he owed his fortune to his
difimuiation much more than to his courage. :
Though thus deprived, at one ſtroke, of the fruits

of ſo expenſive a war, Ali Bey did not renounce his

projects. He continued fo fend ſnccours to bis ally.

Daher, and prepared a ſecond army for the campaign
of v772; but fortune, weary of effecting more for

him than his own abilitics could have pa -

ed, ceaſed to favour him.

Ihe firſt reverſe he experieneed- 1 was in the loſs
of ſevera] cayaſſes, or boats, loaded with rice, for
Shaik Daher, which were taken by a Ruffin priva-
reer, within fight of Damietta; but another, and
{till more ſerious accident, was the eſcape of Moharr -

mad Bey. Ali Bey could not eafily for ger the affair

of Damaſcus; neverthelels from the remains ef that
aflection we retain for thoſe whom we have ferved,

he could not bring himfelr to refolve on having re-

courle to violence, when an exprettion made ule of
by the Venctian merchant who enjoy ed Eis con ndence
fixed his wavering reſolution.

& Have thc Sultans of the Franks,” 1210 Ali Bey.
one day, to that i.uropcan®, ce children as rich as
© my ſou Mobaminad 7” « No, deignior,“ replied
the courtier, © they are careful of that; for they
« think that when children become too great, they
& are often in haite to en oy their! e . 1 his

intmuation went to the heart of Ali From that

moment he beheld in „ e e rival,
aud reſolved his ruin. To effect 8 without ritt,

This anecdotc I received fiom that mecha wt...

EGYPT AND SYRIA, | 85

ge firſt ſent directions to all the gates of Cairo, that

no Mamlouk ſhould be ſuffered to paſs in the even-

ing, or at night; he then ordered Mohammad into
immediate exile in the Said. By theſe oppolite or-
ders he imagined Mohammad would be ſtopped at the
gates, and that, the keepers taking him into cuſtody,
he ſhould eafily free himſelf from his fears; but
chance diſconcerted theſe vague aud timid meaſates.;
Mohammad, by ſome miſtake, was ſuppoſed to be
charged with private orders from Ali. Ile and his
retinue were allowed to paſs, and from this moment
all was loſt. Ali Bey, informed of his flight, gave
orders to purſue him, but Mohammad appeared ſn
well prepared and determined, that none dared attack
him. He retired into the Said, foaming with rage,
and thirſting for vengeance. Even after his arrival
there, he had another narrow eſcape. Ayoud Bey,
an officer of Ali's, feigning great deteſtation of the
injuſtice of his maſter, received Mohammad with
tranſport, and ſwore upon his ſabre and the Koran,

to ſhare his fortune; but, a few days after, letters

were intercepted from this fame Avoub, to Ali, in
which he promiſed him, without delay, the head of

his enemy. Mohammad, having diſcovered the plot,
ſeized the traitor; and, after cutting off his hands
and tongue, fent him to Cairo to receive the recom-
penſe of his patron. Et

The Mamlouks, however, wearted with the inſo-
lence of Ali Bey, repaired in crowds to his rival ;
and, in about ſix weeks, Mohammad faw himſelf
ſufficiently ſtrong to leave the Said, and march to-
wards Cairo. Ali Bey, on his ſide, lent his troops
againſt him; but ſeveral of them likewiſe deſerted to
the enemy; At length, in the month of April 1772
the armies had a rencounter in the plain of El-Maſa-
teb, at the gates of Cairo, the iſſue of which was,
that Mohammad and his party entered the city, ſabre
in band. Ali Bey, having barely time to make his

86 TRAVELS IN

eſcape ith eight hundred of bis Mamlouks, repair-

ed to Gaza, for the firſt time in his life, and endea-
voured to get to Acre, to join his ally, Daher; but
the inhabitants of Nablous and Yafa cut off his re-
treat; and Daher himſelf was obliged to open him a
paſſage. The Arab received him with that ſimplicity
and frankneſs which in all ages have characterized
that people, and conducted him to Acre. It was

neceſſary to ſuccour Said (Sidon), then beſieged by

the troops of Oſman, in conjunction with the Druzes.

He accordingly marched to that place, accompanied

by Ali. Their combined troops formed a body of
about ſeven thouſand cavalry, and, at their approach,

the Turks raiſed the fiege and retired to a place a

league to the northward of the city, on the river
Aoula. There, in July 1772, the molt conſiderable
and ad methodical- engagement of the whole war
took place. 'The Turkiſh army, three times more
pumerous than that of the two allies, was entirely
defeated. The ſeven Pachas who commanded it took

to flight, and Said remained in the Or of Da-

her, and his governor Degnizla.
Ali Bey and Daher, on their return to Acre, pro-

ceeded to chaſtiſe the inhabitants of Yafa, who had

revolted that they might convert to their uſe the
ammunition and cloathing left there by one of Ali's
fleets, before he was expelled from Cairo. The
city, which was held by a Shaik of Nablous, ſhut its

gates, and reſolved to ſtand the fiege. This com-
menced in July and laſted eight months, though
Vafa had no hs rampart than a mere garden-wall,
without a ditch; but in Syria and Egypt they know

{till lets of carrying on a ſiege than of engagements
in the field; at length, however, the beſieged capt-

tulated in February 1773.

Ali, now feeling IT Ab thought of
nothing but his return to Cairo. Daher offered to
furniſn him with ſuccours; and the Ruſſians, with

EGYPT AND 8YRIA, 87

whom Ali had contracted an alliance, while treat-
ing of the affair of the privateer, promiſed to ſecond
him: time however was neceſſary for collecting theſe
ſcattered aids, and Ali became impatient. The pro-
miſes of Rezk, his Kiaya and his oracle, rendered
him ſtill more defirous to be gone. This Copt never
ceaſed aſſuring him that the hour of his return Was
come; that the aſpect of the ſtars was moſt propi-
tious; and that the downfall of Mohammad was now
moſt certain. Ali, who like all the Turks, believed

firmly in aſtrology, and who put the greateſt faith

in Rezk, becauſe he believed his predictions had
been often verified, could no longer endure delay;

and the news he received from Cairo ny his

impatience.

In the beginning of April, letters were ſent him
by his friends in which they informed him that the
people were tired of his ungrateful ſlave, and that
nothing but his preſence was wanting to expel him.
He determined, therefore, to ſet out immediately,
and, without giving the Ruſſians time to arrive, de-
parted with his Mamlouks, and fifteen hundred Sa-
fadians, commanded by Oſman, the fon of Daher;
but he was ignorant that the letters from Cairo were
a ſtratagem of Mohammad's, and that this Bey had

enxtorted them by force, in order to deceive and

lead him into the ſnare he was preparing. In fact,
no ſooner had Ali advanced into the deſart which
ſeparates Gaza from Egypt, than he fell in, near Sal-
akia, with a choſen body of a thouſand Mamlouks,
who were lying in ambuſh, waiting his arrival. This
corps was commanded by the young Bey,  Mourad,
who, being enamoured of the wife of Ali Bey, had
obtained a promiſe of her from Mohammad, in caſe
be could bring him the head of that illuſtrious un-
fortunate. Scarcely did Moraud perceive the duſt
which announced the approach of his enemies before
he ruſhed upon them with his Mamlouks, and threw

1 TRAVELS IN,

them into conſuſion. To crown his good fortune,
he met with Ali in the crowd, attacked, "and wounded
him in the forehead with a ſabre, made him priſon.
er, and conducted him to Mohammad. The latter, |
who was encamped two leagues in the rear, receiv.
ed his former maſter with all that exaggerated reſpect
which is ſo cuſtomary with the Turks, and that ſen-
ſibility which perfidy knows ſo well how to feign.
He provided a magnificent tent for him, ordered him
i to be taken the orcateſt care of, ſtiled himfeif a thou-
4 ſand times, his ſlave, who keked the duſt of his
| feet; but the third day, this parade of politencſs
i terminated by the death of Ali Bey, who died, ac-
cording to ſome, of his wounds ; or as others report,
by poiſon : the probability of both theſe accounts
13 ſo equal, that it is Impoſlble to decide between
them.
Thus terminated the enterprizes of this celebrated
man, who for ſome time engaged the attention of.
Europe, and afforded many politicians hopes of a great
revolution. That he was an extraordinary charac-
ter, cannot be denied; but it is eXagg eration to place
him in the claſs of great men: the accounts given
of him by witneſſes highly worthy credit, prove that
though he poſſeſſed the feeds of great qualities, the
want of culture prevented them from coming to ma-
turity. Let us paſs over his credulity in aſtrology,
which more frequently inſſluenced his conduct than
more ſubſtantial motives; let us not mention his
rreacheries, his perjuries, the murders even of his
benefaQors*, by which he acquired, or maintained
bis power, the morality of a rude ſociety is doubt-
leſs leſs rigid than that of a well-regulated ſtate ;
but, judging ambitious men on their own principles, N
we ſhall ind that Ali Bey either ill underitood, or
erroneouſly purſued his plan of greatneſs; and that

2

1
11
1
.
2
l

:
o
"F
4

1 .
:

is

!
'
!
4
7
.
4

i
|
9

* Such 2s Sajch Bey,

*
1
'

x
4 6
-

:

-
£5
1

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 30 *

it was he himſelf who paved the way for his own.
ruin. We are certainly juſtified in charging him
with three errors: firſt, that imprudent thirit after
conqueſt, which truitletsly exhauited his revenue,
and his forces, and made him neglect the interior
adminiſtration of his own country. Secondly, the
premature indolence to which he reſigned himſelf,
executing nothing but by his lieutenants, Which di-
miniſhed the reipect entertained for his perſon by
the Mzmlouks, and encouraged the ſpirit of revolt.
Thirdly, the exceiltye riches he ſhowered on his fa.
vourite, which procured him the influence he abuſed.
Suppoling Mohammad virtuous, ought not Alt to
have dreaded the feduction of Aattevers; who in all
countries are the conitant attendants on opulence ?
In ali Bey, however, we mult admire unequality,
which diſtinguiſhes him from the multitude of ty-
rants who have coverned Egypt, if a vicious Educa-
tion prevented him trom knowing what true glory

is, it is certain, at leaſt, he was animated with the

deſire of obtaining it; and this was never the portion
of vulgar minds. He wanted nothing but to be
adviſed by thoſe who knew the true road to it ; and
among thoſe who are born to command, how iew
are there who merit this eulogium?

1 cannot proceed without a few remarks on an
obſervation I remember to have frequently heard
made at Cairo. Thoſe among our merchants who
nad witneſſed the reign of Ali, and his downfall, at-
ter extolling- his good government, his zeal for juſ-
tice, and his beneficence to the Franks, never failed
0 expreſs their aſtoniſhment at his not being regret-
ed by the people; and thence took occaſion to re-
peat theſe charges of inconſtancy and ingratitude
with which the orientals are uſually reproacked ; but
on maturely examining every circumſtauce, this does
not appear to me fo rtraordinary as it may at firſt
ccm.

—— —

5 2 * - * bh S , — 7 1 » * 4 2.65 * r = x .

BE te 9 PA Rare rr 7 8% + 17 ren gp rate Be ror 909 ny | 0 Gy r * 4 "4

_ — - —— VS ta —̃ = p — — — „„. — —— — a . = #& as = — 22 —ͤ— — — 94 — —— me — — 4 1 _ _ Aut - 2 _ —"
.

90 3 | TRAVELS IN

In Egypt. as in every other country the judgment of -

the people is guided by the penury or plenty in which

they live; their love or hatred, their cenſure or ap-

plauſe, are meaſured by the eaſe or difficulty with

which they can procure the means. of ſubſiſtence,

in conſequence of the adminiſtration of their rulers ;
nor can this be eſteemed an improper criterion. In
vain may we tell them that the honour of the em-
pire, the glory of the nation, the encouragement of
commerce, and the improvement of the fine arts,

require ſuch and ſuch meaſures. Every thing is

ſuperceded by the neceſſaries of life; and when the
multitude want bread, they have at leaſt a right to

withhold their praiſe and admiration. Of what con-

ſequence was it to the people of Egypt, that Ali Bey
had conquered the Said, Mecca, and Syria, it theſe
conqueſts only augmented , inſtead of relieving their
bdurthens? The expences incurred by theſe! wars,
increaſed the contributions they were obliged to raiſe.

The expedition againſt Mecca alone colt twenty. ſix

millions of French livres (above one million eighty-
three thouſand pounds), and the exportation of corn

for the uſe of the armies, added to the monopoly
of ſome merchants in favour, cauſed a famine which

deſolated the country during the whole of the years
1779 and 1771. When, therefore, the inhabitants of

Cairo, and the peaſants of the villages, were dying

with hunger what wonder if they murmured againſt
Ali Bey? Who can blame them for difapproving of
the commerce with India, if all its advantages were
to center in a few hands? When Ali Bey expen-

ded two hundred and tweuty-five thouſand livres

(above nine thouſand pounds), in the uſeleſs han-

dle of a #andjar*, though jewellers might applaud

his magnificence, had not the people reaſon to de-

teſt his luxury? This liberality, which his courtiers ;

* A poniard carried in the belt,

i — mam? nc. aus * 8

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 9 x

called virtue, the people at whoſe expence it was
exerciſed, were juſtly entitled to ſtigmatize as vice.
Had this man any merit in laviſhing what coſt him
nothing? Was it an act of juſtice to gratify his fa-
vourite at the expenſe of the people, or repay with
their money his private obligations, as in the caſe, of
his purveyor- general“? It muſt be confeſſed, that the
greateſt part of the actions of Ali Bey were founded
much leſs on general principles of juſtice and huma-
nity, than perſonal motives of vanity and ambition.
Egypt, in his eyes, was his private property, and the
people a vile herd of worthleſs animals, of whom he
might diſpoſe at his pleaſure. Ought we then to be
aſtoniſhed, if thoſe whom he treated like an imperi-
ous maſter have viliſied his fame like mercenary
milenbntent s 86 17 EROS: -

Summary, Meeren, from, n of ANN
VVV the year 1785. C

VE the death of Ali Bey, the fate of the
Egyptians has not been bettered ; his ſucceſſors have
Not even imitated what was laudable in his conduct.
Mohammad Bey, who ſucceeded him in April 1773,
during a,reign of two years, diſplayed nothing but
the ferocity of a robber, and the baſeneſs of a traitor.

* Alt Bey, ſetting out to go into exile, for he was exiled no
leſs than three times, was encamped near Cairo, being allowed
2 delay of twenty-four hours, to pay his debts; a Janiſary,
named Haſlan, to whom he owed five hundred ſequins (one
hundred and fifty-ſix pounds) came to find him. Ali, thinking
he wanted his money, began to make excuſes. But Haſſan,
producing five hundred more ſequins, ſaid to him, Thou art
an misfortune, take theſe alſo.” Ali, confounded with this

92 A I TRAVELS 1

10 colour bis „ ended towards his patron, the at
fr pretended: to be only the defender of the rights
_ 6fithe Sultan, and the miniſter of his will; he there:
fore: renijtted to Conſtantinople the tribute which had
been interrupted for the laſt fix years; and took the
euſtomary oath of unlimited obedience. He fenew.
Sd his ſubmiſſion at che death of Ali Bey; and, un-
der pretext of proving his loyalty: to the Sultan, de-
manded permiſſion to make war on the Arab Daher.
The Porte, who would: gladly. have ſolicited this, was
Rüppy to permit it as a favour: Mohammad was in-
veſted with the ticle of Pacha of Cairo, and every thing
immediately prepared for his expedition. It may be
aſked what intereſt an we Governor could have
in deſtreying the Arab Daher, in rebellion in Syria?
But refined views of policy had no more ſhare in this
than in other meaſures. It originated merely in private
reſentment. Mohammad Bey could not forget a re-
proachful letter written to him by Daher, at the time
of the revolution of Damaſcus; nor the part the Shaik
had taken againit him in his quarrel with Ali = ;
To-hatred was added the proſpect of plunder.
him Sabbar+, Daher's Miniſter, was reputed to 5.
ſeſs prodigious wealth; and the Egyptian, could he
deſtroy Daher, hoped equally to Sratify his avatice
and revenge.
He did not hefitate, therefore, to endereeke this
War, and made his preparations with all the activity
which. hatred mipires. He provided himſelf with
an extraordinary train of artillery, procured foreign
gunners, and gave the command of them to an Eng:

e fore, by the head of TY Prophet, that, if ever
returned, he would beſtow or this man uhexampled wealth ;
and, on His return, created him Purveyor general; and though
he was informed r the ſcandalous extortions of- Haſan, never
Even reprirfranded him. e |

+ Sabbdr, with the 7 ee thick, which ſignifies .
. the ordiuary 7, it ſignifie, plumber.

ng

EGYPT -AND/SFRIA, 93

" named. Robinſon; he brought from Snez
2 cannon ſixteen feet in length, which had long re-
mained uſeleſs; and, at length 1 in the month ot Feb-
ruary, 1776, appeared in Paleſtine, with an army

equal to that he had formerly headed againſt Damaſ-
cus. On his approach, Daher's forces, which 96+
cupied Gaza, deſpairing of being able to defend it;

' retired ; he took poſſeſſion of it, and without ſtops

ping, marched againſt Vafa. This town which had

a garriſon, and whoſe inhabitants were all inured
to war, ſhewed more reſalution than Gaza, and
determined to ſtand the ſiege. Ihe hiſtory of this
| liege would well exemplify the ignorance of theſe
countries in the art of war, as a fe of the dran
: pal particulars will ſufficiently eving.

Lafa, the ancient Joppa, is ſituated on a part of

the coalt of the general level of which is very little
above the ſea. The city is built on an eminence, in
the form of a ſugar-loaf, in height about one hun-
dred and thirty feet perpendicular. The houfes,
_ diſtributed on the declivity, appear riſing above each
other, like the ſteps of an amphitheatre. On the
ſummit is a ſmall citidal which commands the town;
the bottom of the hill is ſurrounded by a wall without
2 rampart, of twelve or fourteen feet high, and two
ox three in thickneſs. The battlements at the top

are the only tokens by which it is diſtinguiſhable from

2 common garden-wall. This wall, which has no
ditch, is environed by gardens, where ene oranges,

and citrons, in this light foil, grow to a moſt prodi-
gious ſize. Such was the city Mohammad undertook
to beſiege. It was defended by five or ſix hundred
 Safadians, and as many inhabitants, who, at ſight of
the enemy, armed themſelves with their abres and

muſkets, they had likewiſe a few braſs cannon,
twenty-iour pounders, without carriages ; theſe they

mounted, as well as they could, on timbers prepared
in a hurry; and, ſupplying the place of experience

—

94 TRAVELS IN

and addreſs by hatred and courage, replied to the ſum-

mons of the enemy by menaces and muſket-ſhor.
- Mohammad, finding he muſt have recourſe to Wie

formed his camp before the town; but was ſo little

acquainted with the buſineſs in which he was engaged

that he advanced within half cannon ſhot. The bul-

lets, which ſhowered upon the tents, apprized him of
his error; he retreated, and, by making a freſh expe-

riment, was convinced he was ſtill too near; ; at length

he diſcovered the proper diſtance, and ſet up his

tent, in which the moſt extravagant luxury was diſ-
played: around it, without any order, were pitched

thoſe of the Mamlouks, while the Barbary Arabs
formed huts with the trunks and branches of the
orange and lemon trees, and the followers of the
army arranged themſelves as they could: a few
guards were diſtributed here and there, and without
making a ſingle entrenchment, a called thetnſclves f

encamped.

Batteries were now to be eretted; and a pot of
rifing ground was made choice of, to the ſouth-eaſt-
ward of the town, where, behind fome garden-walls,
eight pieces of cannon were pointed, at two hundred
paces from the town, and the firing began, notwith-

ſtanding the muſquetry of the enemy, who, from the

tops of the terraces, killed ſeveral of the gunners. —
This conduct will appear ſo ſingular in Europe, that

the truth of it may be, perhaps, called in queſtion;
but theſe things paſſed eleven years ago; I have deen
on the ſpot, have ſeen many who were eye-witneſſes,

and I eſteem it a duty, neither to alter for the better
or the worſe, facts, by which the character of a nation

may ſo well be eſtimated.

It is evident that a wall, only three feet thick, and 5

without a rampart, muſt ſoon have a large breach made

in it ; and the queition was, not how to mount, but
how to get through it. The Mamlouks were for do-
ing it on horſeback ; but they were made to compre-

* *

hoe Wt.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. n 9 5

bend that this was impoſſible; and they confented, for

the firſt time, to march on foot. It muſt have been

a curious fight to ſee them, with their huge breeches_
of thick Venetian cloth, embarraſſed with their tucked-
up beniches, their crooked fabres in hand, and piſtols
hanging to their ſides, advancing, and tumbling among
the ruins of the wall. They imagined they had con-

quered every difficulty when they had ſurmounted this

| obſtacle; but the beſieged, who formed a better judg-

ment, waited till they arrived at the empty ſpace be-

_ tween the city and the wall; there they aſſailed them
trom the terraces, and the windows of the houſes,

with ſuch a ſhower of bullets, that the Mamlouks did

not ſo much as think of ſetting them on fire, but re-
tired, under a perſuaſion that the breach was utterly
impracticable, ſince it was impoſſible to enter it on
horſeback. Morad Bey brought them ſeveral times

back to the charge, but in vain.

Six weeks paſſed in this manner, and Mohammad
was diſtracted with rage, anxiety, and deſpair. The
beſieged, however, whoſe numbers were diminiſhed

by the repeated attacks, and who did not fee that any
ſuccours were to be expected from Acre, became
weary of defending alone the cauſe of Daher. The
M.,uſſulmen, eſpecially, complained, that the Chriſ-

tians, regarding nothing but their prayers, were more

in their churches than the field of battle. Some per-
ſons began to treat with the enemy, and it was pro-
poſed to abandon the place, on the Egyptians giving
hoſtages. Conditions were agreed on, and the treaty
might be conſidered as concluded, when, in the midſt

of the ſecurity oc:afioned by that belief, ſome Mam-

louks entered the city; numbers followed them, and
attempted to plunder; the inhabitants defended them.
ſelves, and the attack recommenced ; the whole army

then ruſhed into the town, which ſuffered all the hors
rors of war: women and children, young and old,

all were cut to pieces; and Moljammad, equally mean

96 TRAVELS IN

and barbarous, cauſed a n formed of the
heads of theſe ee ſufferers, to be raiſed as a
monument of his victory.“ It is ſaid the number of
theſe exceeded twelve hundred. This cataſtrophe,
which happened the 19th of May, 1776, ſpread terror
through the country. Shaik Daher himſelf fled from
Acre, the government of which he left to his ſon Ali,
whoſe intrepidity is ſtill celebrated in Syria, but whoſe
glory is tarniſhed by his frequent rebellions againſt
bi father. Ali imagined that Mohammad would pay
reſpect to the treaty he had made with him; but the
Mamlouk, being arrived at the gates of Acre, de-
clared, the price of his friendſhip muſt be the head of
Daher bimſell. Ali, finding himſelf deceived, refuſ-
ed to commit this parricide, and abandoned the town
to the Egyptians, who gave it up to be plundered.
The French merchants, with difficulty, procured” an
exemption, and ſoon ſaw themſelves in moſt immi—
nent danger. Mohammad, informed that the wealth
of Ibrahim, Kiaya of Daher, had been depoſited with

them ; declared that, unleſs it was initantly delivered |}

up, they ſhould all be put to death. The enſuing
Sunday was the day appointed for this terrible re-

fearch, when fortune happily freed them and Syria

| from the impending danger, for Mohammad was
feized with a malignant fever, and died, after two |
days illneſs, in the prime of his age+.
The Chriſtians of Syria are perſuaded his death was
2 puniſhment of the Prophet Elias, whole church, on
Mount Carmel, he had violated. They even affrm the
prophet appeared to him ſeveral times in the form of
an old man, and that Mohammad was afterwards con-
tinually exclaiming—“ Take from me that old man,
* who diſtreſſes and terrifies me.” But they who ſaw
this General in his laſt moments, have reported at

See Memoirs of Baron de Tott, Part IV.

+ In ihs month of June, 1776.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 9

Cara; to perſons worthy of credit, that this viſion,
the effects of a delirium, was cauſed by the conſciouſ-
neſs of ſome private murders; indeed, the death of
Mohammad may eaſily be accounted for from natural
cauſes, and is to be attributed to the known unhealthi-
neſs of the climate, exceſſive heat, immoderate 18
and the anxiety occalioned by the ſiege of Yafa.
may not be improper to remark, in this place, Sho

were we to write the memoirs of modern times, as

dictated by the Chriſtians of Syria and gypt, they
would no leſs abound in prodigies and ene
than the hiſtories of antiquity. — |
The death of Mohammad was no 5e known
than this whole army made a precipitate retreat, ſimi-
lar to that of Damaſcus, and tumultuouſſy took the
road to Egypt. Morad Bey, who had acquired great
credit by the favour of Mohammad, haſtened to re-
gain Cairo, that he might be enabled to diſpute the
ſupreme command with Ibrahim Bey. The latter,
alſo a freed-man and favourite of the deceaſed, no
ſooner learnt the ſtate of affairs, than he took mea-

ſiures to ſecure an authority with which he had been

entruſted in the abſence of his patron. Every ap-
pearance threatened open war; but the two rivals,
when each came to conſider the power and reſources
of the other, found themſelves fo equal, as to make
them dread the iſſue of a combat. "They determined
therefore on peace, and entered into an agree-

ment, by which the authority was to be divided, on

condition that Ibrahim ſhould retain the title of Shaik-
el-Beled; this arrangement was dictated by their com-

mon intereſt. Since the death of Ali Bey, the Beys

and the Cachefs, who owed their promotion to his
houſe“, had repined in ſecret at ſeeing all the autho-
rity paſſed into the hands of a new faction: the power

* That 1s to oy of who be had been the re among
the Manlouks, the freed-man is called the child of the houfe,

98 TRAVUELS IN

poſſeſſed by Mohammad, formerly their equal, had
hurt their Nie, and that of his flaves appeared to
them ftill more inſupportable: they reſolved, there-
tore, to ſhake off this yoke, and entered into in-
wignes and cabals, which terminated in a union of
the parties under the title of the houſe of Alt Bey.
The chiefs were Haſſan Bey, formerly Governor of
Djedda, and ſurnamed, on that account, El. djed-
daoui; and his colleague, Iſmael, the only remain-
ing Bey of thoſe. created by Ibrahim Kiaya. Theſe
confederates conducted their plot ſo well that Morad
and Ibrahim were obliged to abandon Cairo, and re.
tire into the Said, where they were exiled; but,
being ſoon reinforced by the refugees, who joined
them, they returned, and routed their enemies, who
were three times their number. Iſmael and Haſlam
expelled in their turn, fled into the Said, where they
ſtiil remain. Morad and Ibrahim, jealous of this
party, have made ſeveral efforts to deſtroy it, with-
out ſucceſs. They at laſt granted to the rebels a dif-
trict above Djirdja; but the Mamlouks, who contin-
ually long for the luxuries of Cairo, having made
ſome movements in 1782, Morad Bey thought it
neceſſary to make a freſh attempt to exterminate
them, and I arrived at the time when he was making
his preparations. His adherents, diſperſed along the
Nile, ſtopped all the boats they met, and ſtaif-in-hand,
forced the wretched proprietors to follow them to
Cairo. Every body fled from a ſervice which was
to produce them no profit. In the city a contribu-
tion of five hundred thouſand dahlers“ was impoled
upon commerce ; the bakers and different tradeſmen
were compelled to furniſh their commodities below
prime colt, and all theſe extortions, ſo odious in

Eurppe, were deemed mere matters ot courſe in Egypt. =

* ech ts fix hundred and twenty five thouſand Eyers, f
99.375

FEC YT AND SYRIA. 99

Every thing was ready in the beginning of April,
and Morad ſet out for the Said. The advices from
Conſtantinople, and the gazettes of Europe, which
re-echoed them, repreſented this expedition, at the
time, as an important war, and the force of Morad
as a powerful army, and it was fo relatively to the
forces he could raiſe and the ſituation of Egypt; but
it 18 no leſs true that it did not exceed two thouſand
horſemen. To obſerve the conſtant falſification of
news at Conſtantinople, one would believe, either
that the Turks of the capital are wholly ignorant of

the affairs of Egypt and Syria, or that they with to
impoſe on the Europeans. The little communication

there is between them and theſe remote provinces of
the empire renders the former ſuppoſition more pro-
bable than the latter. On the other hand, it ſhould
| feem as if our merchants, who reſide in the different
factories, might procure us authentic information;
but they, ſhut up in their kans, as in priſons, con-
cern themſelves but little with what is foreign to

their commerce, and content themſelves with laugh-
Ing at the newſpapers they receive from Europe.
Sometimes they have attempted to rectify theſe er-
rors; but their information was ſo ill employed, that
they have abandoned fo troubleſome and unprofitable

an undertaking.

Morad, leaving Cairo, Jed his cavalry, by forced
_ marches, along the river ; his baggage and ſtores fol-
lowed him in boats : and the north-wind, which is al-
ways moſt prevalent, was favourable to his deſigns.

the exiles, to the number of five hundred, were poſted
above Djirdja. They no ſooner were apprized of the
enemy's approach than they became a prey to diſſen-
tion ; ſome were for fighting, and others adviſed to
capitulate; ſeveral of them even adopted the latter
meaſure, and ſurrendered to Morad Bey: but Haſſan

and Iſmael, continuing inflexible, removed up the

river towards Alouan, followed by about two hun-

dred and fry horſe. Morad purſued them almoſt to
the Cataract, where they took poſt ſo advantageouſly,
[ on rocky precipices, that the Mamlouks, utterly ig-
. norant how to conduct a war of poſts, held it impoſ-
ſible to force them. Beſides, Morad, dreading leſt
| too long an ablence from Cairo might give encou-
i ragement to new projects, haſtened to return thither;
and the exiles, delivered from their embarraſſment,
J returned iow if to their ſtation in the Said. oh,
i In a ſociety where the paſſions of individuals are
0 not directed to one general end, where each man,
Wn attentive only to himſelf, conſiders the uncertainty
a of the next day, merely as a motive to improve the
advantage of the moment; where the chiefs, impreſ-
ſing no ſentiment of reſpect, are unable to maintain
ſubordination ; in ſuch a ſociety, a fixed and regular
ſtate of affairs is impoſſible ; and the inceſſant jarring
of the incoherent parts muſt give a perpetual vibra-
tion to the whole machine: this is what continually
happens among the body of Mamlouks ar Cairo.
Scarcely was Morad returned when a new combina-
tion of intereſts excited new troubles ; beſides his
faction and thoſe of Ibrahim, and the houſe of Ali
Bey, there were, at Cairo, other Beys, allied to
other houſes. Theſe Beys, who, from their indivi-
dual weakneſs were acolebied by the ruling Beys,
thought proper, in the month of July, 1783, to unite
their hitherto detached forces, and form a party,
which alſo had its pretenſions to ſovereign power.
This league, however, was diſcovered too ſoon, and
the leaders, to the number of five, found themſelves
_ unexpectedly exiled to the Delta. To this order they
feigned ſubmiſſion ; but they had ſcarcely left the
city before they took the route of the Said, the
uſual and convenient aſylum of all the malecontents ; ;
they were purſued to no purpoſe for a day, through
the deſert of the Pyramids; but they eſcaped both

+ 100 | TRAVELS IN
|

— 8 nn, OE IE tain
2 2 * =: WW es = >

5
©4056 · „

* 5
La” OS

> h 2 4
En In OE: * —

IN 2 —
by
= I

r Of COS _-. . -  NO"

EGYPT "AND SYRIA. 101

the Mamlouks and Arabs, and 4111 ſafe at Mini-

ah, where they took up their reſidence.
This village, ſituated forty leagues above Cairo,

on the banks of the Nile, which it commands, was

well calculated to promote their deſigns. Maſters
of the river, they could ſtop every thing which came

from the Said; and they availed themſelves of this
advantage: the corn, annually ſent from that province,

at this ſeaſon, was a favourable circumſtance; this

they ſeized; and Cairo, deprived of proviſions, was
in danger of a famine; while the Beys, and others
whoſe lands lay in, or beyond, the province of
Fayoum, no longer received their revenues, as the

exiles had laid them under contribution. To remove
theſe evils, a new expedition was neceſſary. Morad
Bey, fatigued with the former, refuſed to undertake
a ſecond; and Ibrahim Bey took it on himſelf. In
the month of Auguſt, notwithſtanding the Rama-
dan, the preparations were begun; all the boats,

and their owners, were ſeized on, as before. Con-

tributions were levied, and the dealers compelled to

ſupply the troops.

At length, in the bevinatiny of October, Ibrahim

ſet out with an army which was thought formidable,
ſince it conſiſted of about three thouſand cavalry.
It was reſolved to go down the Nile, the waters of

the inundation having not yet left the whole country,

and the ground continuing to be marſhy. In a tew
days the armies came in ſight of each other; but
Ibrahim, who had not the fame fondneſs for war
with Morad, did not attack the confederates ; he
entered into a negociation, and concluded a verbal
treaty, the conditions of which were the return of the
Beys, and their re-eſtabliſhment. Morad, who ſul-
pected ſome plot againſt himſelf, was much difſatisfied

with this convention ; diſtruſt took place more than
ever between him and his rival; and the arrogance
diſplayed by the exiles, in a general Divan, ſtill more

102 TRAVELS IN

increaſed his fears. He thought himſelf betrayed,
and, to ſecure himſelf from treachery, fet out from
Cato with his adherents, and retired into the Said.
Open war was expected to be the confequence, but
Ibrahim temporized, and, at the end of four months,
Morad advanced to Dijiza, as if to. degige the quar rel
by a battle.

For five-and- twenty days the two parties, ſeparated
by the river, remained oppoſite each other, without
attempting any thing. A treaty. was propoſed, but
Morad, diſſatisfied with the conditions, and too weak
to dictate others, returned into the Said, whither he
was followed by deputies, who, after four months
negociation, at length ſucceeded in bringing him back
to Cairo: the conditions ſtipulated were, that he
ſhouid continue to ſhare the authority with Ibrahim,
and that the five Beys ſhould be deprived of their
poſſeſſions. Theſe Beys, perceiving they were given
up by Ibrahim, took to flight: Morad purſued, them,
and the Arabs of the deſert, having taken them, he
brought them back to Cairo, that they might be
under his eye. Peace now ſeemed re-eſtabliſhed ; but
what had. paſſed between the two chiefs had too
clearly manifeſted their reſpective views, to ſuffer
them to continue friends; and each, well convinced
that his rival was only watching an opportunity to
deſtroy him, kept, conſtantly on his guard, either to
avoid or endeavour a ſurpriſe.

Theſe ſecret machinations obliged Morad Bey again
to quit Cairo, in 1784; but, forming his camp clok

to the gates, he appeared ſo determined, that Ibra-
him, terrified in his turn, fled with his partizans into
the Said, where he remained till March 1785, when,
In conſequence of a new treaty, he returned to Cairo,
where he now ſhares, as formerly, the ſupreme auth:
rity with his rival, until ſome freſh intrigue ſhall ai
ford him an opportunity of taking his revenge. Such
is the mary of the revolutions which have taken

muſt defcend+ from his high og:

"that is, deſcend from the caſtle.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 103

place in E gypt tor ſome years paſt. I have not eir-
cumſtantially related the various incidents of theſe
events, becauſe, not to mention their uncertainty, -
they can neither intereſt nor convey information.
The whole is a tiſſue of cabals, intrigues, treachery,
and murders, which could only weary the reader in
the repetition ; it is ſufficient if he is acquainted with

the leading facts, and is enabled from them to form

juſt ideas of the manners and political ſtate of the
country, which ſubject 1 al now proceed to diſcuſs
More amply. | 5

CHAP. X.

Si the revolution of Ibrahim Kiaya, and eſpe-
cially ſince the revolt of Ali Bey, the Ottoman power

has become more precarious in Egypt than in any

other province.
a Pacha;

it is true the Porte ſtill retains there
but this Pacha, confined and watched in
the callle of Cairo, is rather the priſoner of the
Mamlouks, than the repreſentative of the Sultan.
He is depoſed, exiled, or expelled at pleaſure; and,
on the mere ſommons of a herald, clothed in black*,
Some Pachas,
choſen expretsly for that purpoſe by the Porte, have

_ endeavoured, by ſecret intrigues, to recover the power

formerly annexed to their title; but the Beys have

rendered all ſuch attempts ſo, dangerous, that they.
now ſubmit quietly to their three years cAPUTUY, and

* This N 18 named in

+ The formulary of depoſition conſiſts in the word enzel, :

— — K Le Sd 4
2 * þ RT
: * _ KS er:
r rn = OY
—— —

—
—
——
= —
— — — 4 . — — - =
"ITO ARCIECE SCN IG ta 3 tt, 4
: S .

- x 2
— — — - — . — 2 —
— k by « jr.
= —— jw —

— — — — - — — —
* ws — — —
- -S —— FR wry LIABLE; —
— — „„
— — — — — —
—
4 = 3 78
— TIE — 4
- E — wet res, 2

mitted,

the courle of events.

104 T TRAVELS IN

confine ſelves to the peaceable enjoyment of
their ſalary and emoluments.
The Beys, however, apprehenſive of driving the

Porte to adopt ſome violent meaſure, dare not de-

clare their independence. Every thing continues to
be tranſacted in the name of the Sultan; his orders
are received, as they expreſs it, on the head and on
the eyes; that is with the greateſt reſpect; but this
ridiculous appearance of reverence is never follow-
ed by obedience. The tribute is frequently inter-
and always undergoes great deductions.
Various expences are carried to account, ſuch as
the maintenance of the canals, and the carriage of
the rubbiſh of Cairo to the ſea, the pay of the troops,
the repair of the moſques, &c. &c. which are all
ſo many falſe and pretended charges. Deceit is

practiſed reſpecting the degree of inundation ; and

nothing ſhort of the dread inſpired by the Turkiſh Ca-
ravelles, which come annually to Damietta and Alex-
andria, could procure the contribution of rice and

rain: even in this too, means are found to dimi-
niſh the effective ſupplies, by a colluſion with thoſe
appointed to receive them. On the other hand,
the Porte, abiding by her uſual policy, is blind to
all theſe abuſes, well knowing, that to correct them,

will require expenſive efforts, and poſſibly an open

war, in which the dignity of the empire might ſuffer
conſiderably. Other, and more urgent affairs, have,
beſides, forced the Turks, for ſome years paſt, to
collect all their forces towards the North. Obliged

to beſtow all their attention on their immediate ſafe-

ty in Conſtantinople, they leave the reſtoration of
their authority in the diſtant provinces to time, and
They take care, however, to
foment diviſions among the rival parties, that none
of them may acquire an eſtabliſned power; and this
method has been found equally beneficial to the ſtate,
and advantageous to the great officers, who derive

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 10F

large profits from the rebels, by ſelling them their
influence and protection. The preſent Admiral,
Haſan Pacha, has more than once availed bicafelf
of this practice, fo as to obtain conſiderable ſums
from Ibrahim and Morad..

c H A P. 11
Military Conflitution ot the Mamlouke.

2 Tas; Meals, on obtaining the government
| of Egypt, adopted meaſures which ſeem to ſecure to
them the poſſeſſion of the country. The molt effica-
cious is the precaution they have taken to degrade
the military corps of the Azabs and Janiſſaries: Theſe
two bodies, which were formerly the terror of the
Pacha, are now as inſignificant as himſelf. Of this
the corrupt and wretched government of the Turks has
| alone been the cauſe ; for, previous to the inſurrec-
| tion of Ibrahim Kiaya, the number of Turkiſh troops,
| which ſhould conſiſt of forty thouſand men, infantry
and cavalry, had been reduced to leſs than half that
number, by the avarice of their officers, who divert-
e the pay to their own uſe. After Ibrahim, Ali
Bey completely deſtroyed their conſequence. 5
firſt diſplaced all the officers who gave him umbrage;
left unfilled the places that became vacant; depriv-
ed the commanders of all influence; and ſo degrad-
ed all the Turkiſh troops, that at this day the Janiſ-
| farics, the Azabs, and the five other corps, are on-
ly a rabble of artizans and vagabonds, who guard
the gates of thoſe who pay them, and tremble in the
preſence of the Mamlouks, as much as the populace
| of Cairo. The whole military force of Egypt really
conſiſts in the Mamlouks. Some hundreds of theſe -

— — ' .
9 — 2 * - X vl 22 —
5 — RIPE „

3
— Z

. — — r
MR CE Ea Es.

* — —— ar
/ ono dn th reg fs

1 MW
LOS
„

—
2 8 4 N *
— ———
.

106 TRAVELS IN

are diſperſed throughout the country, and in the
villages, to maintain the authority of their corps,
collect the Ons, and Improve every opportunity
ot extortion ; but the main body continually remains
at Caifo. From the computation of well-informed
perſons, it appears, their number cannot exceed eight
thouſand five hundred men, reckoning Beys and
Cachets, common treed-men, and Mamlouks: who
Arc ſtu | flaves. In this number there are a multi-
tude 0 k youth under twenty. ana twenty-two years of

— 5

The moſt powerful houſe is that of Ibrahim Bey,
10 has about ſix hundred Mamlouks. Next to him

18 d who has not above four hundred, but who,
by his audacity and prodigality, forms a counterpoiſe
to the infatiable avarice of his rival; the reſt of the
Beys, to the number of eighteen or twenty, have
each of them from fiity to two hundred. Beſides
theſe, there is a great number of Mamlouks who may
be called individual, who being ſprung from houſes
which are extinct, attach themſelves fometimes to
one, and times to another, as they find it their
. and are always ready to enter into the ſer-
ice of the beſt bidder. We mult reckon likewiſe
forte Serradjes, a fort of domeſtics on horfe-back,
#ho pry the orders of the Beys; but the whole
together does not exceed ten thouſand horſe. ' No
mention is here made of n which is neither
knor den nor eſteemed in Turkey, eſpecially in the
Iliatic provinces. The prejudices of the ancient
Perſians, and of the Tartars, {till prevail in thoſe
countries, where war, conſiſting only in flight and
purſuit, the horſeman, who is beſt qualified for both
theſe, is reputed the only ſoldier; and as, among
Barbarians, "the warrior is alone the man of diſtinc
tion; to walk on foot is held to be degrading, and
5s, for that reaſon, reſerved for the common people.
The Mamiouks, therefore, permit the inhabitants

„

PI AND SYRIA. : a7

ot Egypt to be carried only by mules or alfese, re-
erving to themſelves the excluſive privilege of tiding
on horſeback ; and of this they make ſufficient uſe;

for whether they are in town or country, or if they
only make a viſit to the next door, they are never
ſeen but on horſeback. Their dreſs, as well as the
ſupport of their dignity, obliges them to this. This
dreſs, which does not differ from that of every other

perſon in 20 circumſtances 1 in K urkey, deſerves to
be deſeribed.

8 E © 1. I.

2 of the Mantlouks:

Firſt, they have a wide: ſhirt of this cotton, of 2
yell lowiſh colour, over which they wear a ſort of gown
of Indian linen, or the light ſtuffs of Damaſcus and
Aleppo. This robe, called antari, deſcends from the
neck to the ankles, and folds over the fore-part of the
body, towards the hips, where it is faſtened by two
ſtrings. Over this firſt covering is a ſecond, of the ſame
form and width, the ample fleeves of which deſcend
like wiſe to the finger ends. This is called a rffan,
and is uſually made of ſilk ſtuff, richer than the for-
mer: Both theſe are faſtened at the waiſt by a long
belt, which divides the whole dreſs into two bundles.
Above them is a third, which is called djozba, which
is of cloth without lining, and is made nearly in the
| {ame manner, only the fleeves are cut at the elbow.

In ine n 5 even in ſummer, this djouba

*The Franks by all nations are ſubjeRed to the ſame humi-
liating reſtriction, but by proper management, and libers] pre-
lents, this may be got over by ſirangers of conſequence, who
tome only to viſit the country. Lord Algernon Percy, now
Lord Louvaine, and the Earl of Charlemont, obtained permiflion
do ride on horfeback in Rc Colonel Capper's excel-

'ent little work, p. 31. . 85
0

r TRAVELS IN

is lined wk fur, and is Joanie into a peliſſe.
Laſtly, over theſe three wrappers, they put on an
outer garment, called the beniche. This is the cloak
or robe of cererony, and completely covers the
whole body, even the ends of the fingers, which it
would be deemed highly indecent to ſuffer to appear
before the great. The whole habit, when the beniche
is on, has the appearance of a long ſack, from out
of which is thrult a bare neck, and a bald head,
covered with a turban. The turban of the Mamlouks,
called a Xacuk, is of a cylindrical ſhape, yellow, and
turned up on the outſide with a roll of muſlin artifi—
cially folded. On their feet they wear a ſock of
yellow leather, which reaches up to the heels, and
ſlippers without quarters, always liable to be left on
the road. But the moſt ſingular part of this dreſs is
a ſort of pantaloon, or trowſers, ſo long as to reach
up to the chin, and ſo wide, that each of the legs is
large enough to contain the whole body, and made
of that kind of Venetian cloth which the French
called /ail/z, which, although as pliant as the EIN
cloth, is thicker than the burre of Rouen; and that
they may walk more at their eale, they faſten, with a
running ſaſh, all the looſe parts of the dreſs I have
been deſcribing. Thus ſwaddled, we may imagine
the Mamlouks are not very active walkers; and thoſe
who are not acquainted by experience with the pre-
judices of different countries, will find it ſcarcely
poſlible to believe, what however is the fact, that they

look on this dreſs as exceedingly commodious. In

vain may we object that it hinders them from walk-
ing, and encumbers them, unneceſſarily, on horſe-
back, and that in battle, a horſeman once diſmounted,
1s a loſt man. They reply, It is the , and every
objection 1 is anſwered.

3

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 109

8 1 e r. the
Horſe accoutrements of the Mamlouts,

Let us now examine whether their horſe accoutre-
ments are more rational, Since the Europeans have
bad the good ſenſe to examine the principles of every
| rt, they have found that the horſe, in order to move
| jreely under his rider, ſhould be as little harneſſed as
the lolidity neceſſary would permit. This improve-
ment, which has taken place amongſt us in the eigh-
| tcenth century, is {till very far from being adopted by
che Mamlouks, who have ſcarcely arrived at the know-
ledge of the ninth. Continually the ſlaves of cuſtom,
the horſe's ſaddle among them is a clumſy frame,
loaded with wood, leather, and iron, on which a
| truſſequin riſes behind, eight inches in height above
the hips of the horſeman. A pummel before projects
| four or five inches, ſo as to endanger his breaſt,
{ ſhould he ſtoop. Under the ſaddle, inſtead of a
ſtuffed frame, they fpread three thick woollen cever-
| ings, and the whole is faſtened by a ſurcingle, which,
inſtead of a buckle, is tied with leathern thongs, in
very complicated knots, and liable to flip. They
| uſe no crupper, but have a large martingale, which
| throws them on the ſhoulders of the horſe. Each
{tirrup is a plate of copper longer and wider than the
foot, with circular edges, an inch high in the middle,
| and gradually declining toward each end; the edges
are ſharp, and are uſed, inſtead of ſpurs, to make
long wounds in the horſe's fides. The common

weight of a pair of theſe ſtirrups is between nine and
ten pounds, and frequently exceeds twelve or thir-
teen. The ſaddle and ſaddle-cloths do not weigh
leſs than five-and-twerity ; thus the horſe's furniture
weighs about ſix-and-thirty pounds, which is ſo much

| the more ridiculous, as the Egyptian horſes are very
mall. i e "=

K .
71 7 . . by D 4
Ix hy Ne 4 - e — 3 * 2 L 8 0
I I 8 3 . IS. x ah "08, : 4 Y 22 Wahi +- Wo 2:68 IC, 8 F
* . 2 a . 1 25 5 — \ * 8 5 —— —
. obo dcdcdc _— AS Rear 6 wh . A as Wii oa Trend * * s

2

2

2 S bz ft - 1 d 8
— Jt Va WE een ay oh .
* « —y V 4
: 2333 * 3

at nw

. r
: 6 IF.
E

—
7;
—

110 | TRAVELS IN

The wile. 18 equally ill ee 0 it is a kind
of ſuaffle, but without a joint, and with a curb,
which, being only an iron ring, binds the jaw ſo as
to lactrate the ſkin, ſo that the bars are injured, and
the horſe abſolutely has no mouth. This neceſſarily
reſults from the practice of the Mamlouks, who,
inſtead of managing the mouth, like us, deſtroy it
by violent and fudden checks, which they employ.
particularly in a manceuvre pecuhar to them, "This
confiſts in putting the horſe on a full gallop, and fud-
denly ſtopping him, when at his higheſt fpeed,
_ Checked thus by the bit, the horſe bends in his hind
legs, ſtiffens the fore, and flides along like a horſe of
wood. How much this manceuvre muſt injure the
legs and mouth may eaſily be conceived; but the
Mamlouks think it graceful, and it is adapted to
their mode of fighting. Notwithſtanding however
their ſhort ſtirrups, and the perpetual motion of their
bodies, it cannot be denied that they ate firm and
Vigorous horſemen, and that they have a warlike
appearance, which pleaſes the eye even of a ſtranger ;
it mult alſo be allowed, they have ſhewn more Judg:
ment! in Be choice of their arms.

8 E o r. III.
Arns of the Mamlouks

| Their principal weapon is an a Engliſh bine about
thirty inches long, and of ſo large a bore as to dil-
charge ten or twelve balls at a time, which, even
without ſkill, cannot fail of great execution, They
beſides carry at their belt two large piſtols, which
are faſtened to ſome part of their garments by a filk
ſtring. At the bow of the ſaddle ſometimes hangs
a heavy mace, to knock down their enemy, and on
the left thigh is ſuſpended, by a ſhoulder-belt, a
crooked ſabre, of a kind little known in Fanape +

| form, which appears whimſical to us,
adopted without motives ;
| that the affect of a ftratt blade is limited to the place
and moment of its fall, as it acts merely from preſ-
| ſure; a crooked blade, on the contrary preſenting
its edge in retiring, ſlides by the effort of the arm,
and continues its action longer.
| who generally apply themſelves moſt to the deſtrue-
tive arts, have not ſuffered this obſervation to eſcape

and ſo ancient in the Eaſtern world.
louks commonly procure theirs from Conſtantinople,

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 111

the Junge of the blade in a right line, from the
hilt to the point, is not more than twenty-four inch-

This
has not been
experience teaches us,

es, but meafured in the curve is at leaſt thirty

The Barbarians,

them; and hence the uſe of ſcymetars, ſo general
The Mam-

and from Europe; but the Beys rival each other in

Perſian blades, and in ſabres of the ancient ſteel of

Damaſcus*, for which they frequently pay as high

| 2s forty or fifty pounds ſterling. The qualities: they
eſteem in them are lightneſs, the equality and ring

Jof the temper, the waving of the iron, and above
all, the keenneſs of the edge, which it muſt be al-
| lowed is exquiſite; but theſe blades have the defect |
| of being as 'briate as 1

Education and Exerciſes of the Mamlouks.
The art of uſing theſe arms conſtitutes the edues-

tion of the Mamlouks, and the whole occupation of
their lives, Every day, early in the morning, the

greater part of them reſort to a plain, without Cairo,

and their, riding full ſpeed, exerciſe themſelves in
drawing out their carbines expeditiouſly from the

| bandale er, diſcharging it with y_ aim, and then

#4 Gay ancient, for Reel i is now no- longer made there,

*

*

112 2 TRAVELS IN

throwing it under their thigh, to ſeize a piſtol, which
they fire and throw over their ſhoulder; immedi.
ately firing a ſecond, and throwing it in the ſame
manner, truſting to the ſtring by which they are
taſtened, without looſing time to return them to their
place. The Beys who are preſent encourage them;
and whoever breaks the earthen veſſel which ſerves
by way of butt, receives great commendations and
money, as a recompenſe. They practiſe allo the
management of the ſabre, and eſpecially the coup de
revers which cuts upwards, and 1s the molt difficult
to parry. Their blades are fo keen, and they han-
dle them ſo well, that many of them can cut a clew
of wet cotton, like a piece of butter. They like-
wiſe ſhoot with bows and arrows, though they no
longer uſe them in battle; but their favourite Gs
ciſe is throwing the djerid : this word which pro

* perly means a reed, is generally uſed to ſignity ak
1 ſtaff thrown by the hand, after the manner of the:
1 Roman pilum. Inſtead of a ſtaff, the Mamlouks
WET make uſe of branches of the palm-tree, freſh ſtripped.
ret Theſe branches, which have the form of the ſtalk of
"TY an artichoke, are four feet long, and weigh five or
70 1x pounds. Armed with theſe, the Cavaliers enter
WAY — the lifts, and, riding full ſpeed, throw them at each
15 other from a conſiderable diltance. The aflailant,
1 . as ſoon as he has thrown, turns his horſe, and his

antagoniſt purſues and throws his in his turn. The
horſes, accuſtomed to this exerciſe, ſecond their mal-
ter ſo well, that they ſeam alſo to ſhare in the pleaſure.
19 But this pleaf ure is attended with danger; for ſome
Can dart this weapon with fo much force, as frequently

to wound, and ſometimes mortally. Ill-tated was
the man who could not eſcape the djerid of Ali Bey |
theſe ſports, which to us ſcem barbarous, are inti- iW
mately connected with the political ſtate of nations.
Not three centuries ago they exiſted among ourſelves, Wt
and their being laid af de is leſs owing to the Accl-

+1 wa ;
| N

Io » „ 1
{ WH it 4:

+8 "TH. 4 1
3 "I. J 7
1 9 3 4
EL, 1.144444: !

. fd” i Ow -
n.. ö

1 .

dent of Henry the ſecond, or to a ſpirit of philoſophy,
than to the ſtate of interac peace which has ren-
dered them uſeleſs. Among the Turks and Mam-
louks, on the contrary, they are retained, becaule
the anarchy in which they hve continues to render
whatever relates to the art of war abſolutely” ne-

| ceſſary. Let us now conſider whether their pro-

greſs in this art be eee to their practice.
1 E | ts 2. | V.
2 feel of the Manmlouts.

5 Europe, whos: we hear of troops, and of war,
we immediately figure to ourſelves a number of men
diſtributed into companies, battalions, and ſquadrons
with uniforms well fitted, and of different colours,

| ranks and lines formed, combinations of particular

| manceuvres, or general evolutions ; and, in a word,
complete ſyitem of operations founded on eſtabliſh-

| ed principles. Theſe ideas are juſt, relative to our-
ſeives, but, when applied to the countries of which
| we are treating, are erroneous indeed. The Mam-
| louks know nothing of our military arts; they have
neither uniforms. nor order, nor diſcipline, nor even
ſubordination. Their troops are a mob, their march
a riot, their battles duels, and their war a ſcene of
robbery and plunder, which ordinarily begins even
in the very city of Cairo; and, at the moment when
there is the leaſt reaſon to expect it. A cabal gathers
together, the Beys mount on horſeback, the alarm

freads, and their adverſaries appear; they charge

each other in the ſtreet, ſabre in Band; a few mur-

ders decide the quarrel, and the weakeſt or molt

timid is exiled. The people are mere cyphers in
theſe affrays. OF what importance is it to them that

their tyrants cut each others throats ? But it muſt not

de nt that they ſtand by * ſpectators,

4
" 2
*
*
„
+
4
7
„
4
„
1
*M
4 —
4
—
ES
4
= ,
N
"A
7
=
£FM
99
1
2
I
*
*
”
Fa
-
fy

r 4. "4%

.

; $5 bn "uu"
1 — Ar Le ibis es fab

e
72

. OTE TER
Fr

Lon.

— 4
: 1 : ” —— e
3 4 2 — 2 "=>;
© '* 5 p *
kt

1
D

Narr.
97

* 4
i 144
26 . .
© 488
*
115 J
MV $7
_ 1
7 L
. LE RI
* L
l 1 E415 %
ws) 1 4 144
4 11
ae
114 1 .
„ $f 4 8+ o
ia
" +1 £428 h
iM. * 5
1 4
TEM ene
1 r
1 of 1
ne
r
MH
172 :
.
N 1 9
_ :
3
+ 1670
4 *
i A
*%,1 36%
4 1
1
r
1 39
77
1
4: +40 * f
$4
4 3:38
WW 1
- i |,
: 77
& Kt:
* 1
1
[384
j
1
- *
- 4” ol
1
30.1.0
$2
© s | [
I143Þ 2]
®: 1%
77 Wt
< 4
J
„
.
. $7
4
AX ? » ;
ep 14+}.
. 1
1 p
2 7 1
. $437; 1
* oh
o
, *
„
in
*
: 15
1
1
* Hy
* 174
1 11
9 15
1
e
In.
1 If
+51.
9
q A
7
0 F
$27
4
5
bd af
* .
* Fe
REM
"© 4
*
n.
rp 4,
3
F
I
f *.
K.
Fin
4

—
— *
- .
hu
— I +
oo ee hes ve 2 8
— ä . 4

8
— — — "Ji >

= fo ee.
2
* 82 5 7 _ ob = * <0 RSS - 7
7 Der eee. e *

"SIE © EY IEICE .

* FFF K 4

* Gti e

N —

114 TRAVE LS IN

and ſcymetars;
tcene of action till tranquility is reſtored.

that would be too dangerous in the mig of bullet
every one makes his eſcape from the
Sometimes

the populace pillaze the houſes of the exiled, which

tins conquerors never attempt to prevent.

"And it

will not be improper here to obſerve that the phraſes
employed in the European Gazettes, ſuch as * Thz
| ;. OP have e recruits, the Beys have excited the

people to revolt, the Beys have favoured one party,”

are ll calculated to furniſh accurate ideas.

In the

difference of the Beys, the people are never any 9

10r2 than merely paſſive inſtruments.

Sometimes the war is transferred to the countty,
but the art and conduct of the combatants is not more

conſpicuous.
purfues the other.

The ſtrongeſt, or moſt daring patty
If they are equal in courage, they

wait for each other, or appoint a rendezvous. where,
without regarding the advantages of ſituation, the

beſpeRive troops aſſemble in p
marching at their head.

latoons, the boldef
They advance towards theit

enemies, mutual defiances paſs, the attack begins,

and every one chooſes his man:

van, and preſentiy fall on with the ſabre : it

they fire, if the)

1s then

the manageableneſs of the horſe and the dexterity of

the cavalier are diſplayed.
detruction of the latter is inevitable.

If the former falls, che
In defeats, the

valets, who are always preſent, remount their mat
ders z and if there are no witneſſes near, frequent!
Nndek them on the head to obtain the ſequins they

never fail to carry.

The battle is often decided by

the death of two or three of the combatants. Of
Lite years, eſpecially, the Mamlouks ſeem convinced,
that as their patrons are the perfons principally inter
ee, they ought to encounter the greateſt dangers
and therefore preſently leave them the enjoyment of
that honour. If they gain the advantage, fo muck

the better for all concerned;

if they are overcome,
they capitulate with the conqueror, Who frequent)

„ee - ay, warn .

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 115

makes vil conditions beforehand. There is nothing
co be gained but by remaining quiet; they are ſure

1 of finding a maiter who pays, and they return to

Cairo to hve at his expenſe until lome new revolution
takes place.

8 © 7. VI.
Diſcipline of the Mamlouks.
The intereſted and inconſtant character of this
militia, is a neceilary conſequence of its origin and

conſtitution. The young peaſant, fold in Mingrelia
or Georgia, no ſooner arrives in Egypt, than his ideas

| undergo a total alteration. A new and extraordinary

ſcene opens before him, where every thing conduces
to awaken his audacity and ambition; though now
a flave, he ſeems deſtined to become a maſter, and
already afſumes the ſpirit of his future condition.

He calculates how far he is neceſſary to his patron,

and obliges him to purchaſe his ſervices and his zeal ;

theſe he meaſures by the ſalary he receives, or that
which he expects; and as in ſuch {ſtates money is the
only motive, the chief attention of the maſter is to
latisfy the avidity of his ſervants, in order to ſecure
their attachment. Hence, that prodigality of the
Beys, ſo ruinous to Egypt, which they pillage; that
want of ſubordination in the Mamlouks, fo fatal to
tne chiets whom they deſpoil ; and thoſe intrigues,

which never ceale to agitate the whole nation. No

ſooner is a ſlave enfranchiſed than he aſpires to the
principal employments ; and, who is to oppoſe his
pretenſions? In thoſe who command; he diſcovers no
luperiority ot talents which can impreſs him with
reſpe& ; in them he only ſees ſoldiers like himſelf,
arrived at power by the decrees of fate; and if it
pleaſe fate to favour him, he will attain it alſo, nor
will he be leſs able in the art of governing, which

116 TRAVELS IN

conſiſts only in taking money, and giving blows with
the ſabre.

From this ſyſtem alſo has ariſen an unbridled lux:
pry, which, indulging the gratification of every ima-
ginary want, has opened an unlimited field to the
rapacity of the great. This luxury is ſo exceſſive,
that there is not a Mamlouk, whoſe maintenance coſts
lefs than twenty-five hundred livres (a hundred and
four pounds) annually, and many of them coſt double
that ſum. At every return of the Ramadan, they
mult have a new ſuit, French and Venetian cloths,
and Damaſcus and India ſtuffs. They muſt often
likewiſe be provided: with new horſes and harneſs,
They mult have piſtols and ſabres from Damaſcus,
gilt ſtirrups, and ſaddles and bridies plated with fil-
ver, The chiefs, to diſtinguiſh them from the vul.
gar, muſt have trinkets, precious ſtones, Arabian
horſes of two or three hundred pounds value, ſhaw]
of caſnmire worth from five-and-twenty to fifty pounds
each, and a variety of pelifles, the cheapeſt of which
colts above twenty pounds*. The women have re-
jected the ancient cuſtom of wearing ſequins on the
head and breaſt, as not ſuiaciently ſplendid and coſt-
Iy, aud in their ſtead have ſubſtituted diamonds, eme-
ralds, rubies, and the fineſt pearls; and to their fond-
neſs of ſhawls and furs, have added a paſſion for Ly-
ons ſtuffs and laces, When ſuch luxuries are become
the neceſſaries of thoſe whoſe authority is without
controul, and who neither reſpect rhe rights of pro-
perty, nor the lite of their interiors, it is eaſy to con-
ceive what muſt be the condition of their ſubjects
who are obliged to turnifh them with whatever their
ba may require, |

ba The European merchants, who WI adopted this Loan;
do not think they have a Jacket ward robe, unlels its value
exceeds twelve or fifteen thouland livres, (five or lix hundrec
* |

1 * a — * 4 ö
. * 2

1

{9

Bar
Manners of the Mamtouks ©

The manners of the Mamlouks are ſuch, that

N though I ſhall ſtrictly adhere to truth, I am almoſt

afraid I ſhall be ſuſpected of prejudice and exagger-

ation. Born for the moſt part in the rites of the
E Greek church, and circumciſed the moment they are
bought, they are conſidered by the Turks themſelves
as Renegadoes, void of faith and of religion. Stran-
gers to each other, they are not bound by thoſe
natural ties which unite the reſt of mankind. With-
out parents,
nothing for them, and they do nothing for the future.
Ignorant and ſuperſtitious from education, they be-
come ferocious from the murders they commit,

perfidious from frequent cabals, ſeditious from tu-
molts, and baſe, deceitful, and corrupted by every
: ſpecies of debauchery. They are, above all, addicted
to that abominable wickedneſs, which was at all times
the vice of the Greeks and of the Tartars, and is the
firſt leſſon they receive from their maſters, It is
difficult to account for this taſte, when we conſider
| that they all have women, unleſs we ſuppoſe they
kek in one ſex, that poignancy of refuſal which they
do not permit the other. It is however very certain,

| that there is not a ſingle Mamlouk but is polluted
by. this depravity ;

without children, the paſt has done

and the contagion has fpread
among the inhabitants of Cairo, and even the Chriſ-
tans of Syria who reſide in that city.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. fro

}
ki
f
j
4 N

64
* * "i = of * — wad * 7 *
5 m Os En uy A. * 9 |
5 mo 2 r Þ * 12 —— Ses, m N
r ee” „ he * 5 8
n 8 e 2 2 „ l 8
7 * * I Oo. CET 2 K "4 Es A
r 2 DOI | 2
= 2 — — n

CET

. 4. -
—4 "ah
88 22

* * 910 ”
e —
. * *

.
3 22 8

$2.9
* Ip |
ps 5
* e 2
„ As
7
A

„„ MM;

2 .
* 8 «> :
A223 22
b tg -

* *
2 ——— —¼e Yo

— rr 22 . ; I I" , * a * a g 2
r pe Onan: — is. 7 Ä * e "ih nn * 3 . ES oma ö *
ps — - * 2 — * os IP SY ummm + - ui JAE XK: 90, 3 22
— Ss ——— — - 2 —

2 5 7
r .
e, e Fox 1 0 9

118 TRAVELS IN

CHAP

Government of the Mamlouks.

$_JUCH are the men who at preſent govern and

decide the fate of Egypt: a few lucky ſtrokes of

the ſabre, a greater portion of cunning, or auda-
city have conferred on them this pre-eminence ; but
it is not to be imagined that in changing fortune
theſe upſtarts change their character; they have ſtil]
the meanneſs of flaves, though advanced to the

rank of manarchs. Sovereignty with them is not
the difficult art of directing to one common object

the various paſſions of a numerous ſociety, but only
the means of poſſeſſing more women, more toys,
horſes, and flaves, and ſatisfying all their caprices.
The whole adminiſtration, internal and external, Is
conducted on this principle. It conſiſts in manage-
ing the court of Conſtantinople, ſo as to elude the

tribute, or menaces of the Sultan; and in purchaſing
a number of ſlaves, multiplying partiſans, counter:

mining plots, and deſtroying their ſecret enemies by
the dagger, or by poiſon. Ever tortured by the
anxiety of ſuſpicion, the chiefs live like the ancient
tyrants of Syracuſe. Morad and Ibrahim fleep con-
tinually in the midſt of carbines and fabres, nor
have they any idea of police or public order.“ Ther

only employment 1s to procure money : and the me-

* When] was at Cairo, ſome Mamlouks carried off the wife
of a Jew, who was paſſing the Nile with her huſbang. The
Jew having complained to Morad, that Bey replyed in his roug!
tone of voice: IWell, let the young folks amuſe themſelves ! In
the evening the Mamlouks acquainted the Jew that they wou
reſtore him his wife if he would pay them one hundred piaſtes
for their trouble and to this he was obliged to ſubmit, Thi
inſtance is the more in point, ſince in this count ry women ate
held more ſacred than life itfelf. |

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 119

bod e as the moſt imple, is to ſcize it
wherever it is to be found, to wreſt it by violence
from its poſſeſſer, and to impoſe arbitrary contribu-
tions every moment on the villages, and on the
-uſtom-houſe, which in its turn, Jevies them again
upon commerce.

SECT E
Condition of the peopls in Egypt.

We may eaſily judge that in ſuch a country, every
thing is analogous to ſo wretched a government.
Wherever the cultivator enjoys not the fruit of his
labour, he works only by conſtraint, and agricul-
ture Janguiſhes : Wherever there is no ſecurity in
property, there can be no induſtry to procure it, and
the arts muſt remain in their infancy. Wherever
3 knowledge has no object, men will do nothing to
acquire it, and their minds will continue in a ſtate
of barbariſm. Such is the condition of Egypt. The
greater part of the lands are in the hands of
the Beys, the Mamlouks, and the profeſſors of the
law; the number of the other proprietors is extreme-
ly mall, and their property liable to a thouſand im-
positions. Every moment ſome contribution is to be
paid, or ſome damage repaired ; there 1s no right
of ſucceſſion or inheritance for real property; every
thing returns to government, for which every thing
muſt be re- purchaſed. The peaſants are hired labour-
ers, to whom no more is left than barely ſuffices to
ſuſtain life. The rice and corn they gather are car-
ried to the table of their maſters, and nothing reſer-
ved for them but dourra or Indian millet, of which 7 =
they make a bread without leven, which is taſteleſs 7 =
when cold. This bread, baked by a fire kindled with 1.4
the dried dung of buffaloes and cows,* is, with

be reader will recollect that Fgy ot is 2 naked country,
which affords no fire wood,

by 4
[4
441. i
g A
* Þ 1
6 ,
+
.
1
0 £8
A 1386008
EET -
8 ! 39
.
1060 .
I.
inn
by 70;
14 it i
{ ft :
i 7
7 94
{B12
: Ws. "Mm.
i
i
Ls
=. T 41
"1 {1 66
FLV EY
| f 4+ .
1
1 4448058
1 1
: 9 A
x 8
1
11 „
II
n
1 Ss
5 +.
4 6 *
194
2 1
1
Nn 7
1 40
4
N i
4% 1i
—ON
© WKY .
13
* BR
+ i J
1
; 1
'" 11:1.
PL by
'
11048;
Nin
| 1
147
N
„ 4
"42 7 oy g
TER
1
inn
Minn
1
Nat
1 1
t, 731
Wert ct:
: 3 $20
Nin
13 4
17
190
ar.
1 0
v1.4
4 19 |
4 106 th
|
: #;.
48:
n
14
448K
0
Nan
16
iin i
i
"$4497
i |
Nie
þ 114
£41 4
Fein
2144
, 41/4
TW 10185
»
Nuk.
1 BY
q
if:
N
19
11
17%
$14 1
* 1
11
A;
Eh: the
17
hls
*
Fi.
+:
"F 1
65
ifs;
a
49605
os oe)
L ati
SEEN:
Ni
3% N
Ky F
Nn
ei
x
TR WA.
Lr
*
* 5
14 weld
ien
In
4143: 5
l Tu
1.
aut?
SHE 3s 73%;
TE MT:
:
5 —

1
[
|
4
wt
+
Kh **
Re.
44
161 enn
Bi! 145 VI
4! vt Kh
; '
- *
Nia II.
di
1. AKA HA: ö
#1 + 1 aun
114 * 1
i Knee
5 ; 1-8
Mts Ria
. n
. en
bt} 1416
114 1
114 714
1 \ x :
qt 1
h 4
j :
i
q -

|
1

120 - " TRAVELS IN

water and raw onions, their only food. throvghout

the year; and they eſteem themſelves happy if they
Can ie PR a little honey, cheeſe, four
milk, and dates. Fleſh :meat, and fat, which they
are paſſionately tond of, make their appearance only

on the great feſtivals, and among thoſe who are in

the beſt circumſtances.

Their whole cloathing conſiſts in a ſhirt of RA

blue linnen, and in a clumſy black cloak. Their

head-dreſs is a fort of cloth bonnet, over which they

roll a long handkerchief of red woollen. Their

arms, legs, and breaſts, are naked, and the great-
eſt part of them do not even wear drawers. Their

habitations are mud-walled huts, in which they are
fuffocated with heat and ſmoke, and frequently at-

tacked by maladies ariſing from uncleanneſs, humi-
dity, and unwholeſome food; and, to fill the meaſure

of their wretchednels, to theſe phyſical evils are added

continual alarms, the dread of the robberies of the

Arabs, and the extortions of the Mamlouks, family

teuds, and all the anxieties of a perpetual civil

War.

This is a juſt picture ab all the vill lages, 2 and equally
reſembles the towns. At Cairo itſelf, the ſtranger,
on his arri val, is ſtruck with the univerſal appearance

of wretchedneſs and miſery. The crowds which

throng the ſtreets, preſent to his fight nothing but

hideous rags, and diſguſting nudities. It is true, he
often meets with horſemen richly clad ; but this dif-
play of luxury only renders the contraſt of indigence

the more ſhocking. Every thing he fees or hears,

reminds him he is in the country of ſlavery and ty-
ranny. Nothing is talked of but inteſtine troubles,
the public miſery, pecuniary extortions, baſtinadoes
and murders. There is no ſecurity for life or pro-
perty. The blood of men is thed like that of the
vileſt animals. Juſtice herſelf puts to death without
formality. The ofticer of the night in his rounds,

. ‚—§— . U é W-, Aeb fenln th om

rr

Pay
2

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 124
and the officer of the day i in lis circuit, judge, con-
demn, and execute in the twinkling of an eye, with-
out appeal. Lxecutioners attend them, and, on the
fit ſignal, the head of the unhappy victim falls into
| the leathern bag, in which it is received for fear of
ſoiling the place. Were even the appearance of cri-
minality neceſſary to expoſe to the danger of puniſn-
ment, this would be more tolerable ; but frequently,
without any other reaſon than the avidity of a power-
ful chief, or the information of an enemy, a man is
ſummoned before ſome Bey, on ſuſpicion of having
money. A ſum is demanded from him, and if he
denies chat he poſſeſſes it, he is thrown on his back,
and receives two or three hundred blows on the ſoles
of his feet, nay, ſometimes is put to death. Unfor-
tunate 18 he who is ſuſpected of being in eaſy circum-
ſtances! A hundred [pies are every moment ready to
accuſe him; and it is only by aſſuming the appear-

ance of poverty, that he can 1 Hope to clcaps me rapa-
ciouſneſs of power..

5 8 E e T. II.
The miſery and famins of Lid years.

Dielow the laſt three years, the capital of Exypt,
and all the country, has preſented a ſpectacle of the
| molt deplorable miſery. To the conſtant evils of an
| uncontrouled tyranny, and the conſequences of the
| troubles of the preceding years, were added natural
| calamities ſtill more deſtructive. The plague, brought
from Conſtantinople in the month of November, 1783,
made its accuſtomed ravages during the whole winter.
Not lefs than fifteen hundred dead bodies were reck-
eds be carried out of the gates of Cairo in a day.“

„la Turkey, the tombs, dM to the cuſtom of the
anclents, are always without the towns; and as each tomb has

rates IN”

The ſummer as is uſual aſſuaged its fury; but to this
ſcourge another equally terrible, toon ſucceeded. The
inundation of 1783 was not ſufficiant, great part of
the lands therefore could not be ſown for want of
being watered, and another part was in the ſame pre.
dicament for want of ſeed. In 1784, the Nile again
did not riſe to the favourable height, and the dearth
immediately became exceflive. Soon after the end of
November, the famine carried off, at Cairo, nearly ſe
as many as the plague ; the ſtreets, which before
were full of beggars, now afforded not a ſingle one; |
all had periſhed, or deſerted the city. Nor were is
ravages leſs dreadful in the villages; an infinite num-

er of wretches, who attempted to eſcape death, {
were ſcattered over the adjacent countries. I fas {1
Syria full of: them. In January 1785, the ftreets of WW t
Saide and Acre, and every town in Paleſtine, were v

crowded with Egyptians, eaſily diſtinguiſhable by
their tawny {kin ; and ſome of them had wandered
even as far as Aleppo and the Diarbekar. The depo-
pulation of theſe two years cannot be peciſely elti-
mated, as the Turks keep no regiſters of births, deaths,
or the number of the people*, but it was the received
opinion that the country had loſt one- ſixth part of
its inhabitants. 5

In theſe circumſtances were renewed all thoſe
dreadful ſcenes at the bare relation of which human
nature ſhudders, and the ſight of which impreſſes a
melancholy horror never to be effaced. For, as was
the caſe, during the famine, ſome years ago in Ben—
gal, the ſtreets and public places {warmed with mea-
gre and dying ſkeletons ; whoſe faultering voices
implored, in vain, the pity of paſſengers, the com.

uſually a large ſtone, and ford idol they eee what
may almoſt be called a ſecond town; which may be named, 3
formerly at Alexandria, Necropolis, or the city of the dead.

* They have ſuperſtitious prejudices againſt this practice.

—

| EGYPT AND SYRIA 223

mon danger having hardened every heart. Theſe
E wretches expired, leaning againſt the houſes of the
E Beys, which they knew were ſtored with rice and
corn, and, not unfrequently, the Mamlouks, impor-
tuned by their cries, chaſed them away with blows:
Every diſguſting means of appeaſing the rage of hun-
ger was tried, every thing the moſt filthy devoured;
nor, {hall T ever forget that when I was returning from
Syria to France, in March 1785, I ſaw, under the
walls of ancient Alexandria, two wretches fitting on
the dead carcaſe of a camel, and diſputing its putrid
fragments with tie dogs

We have among us, minds of noble and exalted
ſentiments, who, after paying the tribute of compaſ-
ſion due to ſuch diſmal calamities, find their indigna-
tion return, and impute it as a crime to the men who
will ſubmit to ſuffer them. They deem thoſe well-⸗
deſerving death, who have not the courage to defend
themſelves from it, or ſeek; at leaſt, the conſolation
of exemplary vengeance. They even go ſo far as to
adduce theſe facts in proof of a moral paradox, per-
haps raſhly advanced; and endeavour to demonſtrate
from them the pretended axiom—* that the inhabi-
| © tants of hot countries, debaſed by climate and
{ © temperament, are deſtined by nature, to be the
| © flaves of deſpotiſm.“ 8
But have they maturely examined whether ſimilar
facts have never happened in climates they are pleaſ-
ccd to honour with the excluſive privilege of liberty?
Have they accurately obſerved whether the general
facts on which they build be not accompanied with
circumſtances and acceſſaries which make an eſſential
difference in the conſequences? In politics, as in
medicine, detached phænomena continually lead us
into error reſpecting the real cauſes of the malady.
| len are too anxious to erect particular caſes into
general rules; and yet thole univerſal principles,
dich are ſo flattering to the mind, have almoſt inva-

Q

.

—— —
EY — — — INNIEIS
— = —— TL -
a ak oa —
= , > DAI 5 1 £
8 — 2 r LIN x

— Cs - —
- r
r

n
bs
4
1
6
4
gf
1
BM
ty
5
*
4
15
15
1
1
0
-
50
.
*
;
+
iS
1.
21
N
N 7
*

r TRAVELS IN

riably the defect of being vague. 80 rarely are the
facts on which we reaſon exact, and ſo liable to mil.

take is the moſt careful obſerver, that we ought to be

extremely cautious, or we thall be continually n
ſyſtems on imaginary foundations.

In the caſe of which we are treating, if we atten.
tively examine the cauſes of the debaſement of the
Egyptians, we ſhall find that this people, depreſſed by
cruel cireumſtanccs, are more deſerving of pity than
contempt, for the political fituation of this country
is very unlike that of Europe. Among us, the traces
of ancient revolutions are becoming fainter. every
day; the foreign conquerors have aſſimilated with
the conquered natives; and from this mixture has

been formed one national body, all the members of

which have the ſame intereſt. In Egypt, on the con-
trary, and throughout almoſt all Aſia, the original
inhabitants, enflaved by revolutions, the effects of
which are {till apparent, are become a prey to foreigtt
conquerors, who mixing with the natives, have form-

ed diſtinct parties, whoſe intereſts are directly oppo-
ſite. The ſtate is properly divided into two factions:

one, that of the conquering nation, who are in pol-
ſeſſion of all the civil and military employments ; and
the other, that of the vanquiſhed, who conttitute the
ſubaltern clafles of ſociety. The ruling party aſſum-
ing, by right of conqueſt, an excluſive title to all

property, treat the governed faction as merely the pal-

tive. inſtrument of their pleaſures, while the latter,
in their turn, deſtitute of all perſonal intereſt, con-

tribute as little as poſſible to the ſervice of the other.
Their ſtate is that of a flave, to whom the opulence

of his maſter is a burthen, and who would wi!
lingly free himſelf from his ſervitude, were it in his
power.

This feebleneſs is an er cham attic which Gif. :

tinguiſhes the conſtitution of theſe nations from thoſe
of Europe, In the European ſtates, the governments.

vt.
8
* 7
3X
—
.
IL
7
>
3
TY
os
.
.
*
.
+
The
1-8
+79
00
"2
92
„
» £68
3
.
"fe
*
4
5
*
*
37,
*%
A
<<
®..Y
0
|
25
Ig
5
YT
*
5
5

15

3"
8
ey,

: >

s formed caimacan, lieutenant...

EGVYPT AND SY RIA. _ 25

deriving from each reſpective nation the means
of. governing it, find it neither an eaſy matter, nor
their intereſt to abuſe their power. And even ſup-
roling they formed diſtin& intereſts, they would ſtill
be unable to obtain unlimited powers. The reaſon
is, that beſides the multitude. called people, which,
though powerful from its number, is always feeble

fromm its diſunion, there exiſts a middle order, which,

partaking of the qualities of the governors and the
governed, maintains, in fome meaſure, an equilebri-
um between the one and the other. This is the
claſs of the opulent and independent citizens, who,
diſperſed through the different occupations of ſociety,
have a common intereſt in ſeeing thoſe rights of
property and ſecurity which they enjoy reſpected. In
Egypt, on the contrary, there is no middle ſtate;

none of our numerous claſſes of nobility ; no clergy,

merchants, or landholders, which in ſome degree,

| conſtitute an intermediate body between the com-
mon people and the government. There, every man
is a ſoldier, or profeſſor of the law, that is to ſay,
| a creature of government; or he is a labourer, an
artizan, or ſhop Keeper, that is to ſay, one of the
people, and the people above all are deficient in
| the firſt requiſite to combat oppreſſion, the art of
combining and direCting their force. To deſtroy or
| to reform the Mamlouks, a general league of the
| peaſantry is neceſſary; and this it is impoſſible to
form. The ſyſtem of oppreſſion is methodical. One
would imagine theſe tyrants were every where en-
dued with an intuitive knowledge of its principles.
| Each province, each diſtrict, has its governor, and
each village its lieutenant“, who watches the motions
of the multitude. Single againſt ſuch numbers, he
| May appear feeble; but the power he repreſents

* In Arabic katem makam, litterallv locum tenzns, from which

1720] © TRAVELS IN

renders him formidable. Beſides experience proves
that wherever a man has the courage to make him-

ſelf maſter he finds enough whoſe meanneſs will
ſecond his pretenfions. This lientenant transfers 2
portion of his auchoriry to ſome individuals of the
ſociety he oppreſfes, and theſe become his ſupport.
ers; jealous of each other, they ſtrive who ſhall beſt
merit his favour, and he employs them alternately
to effect their mutual deſtruction.

The ſame jealouſies and inveterate hatreds per.

vade allo and difunite the villages. But even ſuppoſing
an union which is fo difficult to take place, what
could a crowd of bare-footed and almoſt naked pea.
fants, with only ſticks, or even with muſkets, effect
againſt a body of diſciplined and well armed cavalry.
F am, above all, led to believe Egypt can never
make off this yoke, when I conſider the nature of
the country, which is but too advantageous for ca-
valry, It the beſt regulated infantry among us
dread to encounter the horſe in a plain, how formi-
dable muſt they be to a people who are wholly
ignorant of the very firſt elements of tactics, and
who can never poſſibly acquire a knowledge which
can only be the refult of an experience their ſituation
denies them. Mountainous countries, alone, afford
to liberty its great reſources. It is there that kill
and addreſs, favoured by ſituation, ſupply the def:
' ciency of numbers. The revolters, unanimous be.
cauſe they are at firſt not numerous, acquire every
day new ſtrength, from the habit of exerciſing it,
While the oppreſſor, leſs ati.e, becauſe he is already
powerful, delays his attack, till at length theſe bands
of peaſants, or plunderers, whom he deſpiſed, become
ſoldiers inured to war, and diſpute with him, even
in the plains, the ſuperiority in military ſkill, and
the palm of victory. In flat countries, on the con:
trary, the firſt tumult is ſuppreſſed, and the ignorant
pealant, who does not even know how to throw ug

2

* 5 $ # RS 2 1 * 0 * 2 " F ”
PITT er eos 72 SD OOO I, PR I OR TN OT, e n * 18 F
22 NE ee et Ee en 96 oh Neb R Ee Le Ee eee CL we i ee eb eo Hin hog ain gh, n Y
ET 5 ES 7 28 N 128 8 EL 2 Re 6 VS r * r R 2 Ses W N N — Pr
K e x ABR URLS tl 22 SL ES EO OE I ne ee en Ws n 8 . Ne . n . 5-5 TE: 32 n 8 5 7 SIP ch IE Ins
8 7 N a r 4 8 5 - r n e „ "LN {
2 * a eee ß EEE 2 cer CS
- — 8 of ju * N * N 1 « ge” el

5 82 * R , EE ee ES Wes kt C "22.990 R n 9 4 e
N RR CO ANT INES RY . 2" as Be > DE i nd od Vos ea WA ]% è ß, ]— ) ] ³ dons e F
R GEN © 2 n N e n 8 SEN PR; DEI IR Fs OI r 3 MIT ES ALS SN * N e e
.
oo
1 x9
LS
28 4
on -
=, q fe
28
"7 *
1 & «
—— |
1 3
- FRY
2 . *
wx =
> —
Ws
IR .
"3%;
<4
* or 4
1
EY:
3
-
, ID * ö
= 0
*
EH AT
1 5 CO
ba of
N
. 1
5 1
5 4 1
* I
nw 2
8
220M
2 i |
* f
Et F
5s Tr
We ”
Nees
5
* 0
„ £
=}
4
Lan A
| i 4
.
„ 4 o
- Bay
Wa
*
5 —
23
En
<<%
ERS
cal
. 0
8
7M
"x
-%
9
4 0
EE:
4
*
8
3 C 1
LH p
Wy,
* F
7
28 t ;
*y
5
pn
* ?
FL
5
30 44
4.
18
|, nm (
y 1
1 l
J le |
0
5 1
: !

: * 3 e n F T... SIOS
; 9 R ö c d ag Pn ng,
N i 9 ML * 8 / ̃ͤ̃᷑̃¹ . v. ab wes ga Cate: N > Roe 7... ——2
4 N 12 e VI: NIEL ˙ ES tg IE No ah! o „ ô½f IB SSD 92 nh Eg LH RETRY fn e |
, n re 8 es J . OE ER ts CP PIT OLE GATES IN Teri 8 7 ² ˙ PIO, rt vY ew Te CR I tr, Roth ode 125 bh rt = g TS INNn) e 5 2 ; 1

n PWW 2 N > F r 2 AN E972, TJ r e e * ; * , n
od, 8 WY 5 S 4325 W 5 8 F R F 8 10 | 1 e £ * 7 . 4
* Ps RS Y N N . * 2 e 1 7 * N "$5 C3 * N * * * » 8 1

2 "A 4, 8 * * Soak * BY * 1 , 3 hy

N " K
W
n

E GTP AND SYRIA. 120

deen the conſequence of their exhauſted patience,
efecially in the province of Sharkia, indicate a latent
fire, which waits only for proper agents to put it in
motion, and produce great and uncxf ected effects.

Seem: itt.
State of 1h arts

But a powerful obſtacle to every fort anafe revolu-
tion in Egypt, is the profound ignorance of the na-

ton, which equally prevents them from perceiving

the cauſes of their evils, or applying the neceſſary
remedles.
As I propoſe treating this article, which like ſeve-
rah of the preceding ones, is common to all the Turk-
ib empire, more fully in another place, I ſhall not at
preſent dwell on particulars. It will be ſufficient to
obſerve, that this ignorance, diffuſed through every

claſs extends its effects to every ſpecies of moral and

phyſical knowledge, to the ſciences, and the fine arts,
and even to the mechanical profeſfions. The moſt
imple of theſe are ſtill in a ſtate of infancy. The
work of their cabinet-makers, lock-ſmiths, and gun-
fmiths, is extremely clumſy. Their riercery, their
hardware, their gun and piſtol barrels, are all im-
ported from foreign countries. With difficulty can

Jou find one watch-maker at Cairo who knows how
to repair a watch, and he too is an European.
lers are more common there than at Smyrna and
; Aleppo;
the impleſt roſe...
is courſe.
| molaſſes,

Jewel-
but chey know not how to mount properly

Sugar is refined there, but it is full of
and the white 1s exceſſively dear. The

| only manufacture in any degree of perfection is their
| ik ſtuffs; and the workmanſhip of them is much

15 highly anifhed, and the FN far greater than in
. ee

Gunpowder i is made there, but it

* 3 * — = 2 > — -+
——_— = ; I 7 tro IN e SIR „
- . : * - by 4." x , We, * NJ — e 5% OUTS Death ray oy gs | 8 5 © \
. — bo £5 . E * = * * 22 r CE * —
F by . CASEY N one 2 — 3 o wa, , Q 0 o 4 by 5 2
. — reer. SES NR : 8 S ape: gore. hf 8 „ „ r 3 =

.. ˙ ü.... S I. 2s 5 Sr e
4 tao tee n 22 © — — . 3 3

4 Sc _ — — — d 9 9 by

7... 0 Bang WE, r
= Ct ITY * 3 * N * l

6 N = 8 o . +4

ct” 1a

— —
*
*
e
a : Ls

aan

4
4+ 2352S
1 1 1
> 1; .
p : A * 77
4 j* . 4%
e
: ; Wo 1
os 'F
27 *
4 - 2 l
* x
2 .
1
4 FR ,
of bs
7 R
—_— 2 e
— = 9
— * > 8
5 ES E
= 7 3
1 oy > o
l 1 f * 7 g
1 227 0
© 5 .
: : 1
Tx o
$
*4 a
"IO. 1 o
.F 8}
. 6 8 1 =
” % = 4.
4 2 5
5 oy *
eie
5 1
13 ER 0
6 . 3
1 * $73 =_—
1 21 0 *
15 5 1 k
: 2 1
1
L A" Ns
5. ö
4 2 o * 7
54 [3 RS
F . n
l 19 N > SH
* S.
258 "4
* -
1 * 40M
+ 4%
J o

rz IN

CHAP. XIII.

fl
Stat e of Comme ce.
e
IV
N this ſtate of univerſal barbariſm, it cannot but
appear aſtoniſhing that commerce ſhould ſtill continue IE
_ fo Houriſhing as we find it at Cairo; but an attentive *
enquiry into the ſources from whence it is derived Co
will explain the reaſon. |
Two powerful cauſes have contributed to render -
Cairo the ſeat of an extenſive commerce ; the firſt of 5!
which is, that all the commodities conſumed in Egypt I
are collected within the walls of that city; and all the D
perſons of property, that is, the Mamlouks and lau- tl
yers, are aſſembled there, and draw thither their Ec
whole revenues, without making any return to the tu
country from which they receive them. in
The ſecond is the ſituation, which makes this city Lk
4 centre of circulation, while by the Red Sea, it D
correſponds with Arabia and India; by the Nile, *<
with Abyſſinia and the interior parts of Africa; and 91
by the Mediterranean, with Europe and the empire WB in
or Turkey. Every year a caravan from Abyflinia | ch
arrives at Cairo, and brings from a thouſand to twelve BW
hundred black flaves, as alſo elephants teeth, gold fi
duſt, oſtrich-feathers, gums, parrots and monkeys“, M
while another, deftined for Mecca, leaves the e 70
tremities of e and receiving e even oy
* This”; caravan comes by land along the Nile; it Was with lec
that Mr. Bruce returned in 1772, from Abyſſinia, after having
performed the moſt adventurous journey attempted in the pre- Wi |
tent age. In traverſing the deleit, the proviſions of the cars” 8

van fell ſhort, md the travellers lived leveral days on gu" WT tic
alone. |

EGV TAN SYRIA. 131

terranean, collecting thoſe ot Algiers, Tipo, and
Tunis, and arrives by the deſert at Alexandria, con-
fiſting of not leſs than three or four thouſand camels.
From thence it proceeds to Cairo, where it joins the
caravan of Egypt. They then jointly ſet out for
E Mecca, whence they return one hundred days after.

leagues more to travel, do not reach home till after
an abſence of more than a year. The lading of theſe
caravans confiſts in India ſtuffs, ſhawls, gums, pearls,
perfumes, and eſpecially the coffee of Yemen.

The fame commodities arrive by another route at
J1ez, to which port ihe ſoutherly winds bring, in

Dijedda, Cairo does not retain the whole quantity of
15 merchandize; but, beſides what is there conſum-
ed, conſiderable orofits ariſe from the duties, and the
ſums expended by the pilgrims. On the other hand,

ſmall caravans arrive from time to time from Dama.
| cus, with ſilk and cotton ſtuffs, oils, and dried fruits.
| During the favourable feaſon, there are always ſome

of tobacco from Latakia, the conſumption of which
in Egypt is enormous. Theſe veſſels take rice in ex-
change, whilſt others arrive ſucceſſively at Alexandria,
bringing cloathing, arms, furs, paſſengers, and wrought

Marſeilles, Leghorn and Venice, with cloths, cochi-
neal, Lyons ituffs and laces, grocery, paper, iron,

thele articles conveyed by ſea to Roſetta in barks cal-
led djermt, are firit landed . then re-embarked

| they had ſeen Europeans i in their country. |
A {tort of boat which carries an extremely. large lateen fail,
Eriped with blue and Eres like tickings... |

dom the river of Senegal *. «0a along the Medi-

E Byt the pilgrims of Morocco, who have fix hundred

May, fix or eight and twenty fail of veſſels from

-y * — — * . * 5 TY * —
- — . * > 3 . A e
92 CEC — ,
- ——— * 4 4
0 — — _
P * » * N — — 2 8 fro . d
* bee W444 . ie" 8 be _ 0 5 n n ; CES > > > . — . :
wa 2 85 — W * . N 2 0 N . r N L =, > "aud. V 7-8 2 n 5 2 & \ = 7 * 3 3
_ . ” K — de : a - mt oe — 1 4 _— . * p 2 * on - * ZZ. 41g op * - = -
149). Siu . 2 ay” 52, 2 * * — 3 * 7 3 Oo. Ca . on L IS wn WE 1 5 n 3 r
8 — 4 — = bs 7
. 7 - 4 ws 7 - + vy = f -
- + In ry .
4 N 1
on £ m —_ RET
G 1 e 8 1
— — 7 »

% £
RN paee=onopmprn

* * = wes, © » —
as Pug e = 4 A *
e e e 2675
8 234. 5 he * LR . —
my

my * 12 —
1
— a 7 5
—

veſſels in the road of Damietta, unloading hogſheads

filk, from Conſtantinople. Veſſels come likewiſe from

jead, Venetian ſequins, and German dahlers. All

* I ſaw ſeveral negroes A came by this caravan, from the
country of the Fouts,” to the north of Senegal, und who laid.

| PRI 75 =
i

* . — — % o —_— > + * — + * 2 5 > 44 2 * al * *
8 7 Wo 23 CE PIER b Tar a > SARS + rg car — — wow 4 ot X = r eee PAC; £ BIS vw F -
7 4 A l Y — e 4 * £ 5 * "IE * = - - e 3 8 2 2 22 * 2 3 a >
a C 7 EY Pat's Et T4 BY: Toe SE +» Sl, 2 n * „ieee eee A — 22 * 5 2
. * ** 2 * 5 p f . 2 2 ts A — 2 Wee A. 1 N * a & ag TV" s i" e « 7 =
— od gs — WET K — — K — — po * 1 = _ ROE * — N 1 —
pc ee -_ >a 1 2 Rey  Ws , * N 2 9

*
.

— * — 1 — — 4
. 2 \ — * i
RY 0 bs, ad Lk
44s +4. - iy Gund, fi tf ETP 4s I
vs. lh eee
. * ugh "* * 4 * 0 4 -

*
—— — -

- P "oy 5 1 E — > XS. A MM. : Ly
. "IE erde Wt =” . 99 n 2 * 77 Gas N 4 > W. 8 *
8 e ee Tas :
* 8 b —_ - * 15 . y 5 * — — ** —
2 TI. 9 1 2 N. oo" phy * 8 * 8 A = * 5 5
t 8 | _ _

* 1 :
2 e

8 we
Adj

ay
5 % F =

8
5
K EP

> n MF 3.2.5
”—_ — N oF * Oe"
* err
N 4
Fa 5 *

e
5 1
28

2.

r © TRAVELS IN

on the Nile, and ſent to Cairo. From this account,
It is not ſurprizing that commerce ſhould continue ſo
flouriſhing in that. capital, and we need not heſitate to
admit the report of the commiſſioner general of the
cuſtoms, who aſſerted, that in 1783, Cairo had trad-
ed to the amount of near a hundred and fifty millions
of livres, (fix millions two hundred and fifty thouſand

pounds.) But if we examine the channels into which

this wealth is poured, if we conſider that a great
part of the merchandize and coffee of India paſſes
into foreign countries, the value of which is paid in
goods from Europe and Turkey; that the conſump-

tion of the country almoſt entirely conſiſts of articles

of luxury completely finiſhed, and that the produce

given in return is principally in raw materials, we
zall perceive that all this commerce is carried on

without contributing greatly to the real riches of
[ Egypt or the benefit of the e

CHAP. XIV.

ov the Imus of Suez,
Sea with ihe Mediterranean.

1 HAVE mentioned the commerce carried on at

Cairo, with Arabia and India, by the way of Suez;

and this ſubject naturally leads to a queſtion fre-
quently agitated in Europe, which is, whether it
would be practicable to cut through the Iſtmus which

ſeparates the Red Sea from the Mediterranean, that

veſſels might arrive at India by a ſhorter route than
by the Cape of Good Hope. The narrowneſs of
the Iſtmus induces us to believe it eaſily practicable;
but, in a journey I made to Suez, the following rea ·

ſons induced me to change my 9

and the junction of the Red 3

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 133

Fit It is certainly true, that the ſpace which ſe:

\parates the two ſeas is not more than eighteen or

nineteen ordinary leagues ; it is true, alſo, that this in-
terval is not inter ſected by mountains, and that,
| from the tops of the terraces at Suez, we cannot
| diſcover, with any teleſcopes, a ſingle obſtacle on
the naked and barren plain to the north-weſt: it is
not therefore the difference of levels which prevents
the junction“; but, the great difficulty ariſes from
the nature of the correſponding coaſts of the Medi-
terranean and the Red Sea, which are of a low
and ſandy ſoil, where the waters from lakes, ſhoals,
and moraffes, ſo that veſſels cannot approach with-
| in a conſiderable diſtance. It will therefore be

ſcarcely poſſible to dig a permanent canal amid theſe

ſhifting ſands : not to mention that the ſhore is deſ-
titute of harbours, which muſt be entirely the work
of art. The country beſides has not a drop of' freſh
water, and to ſupply the inhabitants, it mult be
brought as far as from the Nile.

The belt and only method therefore of affeQing
this junction, is that which has been already ſucceſs-

fully practiſed at different times; which is by mak-

inz the river itſelf the medium of communication,
for which the ground is perfectly well calculated;

for Mount Mokattam ſuddenly terminating in the
/atitude of Cairo, forms only a low and ſemicireu-

jar mound, round which is a continued plain from
the banks of the Nile as far as the point of the Red

Sea. The ancients, who early underſtood the ad-

vantage to be derived from this ſituation, adopted

the idea of Jorg the two ſeas by a canal connect- |

* The ancients were ol opinion that the Red Bon was 8 |
than the Mediterranean; and, in fact, if we obſerve that, from

the canal of Kolzoum to the fea, the Nile has a declivity, for
| the ſpace of thirty leagues, this idea will not appear ſo ridicu-
| Jous; beſides that, to me, it appears probable the level will be

found at the Cape of Good *

. (i, dx - x Hong
* * 4 K .
—— — > na * EY a - it ”

8 * - ”, . — — Jn _ —
3 75 le nd = 5 1 — 5 TB 3 — - 4 - A _ * * — — — — a _
ye 7 a 7; * 12 - —_— I * — = — - y
. Fad Glebe 7 22988 „ eee err 8 rr GE. "Em 2 as peel 1 weng 85 be bh ES 3 72 _ . e .
N Lone Had , 1 : 8 - 4 — * 1 by ; [*% — 2 = * 4 — bo. . A. <> 7 * . — ** 6 - 1 - ow
MEE an t46 ot oe ERIE eee, IAA Ir te 2% ES e eee de Yb = 2" er ths -. - nr FO 1 e eee non CITI . 325 — E pI _
82 > 7 — n ee — a _—_ CO 5 _ — KH. — ons — — — 2 — 1% — — ” 0. — * — > Fs * —.— — — ge — = - — — 0 $45 I CO wy — * ns: l ”
* AX — E 2 . . 00 2p rn rt re 6.2 23 * r F 823328 D — 9 . = 9 _— \ * —
* ju * — * 7 7  —
n 8 "0 „ INT 3 « | 0 * 2 er FC
IS f 8 rr 9 Gor” ths 2:1 . — * IE A923 - 2, es * 9 Lern — *
- ac In De hd. x nhl ates x 9 I r : e 7 n n — ny - e eee e
8 ag A ome 2k Y * 22 2 XK? 4 7 . a Su 2 * — $ Ma” D —.— . „ =. Wy * 3 329 — £5 1 3
4 2 a 11 a7. 44 Þ . « iGo - - : a=" 8 A = 2 oh > DINED *
IX * — —1 "x of 4 3 . 2 A 2 a 4 4-08 9 8
80 4 8 . * 2 Ko * 4 1 8 * 8 8 8 K 5 **
> Wo NY 3 2 — by << # > on * : Ys \ * n 1 * + . © — = _

4. > o_ — i A . wy *
FP
— wg — — i "4
5 _ 9 Sad .
22 ©
— 7 * o n Xa *

— 2
— . 5

E
S
4 .

ut; 7 2 a * * —_— —ů— x $

e s obs 7 W © ar. 272: rald* Duc '- - * oy 4 3 2
N 7 0 Oy, ad "= WL 0c, FR = 2 8 3 Nr 8 Ws 2 I» I — 1 # , a4 4 2 ne b wg K 2 3

D * e 3 re A Lende N r r 5 hs fag WF ES SURAT AUR 500
* as . 3 FR - yl . 7 . ERS SEC. Ease 2, OUY n <= - Y
67 117. thy: ain, 4 NN 9 r 8 8 ee r 4 |
9 a % — 5 8 , = bo 1 . 3 yp ö Q _ \ \

e oe 8 h . =

CA 1

2 -
„
Nenn,

134 TRAVELS IN

ed with the river, Strabo (lib. 17.) obſerves, that
this firſt was executed under Seſoſtris, who reigned
about the time of the Trojan war“; and this work
was fo conſiderable as to occaſion it to be remarked;
* that it was a. hundred cubits (or a hundred and
« ſeventy feet) wide, and deep enough for large
< veſſels.” Alter the Greeks / conquered the coun.
try, it was reſtored by the Ptolemies, and again re-
newed by Trajan. In ſhort, even the Arabs: them-
ſelves followed theſe examples. In the time of
“ Omar ebn-el-Cattab,“ ſays the hiſtorian. El Mas
kin, the cities of Mecca and Medina ſuffering from
&: famine, the Calif ordered Amrou, Governor of
“ Egypt, to cut a canal from the Nile to Kolzoum,
« that the contributions of corn and barley, ap-
4 pointed for Arabia, might be conveyed that way.“

This canal is the fame which runs at preſent to
Koide, and loſes itſelf in the country to the nerth-
eaſt, of  Berkct-e!-Hadj, or the Lake of the Pilgrims,
Kolzoum, the Clyſma of the Greeks, where it ter.
minated, bas been deſtroyed for many ages; but the
name and fituation ſtill ſubfiſts in a hillock of ſand,
bricks, and ſtones, three hundred paces to the north
ol Suez, on the border of the Sea, oppoſite the ford
which leads to the ſpring of El-Naba.- I have been
an the ſpot as well as M. Niebuhr, and the Arabs
told me, as they did him, it was called Kolzoum ;
Danville therefore is deceived, when, copying an er-
ror of Ptolemy's, he places Clyſma eight leagues to
the fouthward. I am of opinion that he is likewiſe
miſtaken, in ſuppoſing Suez the Arſinoe of the an-
This city having been ſituated, according
to he Greeks and Arabs, to the north of Clyſma,
Wwe Mall endeavour to trace it according to the words

S That IS according to certain eilen ot mine, in the
| time of Solomon. See Meænꝛoire Jur la Chronologe Aa en in:
terted i 1 the Journal a Ae Sgabans, of Jana iy .

of Strabo®, „quite at the bottom of the gulph,
Das we approach Egypt,“ without proceeding how-
ever with M. Savary as far as Adjeroud, which us

too far to the weſtward. We gi to confine ur-

{elves to the low country, which extends about two
leagues from the bottom of the preſent gulph, that
ace being all we can reaſonably allow for the retreat
of 5 thi ſea in ſeventeen centuries. _
| Formerly theſe diſtricts were covered with's towns
which have difappeared with the waters of the Nile ;

the canals which conveyed theſe were deſtroyed, for in

| this ſhifting ſoil they are rapidly choaked up, both by
the action of the winds, and by the cavalry of the
Bedouin Arabs. At preſent the commerce of Cairo
with Suez is only carried on by means of caravans,

which wait the arrival, and ſet out on the departure

F the veſſels, that is, towards the end of April, or
e beginning of May, and in the courſe of the

months of July and Auguſt. That which I accom.
panied in 1783, conifiſived of about three thouſand

camels, and five or fix thouſand menf. The mer-
:handize conſiſted in wood, fails, and cordage for

ine ſhips at Suez; in ſome anchors, carried each of

them by four camels, iron bars, carded wool, and

lead; it likewiſe carried bales of cloth, and baivels :
of cochineal, corn, barley, beans, Turkiſh piaſtres,

Venetian ſequins, and Imperial dahlers. All theſe
commodities were deſtined for Djedda, Mecca, and
Moka, where they were to be bartered for Indian
goods, and the coffee oy Arabla, which forms the

4 Strabo, lib. 17.

+ It remained upwards of forty 4 aſſembled, Ane its

departure for various reaſons; among others, on account of the
es) days, in which relpect the Turks are as ſuperſtitious as

the Romans formerly were, At length it ſet out on the 25th
of July, and arrived the *9th at Svez, having journeyed twenty-

nine hours by the route of the Haouatat Arabs, 2 league farther

0 che louth than the Lake of the Pilgrims,

-
be, 2 72g Nr 3 _ RE 1 wed

N

'., 04 * __ - 2 7 0 5 A £4 "ors
2 reren 2 —
en n 3: r

b d INS A Ss RL

228

.
— —
- — —
0 9 „ * bg
— 9 © 2 * —— —— — |
- - — i - 2
: — — —
0 1 Pen „ e rn e . . 1 2
0 I re A 8 RS + „ f 1 * 2 AG " 3
5 © n 4 AL. a " EG Sa — Ds — op) 64 by Wa ov 2 Ta. _ N u — — & a 8 ba _ _
+; — mJ 7 * hk . . n * of l l - - wars l
0 n — MO — . 2 £ 83 — — — — — oe . >, N 1 P * n rr FE by = CP 4 is TT
— a * * mou rn * rr 7 2 N 1 ** 1 * "k : n » Sm; 3 8 oo „ >8E.- A. b MES - =_ A — — 2 . "a 3-.£ 4 3 2
3 > * r * * r l Wt — ens — * n r (IE). * rr n - —
hh 1 * * © oft IE SIRI SR 50 n "5, eee — _— 22 eyed a CI.” | _ L «Tn * 8 4 - . — N r r
< JF £ eg yo 1 ” 2 Y l * — 7 ve 92 2 * q 2 = - — —
* ——— * n - - 32 ; l = FP + lis 8 — — . 5
= * > 4.4 —.— n 4 9 2 4 IVY [ \ * * <= W \ "rs —_—
a . L P Da th 1 2 NY 2 2 A Cl 80 J : * -
2 K 8 . ö , * n 71 g 4 \ \
1 = . — * by y "hd *
PT * . ' .
7
*
CIS

A AR > » k, tu ZH; — "I"
fs ZN : N * t a,
—

#6 —— Nr mr # n ”
— . 47; Ras apc" r eat 1
v e  - 2 e 5
a. ihe 8 n 4 aa, - RR”
28 * „ 11
e b RY 1
. D YT * "= 7 dt m3
"TOO wks . rt ge 4 —

* _— ITT]

Tout ar
C0 8 —
— — = —
*

every neceſſary than Suez. From the tops of the MW *

.
F $48
1 14
- *
14.57 5
3 71
»,
*
if
« 184
'
*
.
*
.
*
1
19
- .
„
” 1
.
8
Ty 7
.. 4
n :
np
4
.
js
wo
*
, 0
.
+ N
[0 *
1
nw. :
1
7
Nai
9 1 j
1
17 * |
71
18>
„ $54 1
* TB
\; Sl by :
**
713
16.
*
"TA
+
9
[8.4
52
W ©
1
1
bot: |
1
1
.
„
* * 1
Nr
1
wh +
*
13
1
1 5
oh: +
TI.
Bib.
mu hp
MN
4
1
*
.
” *
bb 4
be
3
.
1
.
4 7-4;
14S
4:71 b
$158
*
em o
Wd.
, LI
10
*
3.4
«4
=.
887
*
1/398
1
1
0
f
„
1
. * 4
3
1
:
WT
1
11
.
Wt
LY
1
*
1
2 5
7
the)
7
** 4
75
1 *
HSE
3
1
*
1
1
FAY
Wi. t.
„
1
13
.
95
.
LAG)
T9
"5
F114
3:
14
va
#
Wor”
Wolf
135%
|
5 A
.
8:6
95H
$48

4 — _—
r = r
2 ES, — —
— 8 MAIS 12
8 3 —
. — — — — 9 —
E —— Dy

136 TRAVELS IN

principal article of the returns. There was beſides 3 1 “.

great number of pilgrims, who preferred the voyage ol
by ſea to a land journey; and it alſo carried the ne. MW be
ceſſary proviſions, ſuch as rice, meat, wood, and even 15

ea

water; for no place in the world is more deſtitute of

terraces, the eye, ſurveying the ſandy plain to the
north-weſt, the white rocks of Arabia to the eaſt, or
the ſea, ind the mountain Mokattam, to the ſouth,
cannot diſcern even a ſingle tree, or the ſmalleſt ſpot WM

of verdure. Suez preſents no proſpect but extenſive :
ellow ſands, or a lake of green water; the ruinous —
condition of the houſes heightens this melancholy Iron
Tcenery. The only water which can be drank is that
brought from E- Naba, or the ſpring, ſituated at the ihe |
diſtance of three hours journey on the Arabian ſhore; Ae
but it is ſo brackiſh, that without a mixture of rum, "|
it is inſupportable to Europeans. The ſea might fur- e
niſh a quantity of ſhell and other fiſh ; but the Arabs acid
ſeldom attempt fiſhing, at which they are far from hic!
expert; when the veſſels are gone, therefore, nobody WM ©
remains at Suez, but the governor, who is a Mam- Nals

jouk, and twelve or fourteen perſons, who form his Nile
houſchold, and the garriſon. [undr
e fortreſs is a defenceleſs heap of ruins, whiich bound
the Arabs conſider as a citadel, becauſe it contains sous
ſix braſs four pounders, and two Greek gunners, 2 |
who turn their heads aſide when they fire. The Mg
harbour is a wretched quay, where the ſmalleſt boats Vigabl,
are unable to reach the ſhore, except at the higheſt Ne)
tides. There, however, the merchandize is embark- 4; the
ed, to convey it over the banks of fand, to the vel- lee
ſels which anchor in the road. This road, fituated a "VL eve
league from the town, is ſeparated from it by a ſhore ated, .
which is left dry at low water; it has no works for tatityl
its defence, fo that the veſſels which I have ſeen there, mag :
-

to the number of eight-and-twenty at a time, might
be attacked wi thout oppoſition ; * the 8 them.

now 4.

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 137

leres are W of reſiſtance, none having any
| other artillery than four ruſty ſwivels. Their num-
ber diminiſhes every year, ſince, by continually coaſt.
ing along a ſhore full of ſhoals, one out of nine, at
leaſt, is ſhipwrecked. In 1783, one of them having
anchored at El. Tor, to take in water, was ſurpriſed
by the Arabs, while the crew were fleeping on ſhore.
| After plundering it of fifteen hundred bags of coffee,
ö they abandoned the veſſel to the wind, which threw
it upon the coaſt. The dock at Suez is ill adapted
| to repair ſuch damages; ſcarcely do they build a
; caya{ſe in three years. Beſides that the ſea, which,
from its flux and reflux, accumulates the ſand upon
that coaſt, will at laſt choak up the entrance, and
the ſame change will take place at Suez, which has
already at Kolzoum and Arſinoe.
| Were Egypt under the adminiſtration of a wiſe
government, advantage might be then taken of that
i accident to build another town in the ſame road,
dich might be done on a cauſeway of only ſeren
W or eight feet in height, as the tide uſually riſes no -
more than three feet and a half. The canal of the
Nile would be cleanſed and repaired, and the five
hundred thouſand livres (near twenty one thouſand
Wpounds), paid annually to the eſcort of the Arabs of
Haouatat and Ayaidi entirely faved. In ſhort, to
avoid the very dangerous bar of the Bogaz of Ro-
Jetta, the canal of Alexandria would be rendered na-
VI able, from whence the merchandize might be
onveyed immediately to the Porte. But ſuch are
not the cares of the preſent government. The ſmall
'egree of encouragement it grants to commerce is
ot even founded on rational motives; if it be tole-
ated, it is merely becauſe it furniſhes a means of
ratifying rapacity, and 1s a fource from whence ty-
anny perpetually derives profit, without conſidering
low ſoon it may be exhauſted. It does not even
no how to make advantage of the eagerneſs of the

138 TRAVELS IN

| Europeans to communicate with din In vain hats

the Engliſh and French attempted to concert with
the Turks a plan for opening ſuch a pailage; they
either inflexibly refuſe, or diſcourage every appli-
cation. We ſhould be wrong in flattering ourſelves
vith any durable ſucceſs ; for eren were treatie;
concluded, the revolutions which, between evening
and morning, ſo often altar che face of affairs, at
Cairo, would render them of no eſtect, as was the
cate with the treaty concluded in 1775, between
Mohammad Bey and the Governor ot Bengal.
Such beſides is the avarice and treachery of the
Mamlouks, that they would never want prerexts 10
Haraſs the merchants, and would augment, in fpite
of every engagement, the duties on commodities.
Thoſe on coffee are at this moment 'enormons.
The farde, or bale of this commodity, weighing
from three hundred and feventy to three hundred
and ſeventy-{ive pounds, and coſting, at Moka, forty-
five pataques*, or two hundred and thirty-ſix livres
Tournois, (nine pounds fixteen and eight pence)
pays in Bahr, or ſea duties, one hundred and forty:
ſeven livres (ſix pounds two ſhillings and ſix pence),
beſides an addition ot ſixty-nine livres (two pound:
ieventeen fthilllings and fix Pence) laid on in ATR

« This is the name given by the NEV of Province 0
the dahler of the empire. after the Arabs, who call it Rid
about arar, or Father of the window, on account of the aims
on the reverle, which, according to them, reſemble a window,
The dahler is worth five livres five lols (four and four pen:

haif-penny.)

+ In May 1789, the fleet of Djedds, conſiſting of twenty
eight fail, four of which were veſſels pierced for ſixty guns,
brought near thirty thouſand fardes of coffee, which, at tt
rate of 370 pounds the farde, form a total of eleven millions ons
hundred thouſand pounds weight, or one hundred and one
thouſand quintals ; but it muſt be obſerved, that the demand df
that year was more than a third greater chan uſual. According:
y: we mult reckon, on an avarage, from fixty to {ever.ey tow

9 £5)

| addi

ing
fols

Egyg

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 139

we ſhall find that the duties nearly equal the prime

R
Of the cuſtam-houſes and impoſts.

Egypt, as in all Turkey, one of the principal offices
of government. He who exerciſes 1t 1s at once the
comptroller and farmer-general. All the duties on
entry, exports, and the circulation of commodities,
depend on him. He names all the ſubalterns who
collect them. To this he adds the paſtes, or exclu-
ſive privileges of the natron of Terane, the kali of
Alexandria, the caſſia of the Thebais, the ſenna of
{ Nubia, and, in a word, is the deſpot of commerce,
which he regulates at his pleaſure. His office is
never held for longer than a year. The price of his
ſand quintals annually, The farde, paying two hundred and
fardes of 1783 produced to the Cuſtom-houſe fix millions four
hundred and eighty thouſand livres Tournois (two hundred and
ſeventy thouland pounds.) 5 3

* At Moka — 16 livres.

At Suez | =
Extra- duty - ED 6g

Total of duties 232
Prime coſt Ew 1 fs,” 236

ion Moe AEM Fre on nt +

adding to which the freight, loſſes, and walte, it is not aſtoniſh-
ing that the Moka coffee ſhould ſell at five-and-forty, and fifty
lols (one and ten-pence, and two and a penny), the pound in
Egypt, and for three. livres, (half a crown) at Marſeilles, _

So that on adding the fix per cent, collected at Djedda,

E adminiſtration of the cuſtoms forms, in

fixteen livres (nine pounds), duty at Suez, the thirty thouſand

.
pa :
. 82 2 _

5 tix ther! "IE 1 D 82 ROE: * W NE go co dN 8
hor ER 3 8 4 IN „ d EYE IRA at + * irn

» hi” Rs x «te 7 A” 5 r ot Bos IR EP kg r 8 |

rn - /
4 8

r
n 4 A; 8 3
+ Wort; *

3 *
pF » *
8 7
3

o - Leer as, #4 iy 3 by * *
rr . S FD” R 2
SE . „. Rt ON
n ANV

*
*

K.....

** _ * - ; — - - — ag — rr N 2 * EOS. 1 — 2 = —— rt . — - = — : A — — — * : _—
4 IE” 7 Com CDS — nanny ab Eng ErIR eb r ELL =
_— 22 - — — . 72 2 1 7 : 4 _ N . — 2 4 Fs * * ” 9 of r 7 en — + . . 9 =
I 5 e 5 PPP AA A . IT at 2 r I Eo ES * e TBT V CE or a. —— * me IEEE © * — 3
e 5 — — — e r x ome ps = + = —— — * — r 2 k = a Ss yo OE 7 — 27 — Woe — . o_ =
1 * , X 7 a * i R . CM a LEE. - Le SANE 7 *Y — n : W= —— |
nr Page TINY 0 12 84. 4 . „ Meth - #4 22 * x X & 2 2 5 ; : : 7 < Y — 4» 4 7 —v 1 2 a
— * 2 A : be be —— - 2 | . gr . ² y . = T2" IX = 1 r * axe 8 — — — — — I. — - « Ja 5 F

- *

2 r OT":
8 LILLE ARE

rer

* *
—ç— -
2 74
— >

5 .

—
3

3 — —
rl

140 TRAVELS IN

contract in 1783, was one thouſand beiten; which,
at the rate of five hundred piaſters the purſe, and

fifty ſols the piaſter, make twelve hundred and fifty
thouſand livres, (above fifty-two thouſand pounds.)

It is true we mult include among the conditions of
his farm eventual extortions, or caſual demands;
that is, when Morad Bey or Ibrahim, are in want of
five hundred thouſand livres, they ſend for the com-
miſſioners of the cuſtoms, who cannot diſpenſe with
advancing them that ſum ; but he recelves a warrant
in return, which empowers him to levy this extortion

on commerce, for which he taxes, in a friendly way,

the different corps or nations, ſuch as the Franks,
the Barbary Arabs, and the Turks; and this fre.
quently turns not a little to his advantage. In ſome
provinces of Turkey, he has alſo the collecting of
the miri, or tax levied only on the lands. Bur in
Egypt, this adminiſtration is entruſted with the Copt
writers, who exerciſe it under the direction of the
ſecretary of the commandant. Theſe writers have
regiſters of each village, and are employed in re-

ceiving the payments, and accounting for them to
the treaſury; they frequently profit by the ignorance

of the peaſants, in not carrying to account the par-
tial payments, and by obliging them to diſcharge

the debt a ſecond time: they often ſell the oxen,

the buffaloes, and even the mat on which theſe
viretches lie; and it may be truly ſaid, that they are
agents every way worthy of their maſters. The or-
dinary tax ſhould amount to thirty-three piaſters for
each feddan ; that is to ſay, to near eighty-three
livres, (three pounds nine and two-pence) for every
voke of oxen; but this is ſometimes carried, by
abuſe, as far as two hundred livres, (four pounds

fix and fix pence.) It is calculated that the whole

produce of the miri, collected, as well in money as

in corn, barley, beans, rice, &c. may amount to

from forty-ſix to ity mien of France, 3 two

EG AND. SYRIA. I41

millions ſterling g) when bread ſells at one fadda the
rotle, that is, at five liards (ſomething more than a

half-penny) the pound of fourteen ounces.

But to return to the cuſtom-houſes; they were
managed formerly, according to ancient cuſtom,
by the Jews ; but Ali Bey having completely ruined
them in 1769, by an enormous extortion, they, pal-
ſed into the hands of the Chriſtians of Syria, with

whom they ſtill remain. Theſe Chriſtians, who
came from Damaſcus to Cairo, about fifty years ago,
| conſiſted at firſt of but about two or three families;
| their profits attracted others, and their number is

now multiplied to near five hundred. Their original

modeſty and œconomy enabled them to gain poſſeſ-

| fon, firſt of one branch of commerce, and then of

| another, ſo that at length they were able to take

| the farm of the cuſtom-houſe after the ruin of the
| Jews. From that time they have acquired great

| opulence, and made pretentions which may poſſibly
end by a fate ſimilar to that of their predeceſſors.

| Their hour was thought to be come when their

chief, Anthony Faraoun, fled: from Egypt in 1784,
and went to Leghorn, to enjoy in ſafety a fortune of

ſeveral millions; but this event, as it was without

example“, ſo it had no conſequences.
3 ic sr 1
Of is Commerce of the H ranks at Cairo.

Next to theſe Chriſtians of Syria, the moſt con-
ſiderable body of merchants is that of the Europeans,
known in the Levant under the name of Franks.
From a very early period the Venetians have had
bliſhments at Cairo, to which they ſend ſadlery,

* In general the e hold the manners of Europe in a de-
lation, w which prevents every idea of emigration.

ens...

=
rn * —
Sed * n e 206

r
* „

2s,

[:
£ 5
J
o — 2
1
.
*
1
1 .
d C *
1
ks Oo
BY
TY
; 1
4 l 4
s +
x
j ke 4
\ 1
4 2
4
5 4
1 1 .,
1 2 2
9
« 3%
7
2
.
1
* . .
＋ } 2
.
2 8 * 1
* *
1
14 +
. N.
1
U .
4 4
1 :
E U
. $
+ 8
\ we
| p * 4
2 1
n 4
yo 7
1
$19
* .
WA ,
£ *E -
4 1
Pas K
"= F
R. 133 1
3
. -
4, n
* B
24 *
1 7
: "i rr 3
» 7
1 4 5 4 *
11
ih
* N
2:
. *
Y Pe 7
* *
| 7
1 1 1
* - bf 4
1 .
* 8
2 * 28 .
xo {
: f
2 5 *
1
* :
+ 6 x
< r \ -
1 * K
£ 4
A < *
* 4 3 as
=> 85
4 x
7 7 5
y 475
„ p 4 17
#4.
TH 73
: 3 þ
*
1
* p
*
* .
5 |
_ : *
1
,
17 *
* 5 \
7 1
# © + BY .
152 3
x *
2 —
o = 5 *
ot n
: «+
4 N
# .
Ws, .
2 1
1 en
1
4
1
> 27
x
* "0
1
. *
13
7 *
TEE
1
.
4 1
1
1
3
® - * 0
„,
4 7 d
J * |
2 8
: $287
3 $3385
342", ll
Re 4
1 19
1
"4:
4 2
1 WT. >
IT .
p 8
7
175
*
4 141
4 2
: 2 T
% _ - :
= .
+3 11
1 7
N
CHAS.
5
1.
9
a.
Fs
© It
7 =
99
-
„ - Þ
f <5
© Weds.
* v3 £7 4
0 4
*,&# 35
„ 8
38.
x 1
1
& 58
s 1 :
: £ 4
_
e
1
: 4 *
= 2
1 * ,
- 345 8 7
7 NES
111
"©
* 8 Y
z - . A
7

2 | e — 8
—— * ee . . — — 5 * — 7 en *
* * — — „ Pl £ "IE :
— f N ”7 e a— 4 IJ 2 * 5

R
7 & 8 - —
is 4. 4 * hw

1
[T8

5

a 4
14.
144
44
af
+
'
*
77
13d
N.
+454 .
* ,
. 'it
My” |
I.
1
1
1
11
ii
bes |
1
15 q
.
118
* *
.
i "Fe
„
.
56
#*
870
495.7
3
. :
.
1 +4 '
91
+ Ado ö
777 4
j
4
| Baz
$48. }
JW Y
4
. . 44
F :
*
1
Pe :
197
þ *
2
TAs
FM
: ** U
ie
Wo
wo
By.
47> 0b
"2
1.5
.
Th!
| 8.
"IN
4
1.
We
15 4
bn of
Was ©
E
7 k
$557
.
1
198
I
4 4 .
1
1
168
po
1
11185
10
i
=.
3
4
„
1.
91 I
Wh.
1
"
„
175
1
I
'
A
*
=
If
"+
i
8
>
547
L
15
li
TT;
#9]
4;
2.35
y
3s
C
4 4
Ja
443
4 *
F<},
bf þ

—
LC

—— * 5
es re
reer

142 TRAVELS IN
filk ſtuffs, looking-glaſſes, mercery, &c. The Eng.

liſh alfo partook of this trade, and fent cloths, arms,

and hard ware, which have to this day preſerved
their ſuperiority of reputation. But the French, by
furniſhing fimilar articles at a much cheaper rate,
have obtained the preference, to the excluſion of

their rivals. The pillage of the caravan which at-

tempted to pats from Suez to Cairo, in 1779“, has

* The newſpapers of the day ſpoke much of this. pillage, on
account of M. de St. Germain, of the Ifle of Bourbon, Whole
misfortunes were greatly talked of in France. The catavan was
compoſed of Engliſh officers and paſſengers, who had landed
from two veſſels at Suez, in their way to Europe, by Cairo.

The Bedouin Arabs of Tor, informed that thele paſſengers were

richly laden, reſolved to plunder them, and attacked them five
leagues from Suez, The Europeans, ſtripped ſtark naked, and

diſperſed by fear, ſeparated into. two parties. Some of them

returned to Suez; the remainder, to the number of ſeven,

thinking they could reach Cairo, puſhed forward into the De-

ſert. Fatigue, thirft; hunger, and the heat of the ſun, deſtroy-

ed them one after the other. M. de Saint Germain alone ſur-

vived all theſe horrors. During three days and two nights, he
wandered in this bare and ſandy deſert, frozen at night by the
north wind, (it was in the month of January) and burnt by the
fun during the day, without any other {ſhade but a ſingle buſh,
into which he thruſt his head among the thorns, or any drink
but his own urine, At length, on the third day, perceiving

the water of Berket-el- Had), he trove to make towards it; but

he had already fallen three times from weakneſs, and undoubt-

_edly would have remained where he laſt fell, but for a peaſant,

mounted on a camel, who ſaw him at a great diſtance, This
charitable man conveyed him to his dwelling,. and took care of

him for three days with the utmoſt humanity. At the expirz-

tion of that time, the merchants of Cairo, apprized of his mis-
fortune, procured him a conveyance: to that city, where he ar-
rived in the molt deplorable condition. His body was. one
entire wound, his breath cadaverous, and he had ſcarcely
ſpark of life remaining, By dint of great care and attention,
however, Mr, Charles Magallon, who received him in his houle,
had the ſatisfa&ion of ſaving him, and even of re-eſtabliſhing
his health, Much was ſaid at the time of the barbarity of the
Arabs, who notwithſtanding killed no one: at preſent we may
venture to blame the imprudence of the Europeans, who con—
ducted themſelves throvghout the whole affair like madmen.

EGYPT AND '8YRIA, 143

giv en the laſt blow to the Engliſh: and ſince that
period there has not appeared i in either of theſe towns
2 ſingle factor of that nation.
The principal articles of the French rae in Egyß t
conſiſt, as throughout the Levant, in light cloths of
banguedoc, called firſt Londrins, and fecond Zondriur.
They fel annually, upon an average, between mine
hundred and a thouſand. bales. The profit is from
thirty-five to forty per cent, but their drawing and
re-drawing cauſing a loſs of from twenty to we:
five, the net produce is only fifteen per cent. The
| other articles of importation are iron, lead, groceries;
cochineal, fome laces, and Lyons ſtuffs, various ar-
ticles of mercery, and dahlers and ſequins.

In exchange they take coffee of Arabia, Africati

gums, clumſy cottons, manufactured at Manouf, and
which are re-ſhipped to the French Weſt. Indies, un-
tanned hides, ſafranum, ſal ammoniac, and fict“.
Theſe articles rarely balance the exports, and the
merchant is at a loſs for his returns, not however
from a want of a variety of productions, as Egypt
furniſhes corn, rice, doura, millet, ſeſamum, cotton,

flax, ſenna, caſſia, ſugar-canes, nitre, natrum, fal
ammoniac, honey, and wax; filks alſo and wine

We be produced: but induſtry and exertion are

So preat was the diſcord a among them, and they had carried their

negligence ſo far, as not to have 2 fingle piſtol fit for uſe. All

their arms were at the bottom of their cheſts. Beſides, it ap-
pears that the Arabs did not act merely from their uſual motives;
well in formed perſons alert that the affair was concerted at

Conſtantinople, by the Engliſh Eaft-India Company's agents, who

law, with a jealous eye, individuals entering into competition
with them for the traffic of Bengal; and what has paſſed ig the

courle of the enquiries into this event, has proved the truth of
the aſſertion.

* The exportation of corn 18 prohibited, and Pococke remark-

ed in 757 that TI meature had been detrimental | to agricul-

ITY — mn, 5 — —
N N 6 * 8 7% wv — C4. —— ü 42 * + ii - : — ”
7 ASS 5 i — i wa, = CO” p< rr 2 :
r r BEI os os oe . — f fł . Onan IE: _ 4 — % -
— — — —
2 1 x 3 - — — —

—
TI

WE PL 7
— —

— ů —
. ³˙ A re WI
8 r —2

OT IE
*

e

I 44 þ

wanting, becauſe the cultivator would not be per-

wor

5 Dias

- 2 p GE Es on IR I I ab” 245
3372222. vo ASE oro ont F290; coor SS: wr xy

uneaſineſs.

TRAVELS IN

mitted to enjoy the fruits of his labour.
The importation of the French is eſtimated, com.
munibus annis, at three millions of livres (a hundred
and twenty-five. thouſand pounds). France main-
tained a Conſul at Cairo till 1777, when he was
withdrawn on account of the expenſe.
transferred to Alexandria, and the merchants, who
ſuffered him to go without demanding an indemnity,

remained at . Cairo at the peril of their lives and for.
tunes. Their ſituation, which has not changed, is

nearly ſimilar to that of the Dutch at Nangazaki;

that is to ſay, ſhut up in a confined place, they live

among themſelves, with ſcarcely any external com-
ab te they even dread it, and go as little out

oſſible, to 2 avoid the inſults of the common peo-
ao who hate the very name of the Franks, and
the inſolence of the Mamlouks, who force them to
diſmount from their aſſes in the middle of the ſtreets,
In this kind of habitual impriſonment, they tremble
every inſtant,
entirely to ſhut themſelves up in their houſes, or ſome
revolt expoſe their quarter to be plundered; left

the chief of ſome party ſhould make a pecuniary de-
mand“, or the Beys compel them to furniſh them

with what they want, which is always attended with

no little danger.

Nor do their mercantile affairs cauſe them leſs
Obliged to ſell on credit, they are rarely
paid at the ſtipulated time. There are no regula-
tions even for bills of exchange, no recourſe can be
had to juſtice, becauſe juſtice there is always worſe
than bankruptcy. Every thing depends on conſci-

ence, and that conſcience has been . "uy

1 They have 8 that theſe extortions amount, annu-
ally, on an average, to ſixty-three thouſand livres (two thou -

ſend fix hunared and Rn ve pounds. )

| Pa)
| wa
relf
tha
out
| gre:
are
thin
it i.
W 0ta
ty
1 {ons
able
| were
| 178:
| pert:
of 8
giver
imme

He was

leſt the plague ſhould oblige them

its

de]

coun
treats
thing

FE
comn

never AND SY. wo

its influence for ſome time ' paſt. Payme "is 18
delayed for whole years; frequently they receive no

payment at all, and great deductions are almoſt al-

ways made. The Chriſtians, who are principal cor-
reſpondents, are, in this reſpect, more faithleſs even
than the Turks; and it is remarkable that, through-
out the empire, the character of the Chrittiang is
| greatly inferior to that of the Muſſulmen; they

] thing paſs through ſuch hands. Add to this, that

| it is impoſſible ever to realize their capital; and to
| obtain an outſtanding debt they are ander a neceſ-

E were nine French mercantile houſes at Cairo; in
1785, they were reduced to three, and ſhortly

[ of Syria, ſettled fome time ago at Leghorn, have
given another fatal blow to this ſettlement, by the

T@ countrymen ; and the Grand Duke of Tuſcany, who
F ireats them like his other ſubjects, contributes every

commerce.

| C HAP. XVI

Of the hy 7 Cairo

much, is ſo celebrated a city that it well rms A
ſtill more particular deſcription. This capital does
not, in the country, bear the name of E!-Xahera,

are reduced however, to the neceſſity of letting every

| ity of giving ſtill greater credit. For all theſe rea-
ſons, Cairo is the moſt precarious and molt diſagree-
able factory of the Levant. Fifteen years ago, there

perhaps there will not remain one. The Chriſtians
immediate correſpondence they carry on with their

ching in his Power towards the eee of their

8 Cure. of which I have ini faid fo

given It by its Z0under ; ; the Arabs know it only by

3
14
t
C. -2
4 \
;

146 | TRAVELS IN

that of Maſr, which has no known ſignification, but

which feems to have been the ancient eaſtern name of |
the Lower Egypt“.

This city lands on the enftery bank of the Nile
at the diſtance of a quarter of a league from the ri.
ver, which deprives it of a great advantage; for the
toſs of which the canal, which comes up to it, can.
hot compenſate, ſince it contains no running ee
Weng in the time of the inundation.1

When we hear of Grand Cairo, we are led to ima.

gine that it muſt be a capital, at leaſt, like thoſe o
Furope; but if we reflect that, even amongſt: our.

lives, towns have only begun to be rendered con-
venient and elegant within theſe hundred years, ve
Hall eaſily believe that, in a country where nothing
has been improved ſince the tenth century, they mul
partake of the common barbariſm; and, indeed, we
{ball find that Cairo contains none of thoſe public or
private edifices, thoſe regular ſquares, or well-bull
[treets, in which the architect diſplays his genius.
Its environs are full of hills of duſt formed by the

rubbuſh which is accumulating every day+, while the

multitude of tombs, and the ſtench of common ſev:
ers, are at once offenſive to the ſmell and the fight.
Within the walls, the ſtreets are winding and narrow

and as they are not paved, the crowds of men, ca.

mels, aſſes, and dogs, which preſs againſt each other,
raiſe a very diſagteeable duſt ; individuals often wate!
their doors, and to this duſt ſucceeds mud and peſtite-

Tous exhalations. Contrary to the general cuſtom o

* This name of Mayr has the fame conſonants with that Cl
M:fr-aim, uſed by the Hebrews ; which, on account of its pl
ral form, ſeems properly to Jenots the 1 of the Delta
while thoſe of Thebais are called Beni Rous, or . of
Kous.

1 Sultan Fel Bad cis bclats: to carry 75 to 1 fel
but this regulation has been 227 age, to divert the money 10

ther purpoſes.

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 147

the ealt, the houſes have two and three ſtories, over
which is a terrace of ſtone or tiles; in general they

ee of earth and bricks badly burnt ; the reſt are .

{oft ſtone, of a fine grain, procured from the neigh-
bouring Mount Mokattam. All theſe houſes have
the air of priſons, tor they have no light from the
ſtreet ; as It is extremely dangerous to have many
windows in ſuch a country: they even take the pre-
caution to make the entering door very low. The
rooms within are ill contrived. Among the great,
1 however, are to be found a few ornaments and con-

veniences, their vaſt halls, eſpecially, in which water

ſpouts up into marble baſons, are peculiarly well
{ adapted to the climate. The paved floor, inlaid with
marble and coloured earthen ware, is covered with
mats and mattreffes, and over all is ſpread a rich car-
pet, on which they ſit croſs-legged. Around the
wall is a ſort of ſofa, with cufhions, to ſupport the
back and elbows ; and above, at the height of ſeven

or eight feet, a range of ſhelves, decked. out with
China and Japaneſe porcelain, The walls, naked in

other reſpects, are chequered with ſentences extracted
irom the Koran, and painted foliage and flowers,
with which alſo the porticos of the Beys are covered

the windows have neither glaſs, nor moving aſhes,
but only an open lattice work, which frequently coſts
more than our glazing. The light enters from the
inner courts, from whence the ſycamores reflect a ver-

dure plealing to the eye. An opening to the north,

or at the top of the ceiling, admits a retreſhing breeze,
white, by a whimfical contradiction, they wrap them-

lelves up in warm woollen cloths. and furs. The

rich pretend by this means to eſcape diſeaſes ;| bur
the common people, with their blue ſhirts and hard

mats, are lels liable to take cold, and enjoy better

health.

1

1 ER ITE

_— CO

- — = ——
MESS <> 2 — «
: 4 1 a * v 4 q
4 bt 4 — — ——
— —— no * rr - | £55 w 9 4
— — 3 — pp a —— ˙ — oo r * - — +4 _ a - — Pay 8 1 '
p = . 4 I r — * | oy 2
"AE hes” —_— — I, 5 = I _— —
* N. — N : © : = : — 4 * 2 9
e n re V kg * . ui n — _ % - » - *
— * 2 75 20 4
_ * A... vv Lon q vi TE) $44 — 9 - * i o —— a =
4 Cai) ** * 4 - 2 — Pl . 8 Re +
< — 1 4 . \ =.

223 Os

ner wes; Re « "a; La ˖˙* *»
GGW 2
. —C £
3 _ —
9
EW

Che. at: 3

=
— 1 a5 — —— *
_ — MIX TEC TIES. - PILE 0 wy - *.
1 * 8 1 99 2 SE * n
hs — 7 » þ *

W *

2 ke of

148 TRAVELS IN
r 03 0
O the Population of Cairo and Egypt. I th

The population of Cairo has frequently been a
ſobje& of difpute. If we may credit the head officer
of the cuſtoms, Anthony Faraoun, cited by Baron le
'$ De Tort, it approaches ſeven hundred thouſand ſouls, in|
44 including Boulak, a port and ſuburb detached from ev
*& the city; but all calculations of the number of
We inhabitants in Turkey are arbitrary, as no regiſters
| are kept of births, deaths, or marriages. The Ma.
hometans have even ſuperſtitious prejudices againſt
numbering their people. The Chriſtians may indeed
be eſtimated by means of their tickets of capitation“.
All we know with certainty is, that according to
. the plan of M. Niebuhr, taken in 1761, Cairo is
three leagues in circumference, which is about the
ſame with Paris, by the line of the Boulevards.
„ Within this ſpace is compriſed a number of gardens,
47 courts, vacant grounds and ruins. Now, if Paris,
WY within the Boulevards, does not contain above ſeven
hundred thouſand inhabitants, though the houſes
are five ſtories high, it is difficult to conceive that
Cairo, where they are only two ſtories, can contain
more than two hundred and fifty thouſand. It 3
equally impracticable to form a juſt eſtimate of the
population of all Egypt. Nevertheleſs, as it is known
that the number of towns and villages does not ex-
ceed two thouſand three hundred+, and the number

N Wy 8

TF
* CE 5 r 2

aa cndt, 5 . :

. UAE IE TA 3

: . —— _ — — - —
2 ö — : —
22 3 RI
a» Re 6" & . D 8 Ve;
_ — — — 2

caſio
this x
tians.

2
we u

—

— A xe: 2 — e — 3
5 —— 5 N
Nr E —
FAG 5 * 7 N + 4 . Y — wood —

.
— 2 2
3 =,

TI A
— 8 IS
: > c

2 2
— 22 — —

* Called karadj ; & is here the Spaniſh jota. Eee
+ Danville had ſeen two liſts of villages in Egypt; one,
which is of the laſt century, gives two thouſand {ix hundred
and ninety-fix towns and villages; the other, of the middle of
the preſent century, two thouſand four hundred and ninety-hve,
nine hundred and fifty-ſeven of which are in the Said, and one "Md
thouſand four hundred and thirty-nine in the Delta: that I have BF Petr n
given is of 178g. : N or ͤũ ùᷣ

3

— —
* Pg — — — =
2 &= FEES EET a I
2 R 222 A

=
—_ » — * =
n

r —

2 —
r
n

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 149

of -ohabitants in each of them, one with another,

including Cairo itfelf, is not more than a thouſand,
the total cannot be more than two millions three

hundred thouſand. The cultivable lands, according
0 Danville, conſiſt of two thouſand, one hundred
ſquare leagues, whence there reſults, for each ſquare
league, one thouſand one hundred and forty-two

inhabitants. This number, which is greater than
even that of France, may lead us to imagine that
Egypt is not ſo depopulated as it has been repreſen-
ted; but if we obſerve that the lands never lie fal-
I low: but are continually productive, it muſt be
followed that its population is very little in compari-
| ſon of what it has been, and of what it is capable ot
becoming.

Among the fingularities which appear moſt extra-
ordinary to a ſtranger at Cairo, may be mentioned
the great number of ugly dogs which roam about the
W {ireets, and the kites which ſkim over the houſes,

with frequent and doleful cries. The Muſſulmen kill
neither of theſe, though they are equally held to be
unclean“; on the contrary, they often throw them
the fragments of their tables; and devotees even en-
dow charitable foundations of bread and water for
the dogs. Theſe animals have beſides the reſource of
the common ſewers, which, however, does not pre-
vent them from ſuffering by hunger and thirſt; but
it is very aſtoniſhing that theſe extremities never oc-
caſion madneſs. Proſper Alpinus has already made
this remark in his treatiſe on the Phyſic of the Egyp-
tians. Canine madneſs is equally unknown in Syria;
the name of the malady, however, is to be found in
the Arabic language, and is not borrowed from any
foreign tongue. |

* The turtle-doves, which are e numerous, build
their neſts 1 in the houſes ; and even the children do not touch
them. TEE |

1

— ; l . b CET — > — — 2505 Bp; - _ N
— ET - - — 2 IL" RE 2 — . _ — — ee | ot ſx — A — * 8 : 2 Re — e —
— - - br Fe es — — eB es RR I EBT c — . 5 2. —— — — The ICT 2 I Eo. a ET EE —-„—-—— — - L
b 4 — 7 T 2 — +>. ———— — KT. he < — — . —— onmn—rdp = an Soo, — 2 — — = 1 3 C A 0 2 = a> a =S — — > - - FY
— — „ EB + 7 5 GAS 4 ” . —— 7 * Þ = - — 2 — 1 — — — =; 2 - . _ aL TE, — I IF E = 1 WW. was 2 — — 9
2 — \ — p S re py k == 4 - S232 oo opp or ne = PERS 1E Et . 223 : — 72 * 21
— X. * 2 1 GE NE —ů — ——- . a " N — : * 7 — Y > 2 6 —— - 5 © LA — TER —
- 5 = _ — — — = N < 2 —— —— = * — - — - 5 Fe CET Toon cr ” Ia * — —5 — — be
8 — os 1 2 1 . — — "2 = ” - . 922 : = INCA -

* 2 * — 2
N — . *

] Hls malady, of which ſo much has been ſaid,

Whoſe ſight is either loſt or impaired, and which is

| have had their eyes red, purulent, or blemiſhed.

It woas decreed, ſays the Muſſulman: praiſe be to God:

name. This reſignation is undoubtedly the beſt re-

among us have written on this diſtemper, but, from
not being acquainted with all the circumſtances

TRAVELS IN
CHAP. XVII.

Of the diſcaſes of Egypt.

6 „ 5 .

* g ff i 8

1 Pa. *

\ . : *
8 | A :
00 T 11.
F E * 89 8 8 1
4 ' = 4

9

—

1

Of Blindneſs

is not the only remarkable one in Egypt; there are
ſeveral which equally deſer ve our notice.

Yet nothing can appear more extraordinary to 2
ſtranger than the prodigious number of perſons

ſo great, that out of a hundred perſons I have met
while walking the ſtreets of Cairo, twenty have been
quite blind, ten wanting an eye, and twenty others

Almoſt every one wears a fillet, a token of an ap-
proaching or convaleſcant ophthalmy ; ; but nothing
aftoniſhed me more than the indifference and apathy
with which they ſupport ſo dreadful a misfortune.

God has willed it, ſays the Chriſtian, bleed be bis

ſource when the evil has happened; but, as it 5
vents an inquiry into the cauſe of the diſorder, i
precludes the diſcovery of its cure. Some phyficians

could not treat it with ſufficient accuracy. I ſhall
therefore add a few obſervations, which may aſh

others in future enquiries. ,
1{t. Defluxions on the eyes are not ea to .
Egypt; they are alſo frequent in Syria, with this dil.
Terence, that they are there leſs general; and it i! : f

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 151

e that the inhabitants of the ſea-coaſt alone
are ſubjeck to them.

2d. In the city of Cairo, which is 8 full of
filth, theſe diſorders are more prevalent than in all

the reſt of Egypt“. The common people are more
liable to them than perſans in eaſy circumſtances, alc

981

the natives more than foreigners. The Mamloüks

are rarely attacked by them; and the peaſants of the
Delta, are more ſubject to them than the Bedouin
Arads.

zd. Theſe defluxions wk at no certain ſ-aſon,
notwithſtanding what is faid by Proſper Alpinus.

They are an endemial diſorder, common to every

month of the year, and to every age.

In reaſoning from thele principles, it ſeems to me

= that we caanot admit the ſoutherly winds as a prin-

cipal cauſe, ſince, in that caſe, this complaint would

be peculiar to the month of April, and the Bedouins
be effected with it like the peaſants; nor can we al-
ribe it to any ſubtle duſt with which the air is filled,
becanſ® the peaſants are mere expoſed to this than the

| inhabitants of towns; the cuſtom of ſleeping on the

terraces has more the appearance of reality; but this
caule is neither confined to this country, nor is it ade-
gquate to the effects aſcribed to it; for in countries re-

mote from the ſea, as the valley of Balbek, the Diar-
bekar, the plains of Hauran, and the mountains, the
inhabitants fleep allo on their terraces, and yet their
ſight is not injured. I, therefore, at Cairo, through-

out the Delta, and on the ccaſt of Syria, it is dan-

gerous to ſleep in the open air, this air muſt acquire
ſome noxious quality from the vicinity of the ſea: and
this quality doubtlels i is moiſture combined with heat.

= ir molt 5 obſerved, howe ver, that the blind people of

the villages come and reſide f in the moſque of flowers, Were they
have a fort of hoſpital. _

T See De Toti! 5 Memo: it's, part IV. 1

.
— » — — 2 eh - ” — —
720 EY? * a - 4 N
** — ha] *. 4 —
— * 1 — — o — * N
4 ra TI — 2 > es —

E ²˙˙A ² ͤ K EY ORR oor oe 0
2 G = *
j —

„
SY

3 _ x n r 99
- 3 n 1 a — Mee
. —— .H.
* Ir .
A. F 2
2 0 WP
hoy PL. * * : .

- * 25 be

— — —
* WD. —_
* 4 2 9 — 22 — — ny
— — 7 — — - K by
— 2 — 5 — r
1 * 1 7 3 323 2
_ " = — — — 1 Y hs
SB — — — b
- — eee — J "54G. >a > 4 "— 0k

FR —
——— 1 *
4 —  ——_—

. TRAVELS IN

which then becomes a firſt principle of theſe diſorders,

The ſaline quality of the air, ſo remarkable in the
Delta, contributes {till farther to this, by the irrita-

tion and itching it occaſions in the eyes, as J have

myſelf experienced.

The uſual diet of the Egyptians appears likewiſe to

be a powerful cauſe. The cheeſe, ſour milk, honey,

confection of grapes, green fruits, and raw vegeta.
bles, which are the ordinary food of the people, pro-
duce in the ſtomach a diſorder, which phyſicians have

obſerved to effect the ſight; the raw onions, eſpe.
cially, which they devour in great quantities, have a

peculiar heating quality, as the monks of Syria made

me remark on myſelf. Bodies thus nouriſhed, abound

in corrupted humours, which are conſtantly endea-
Diverted from the ordinary
channels, by habitual perſpiration, they fly to the ex-
terior parts, and fix themſelves where they find the
therefore naturally attack the

head, becauſe the Egyptians, by ſhaving it once a

vouring a diſcharge.

leaſt reſiſtance. They

week, and covering it with a prodigioufly hot head-

dreſs, principally attract to that the perſpiration ; and

if the head receives ever ſo ſlight an impreſſion of
cold, on being uncovered, this perſpiration is ſuppreſ-
Ted, and falls upon the teeth, or ſtill more readily

on the eves, as being the rendereſt part. On every
freſh cold this organ is weakened, and at length finally

deſtroyed.
ted by generation, becomes a freſh cauſe of malady;

and hence the natives are more expoſed to it than
It will appear more probable that the ex-

{trangers.
ceſſive perſpiration of the head is a principal cauſe,

when we refle& that the ancient Egyptians, who went
bare headed, are not mentioned by phyſicians as be-
ing ſo much allicted with ophthalmies* z and that the

* Hiſtory, however,
Q: ed blind.

A diſpoſition to this diſorder, tranſmit-

informs vs that ſeveral of the Pharaohs

.
.
18
5M
8
4
FP.
—
2 »4A
PL.
.
2X
0%
3
"8
—
pr
$8
$
4
x2
—
7
ij
E..
by
TX

©, % 3

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 1

Arabs of the deſert, who cover it very little, eſpeci-
ally when young, are equally exempt from them.

Ser. II.

|...

f the mal Per. a

Blindneſs i in Egypt! is in many inſtances occaſioned
by the conſequences of the ſmall pox. This diſorder,
which is very fatal in that country, is not treated
after a good method ; during the three firſt days,
debs, or confection of grapes, honey, and ſugar, are ad-

miniſtered to the ſick, and, after the ſeventh, they are
allowed milk, meat, And lalt-fiſn, as if they were in

full health; at the period of ſuppuration, they are
never purged, and they particularly avoid waſhing
their eyes, though they are full of matter, and their

eye-lids cloſed by the grutinous matter; this opera-

E tion they never perform till after forty days, and,

in that time, the pus, by irritating the ball, has pro-
duced an imflamation which affects the whole eye.
Not that inoculation is unknown among them, but
they make little uſe of it. Nor is it more practi-
5 by the Syrians and the inhabitants of Anatolia,
ho have long been acquainted with it“. 2
"This improper regimen is certainly far more per-
nicious than the climate, which is by no means un-

| healthy4., To unwholeſome food, eſpecially, mult
| ve attribute both the deformity of the beggars, and
| the miſerable appearance of the children at Cairo,

which are no where to be met with ſo miſhapen
and wretched. Their hollow eyes, their pale and

8 They for the operation by inſerting a thread into the
fleſh, or by making the patient inhale, or ſwallow, the powder
of tried puſtules. |

| + The Mamlouks are a proof of this, who, from wholeſome
mw __ a proper regimen, enjoy the wry robuſt ſtats of
| heal!

154

TRAVELS IN

puffed faces, ſwollen bellies, meagre extremities, and
yellow ſkins, make them always ſeem as if they had
not long to live. 'Their ignorant mothers pretend

that this is the effect of the evil eye of ſome envious

perſon, which has bewitched them ; and this ancient
prejudice“ is {till general in Turkey ; but the real
caule is the badneſs of their food. In ſpite of the
 aliſmans, therefore, an incredible number of them

periſh, nor is any city more fatal to the population

of the neighbouring country than Grand Cairo.
Another very general diſtemper at Cairo, is that

which the vulgar there call the blefed evil, and

which we alſo improperly term the Neapolitan diſor-
der : one half of Cairo is infected with it. The
greatelt part of the inhabitants believe it preceed
from right, from witchcraft, or from wncleanlineſs,
Some of them ſuſpect the real cauſe; but as that 1s
connected with a ſubject on which they are remarka-
bly reſerved, they chuſe not to mention it. This
blefed evil is very difficult to cure; mercury, unde!
whatever form adminiſtered, generally fails; Tudo-
rific vegetables ſucceed better, without being however
infallible; happily, the virus is not very active, on
account of the great natural and artificial perſpiration.

We ſee there, as in Spain, old men carrying this dil

rder about them to the age of eighty. But its effec
are fatal to children born with the infection. The dan-
get is imminent for ſuch as carry it into a cold coun
try; for it there never fails to make a rapid progrel,
and ſhews itfelf always more inviterate from thi
tranifplantation, In Syria, at Damaſcus, and in the
mountains, it is the more dangerous, as the winter

* Neſcrs quis teneros oculus ili faſcinat agnos. Virgil.

+ We often ſee, in Egypt, little pieces of red ſtuff, o.
branches of coral, and coloured glaſs, hanging on the faces 0
children, and even of grown perlens. Thele are ſuppoled, l
their colour and motion, to fix the firſt glance of the envioi
For it is that they ſay, which frtkes, Es

EGYPT AND SYRIA. I55

is very ſevere there: when negleddicd; it terminates.

in all its well known ſymptoms, as I myſelf witneſſed
in two inſtänces.

There is a troubleſome ap peculiar to the
climate of Egypt, which is a cutaneous eruption that
returns every year. Towards the end of June, or
the beginning of July, the body is covered with red
bots and pimples, the ſmarting of which 1s very

roubleſome. Several phyſicians, perceiving that

this eruption regularly happened at the time of the

new waters, have been of opinion, that it was occa-
ſioned by the falts with which they ſuppoſed theſe

waters impregnated ; but the exiſtence of theſe ſalts

is not proved, and a more ſimple reaſon may be
aſſigned. I have already faid, that the waters of
the Nile become corrupted, towards the end of April,
in the bed of the river, and, when drank, produce

humours of a malignant quality. When the new
water arrives, it occaſions a ſort of fermentation in

the blood, the  refalt of which is to ſeparate the

vicious humours, and expel them towards the ikin,

whither they are invited by the perſpiration. It is,
in its effect, a real purgative depuration, and is al-
ways ſalutary.

Another diſeaſe, but too common at Cairo, is a

ſwelling of the teftacles, which frequently turns to

an enormous hydrocele. It is obſerved to attack,
principally, the Greeks and Copts, and hence ariſes
the ſuſpicion that is occaſioned by the great quantity
| of oil which they make uſe of two-thirds of the year.

it is conjectured, alſo, that the hot-baths contribute

to it, the immoderate uſe of which produces other
effects not leſs injurious to the health“. I ſhall re-

* The Egyptians, and the Turks in general, have a fondneſs
ior the ftove-baths, difficult to account for in a country ſo hot as
tneirs: but this appears to me to ariſe from more prejudice than
tne pleature they find in them. The law of the Koran, which

enjoins men 2 complete ablution after the conjugal act, is of it-

8

—_

e
—
n

Ne PW I ?
n 1 — m 3 to 19m apts opts — —— wg 6 *
— K — Ae regen „4 — 2 * — — — . " _
* — 2 — - a — 4

1 *
: 1
2
— oct 3 ů *
- - ——
DF - 3 _ z; 8 *
8 * s * : EL IS Sy i 8 ; =
3 4 5 i. uid — I 5 IEA » v4 2027) ©. 32 2

n
ene

. 44m Hl RY" 3 2 a
e „ 2 _ hes G —
« e A ¶ nan 2
— r : rag
— . e —— 3 . .
I nas _— OS. LICS rr * 8

— —
= —

—

- — 7 = ID E — 8 7 — — Fr oo ST — 7 8 q * —
5 — = S - = 3 * 3 * * T 1 : 2 c 9 — — * x —— -- = + : 2 =
2 OG I. - pgs = — 3 2 3; — — - 1 ——— 7 — 2 ry  — = « ** 1 * * S 2 — i 7 ESE 2 4 — oy BS WIT — Hons ESR ER > =
6 or ny oe I — — -F*. wy 24 < 32 > Es rn ea. A os 12 * 2 3 I —— 8 — . — SER WE
Y : - — - _— Fi - ” en v = PL, + 5 2 L Jo nu DI Et 7 = Ie _— —
* R 4 6.4 - 0 * 2 « yy F, — *

3
ee
——_— 7

FO Rn *
- _—

ED nn — Es De
— - ox er Se 2

—

— - _— = — — — . == = — = .
— —— — — — - —— meds" 5, — = = <=
Tae ". — c —ũJ LE: PEI — FEES 2
OE _ 2 = TE. WOE —— 3 3-3, 5 2 —
—— ena - . - ——— I — — 22 —— ee eg > — LO IC CE —
oy 9 == F ; : 4 2. 7 :
— 2 — 4 — PAR - a, "Ea U—U— ͤ
XING ent: Eno ot 27 RT o Nee I, AMIE og Og
ESSE —— IRE Taz” c
- r cer 55 7

—
— Wb —-— — - — TH — a
R anon * * — - Job, SDS" - — — 8 Ae ie Sas.
: TTT TT. =o .
k —

6 TRAVELS IN

mark on this occaſion, thatin Syria, as well as in Egypt,
conſtant experience has proved that brandy diſtilled

from common figs, or from the fruit of the ſycamore
tree, as well as that extracted from dates, and the

fruit of the nopal, has a moſt immediate effect on
the teſticles, which it renders hard and painful the

third or fourth day after it has been uſed as drink;

and if the uſe of it be not diſcontinued, the diforder

degenerates into a confirmed hydrocele. -
Brandy made from dried raifins has not the ſame
bad effect; it is always mixed with anniſeeds, and
is very ſtrong, being diſtilled even three times. The
Chriſtians of Syria, and the Copts of Egypt, make
great uſe of it; the latter, eſpecially, drink whole
bottles of it at their ſupper: I imagined this an ex-
aggeration, but I have myſelf had occular proofs of its
truth, though nothing could equal my aſtoniſhment

that ſuch exceſſes do not produce inſtant death, or,

at leaſt, every ſymptom of the moſt inſenſible drunk:
ennels.

ſelf a very powerful motive; and the vanity they attach to its
execution is another not leſs efficacious : as for the women they
have other motives; Firſt, the bath 1s the only place in which
they can make a parade of their luxury, and regale themſelves
with melons, fruits; paſtry, and other delicacies. Secondly,
they believe, as Proſper Alpinus has obſerved, that the bath
gives them that embonpoint which paſſes for beauty. With re-
ſpect to ſtrangers, their opinions differ according to their taſtes,
Many merchants of Cairo are pleaſed with the baths, others have
found them diſagrecable. For my part, I found the bath pre-
duce in me a vertigo, and trembling at the knees, which laſted
two days. I confels it is very extraordinary that a water really
ſcalding, and a profule ſweat, forced out by the convulſions of
the lungs, as well as by the heat, {hould be conſidered as giving lo
much pleaſure ; nor do 1 envy the Turks either their opium, or
their ſtoves, or their too complaiſant Maffers ! | 1

(Theſe Mafſers are boys who knead the fleſh, crack all the
joints, ſcrape off the {curk, eradicate the ſuperfluous hairs,
rub the ＋ gently, and ate ſaid to be labſervient to the plea-
lures of the batker, F.),

.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. Ws

The ſpring, which in Egypt is the ſummer of our
climates, brings with it malignant fevers, which ſoon

arrive at a criſis. A French phyſician, who has had
opportunities to obſerve a great number of them, has

remarked, that the bark, given in the intermiſſions,

in doſes of two or three ounces, has frequently ſaved.
the patient at the laſt extremity“. As ſoon as the

diſorder appears, the patient l be rigorouſſy re-
ſtricted to a vegetable acid regimen; meat is prohi-

bited, fiſh likewiſe, and above all, eggs; the latter
are a fort. of poiſon in Egypt. In this country, as

in Syria, experience proves that bleeding is always
more injurious than beneficial, even in caſes where
it appears to be moſt neceſſary : the reaſon of which

zs, that bodies nouriſhed with unwholeſome aliments,
flach as green fruits, raw vegetables, cheeſe and olives,
have, in fact, but little blood, and a great quantity
ok humours ; their habit is generally bilious, as ap-
pears from their eyes and their black eye-brows, their

brown complexion, and meagre make. Their habi-
tual malady is the cholic; almoſt all of them com-
plain of a ſourneſs in the throat, and an acid nauſea;

emetics and cream of tartar are therefore very gene ·
rally ſuc cceſsful.

The malignant fevers become ſometimes epidemic,

| in which caſe they are eaſily miſtaken for the plague,
| of which! ſhall next | ſpeak.

S 0. Il.
Of the Plague:

Some perſons kave attempted to eſtabliſh an opini-

[on that the plague is of Egyptian origin; but this ſup-
[pobition, tounded on vague prejudices, ſeems to be

* The next day he always adminiſters a clyſter to > expel the

| ark, :

-— © 8
8

edu te I P_ 2
oy 2 r T> 2. .
2 ; 8 2
r
TE Ke CT WIT
>= . 3 —
- 2 * — - —
£2088 * — *
© — 5
. +” - 3 *
y 2 0
= 1 -
* 3

1

Tx
*
Ct 8
—
/ ;
; \
11
1
bo
. F :
1 * 3
i Is =
; 5 \
1 *
4
by F
q 8
F 2
3. I *
4 j J
5 T's
l «79
. * *
: 8
. 1
1
3 *
1983
$+,, 4308.
4 i * .
*
4 $4
1 .
d „
7 h
LET 4
uy : a
1
P $44 ,
* 5 N
i} 1 R
H E
b ö. UM
1 .
1 :
43 11
* 4
19%.
* .
2 5
3
f
& 1 |
4 ; 4
CE d
4 2 Pp %
e
, 4 E ;
1
js :
4 4 '
* * n
Ca
5 I
4. . 2
1
SY y
by .
- 5
5
1 4 N
u
2 0
7 o
3 2,
77 7
Fu 1 =
"08. 24
1
F Io b
5
+ * #
TIS 4
1
1 3
« £ „ <
X-& 4 3-7 _ ...
15 1 2
. .
od 8B
(3 3 : "4
© ..
* * 4
? > fx : 7
— - $1 F 1 I
- 8 : : 9 .
1 Fe,
* - £5 *
1 1
+ == A *
: » A : 2
8 58
. PS -
1 5 2
4 ? A ny * =
, =
2. N
5 Re
EIS: 1
2. *.
7 1 #1
£4. 1
11 5 * ,
F 7 * 1 — 2
( + of
Ld 4
- 4 vn
$343 l *
3 1
*
1 1
1 2
3 &
1 1 Wo -
2 33
=
, WG.
. 1. 18
3 1.
: 8 "=
1 JT; 2 g
1 - 5
| * *
e
Ft 7 E. £4
F, va YA
-® 1 3 -
TP?
3 IE:
. : vi
. *
23 3
I: 7 1
SE 7
: + 4
« . an
5 %8 - = 4
3 *
1
. "Uo
i 3 TX : 5 /
4 2 . 2
þ "2, N
3 '
* 4 4
19 5
& 45 To ©”
1
1 1
J 5 1 5
8 ts f
7 Eq 85
47 5a + >X4
1248 $54
* *%
N, 9
N Ib!
:4* TH Ws. -
1 go» 2 ” ? - |
92 4} x
f 7 5 1
. Ss
5 * %
* 5 4 N
3 .
A -
2 (xl
Y :
$

7»

rav

diſproved by facts. The European merchants who
have been ſettled tor many years at Alexandria, con-
cur with the Egyptians in declaring that the plague
never proceeds from the interior of the country“,

but firſt makes its appearance, on the coaſt, at Alex-
andria; from Alexandria it paftes to Roſetta, from

Roſetta to Cairo, from Cairo to Damietta, and through
the reſt of the Delta. They further obſerve, that it
1s invariably preceded by the arrival of ſome veſſel
coming from Smyrna or Conſtantinople : and that if
the plague has been violent in one of thefe cities dur-
ng the ſummer, the danger is the greater for them-
ſelves the following winter. It appears certain, that
it really originates from Conſtantinople, where it is
perpetuated by the abſurd negligence of the Turks:
this is carried fo far that they publicly fell the effect;
of perſons dead of that diſorder. The ſhips which
go to Alexandria never fail to carry furs and woollen
cloths purchaſed on thefe occaſions, which they ex-
poſe to fail in the Bazar of the city, and thereby
ſpread the wege Mr The Greeks who carry on this
commerce are almoſt always the firſt victims. By
degrees the diſorder reaches Roſetta, and at length

Cairo, following the uſual road of the merchandize.

Afton as it is confirmed, the European merchants
ſhut themſelves and their domeſtics up in their Kaus,
and have no further external communication with the
city. Their proviſions, depoſited at the pate of the
Kan, are received there by the porter, who takes
them up with iron tongs, and plunges them into?
barrel of water provided for this purpoſe. If it
neceſſary to ſpeak to any one, they always keep a
ſuch a diſtance as to prevent touching with their

* 3 Aipimus a Venetian phyſician, who wrote in 15915
ſays allo, that the plague. is not of Egyptian origin; that it 1
brought from Greece, Svriz, and Barbary : that the heats dei
troy it, c. See Medicina Exyptiorum, p. 28.

- "a

' EGYPT AND SYRIA, 1

; other, or breathing on one another; : by theſe means
hey preſerve themſelves from this dreadful calamity,
anlels by ſome accidental neglect of theſe precau-
tions. Some years ago, a cat which paſſed by one
of the terraces into the dweliing of our merchants at
Cairo, conveyed the Plague to two of them, one ot
whom died. 7
It will eaſily be imagined what a tireſome ſtate of

1 impriſonment. this muff be: it continues for chree or

four months, during which time they have no other
amuſement than walking i in the Evening, on the ter-
races, Or playing at cards.

The plague affords ſeveral very remarkable varie-
ties. At Conſtantinople it prevails during the ſum-
mer, and is greatly weakened, or entirely ceaſes,
during the winter. In Egypt, on the contrary, it is
moſt violent in winter, and infallibly ends in the

month of June. This apparent contrariety may be
explained on the ſame principle. The winter deſ-

troys the plague at Conſtantinople, becauſe the cold

there is very levere, and the ſummer revives it, be-
cauſe the heat is very humid, on account of the ſeas,
foreſts, and adjacent mountains. In Egypt, the win-
ter nouriſhes the plague, becauſe it is mild and hu-
mid; but the ſummer deſtroys it, becauſe it is hot

and dry. It ſeems to act on it as on fleſh meat, which

it does not ſuffer to corrupt. Heat is not prejudicial,

but as it is combined with humidity.* Egypt is af-

ficked with the plague every fourth or fifth year, and
the ravages it cauſes would depopulate the country,
were it not for a great number of ſtrangers who re-

fort thither from all parts of the empire, and in a

great meaſure repair 1ts loſſes.

*. At. Cane it is ohlorved, that the water-carriers, continually
wet wich freſh. water they carry in ſkins upon their backs, are

never ſubject to the plague ; but in this caſe it is lotion, and not
hum: idity. „ 7 -

1
F
:
7 N
4
. on,
=” „
$
; *
18
*
FE
7
. 4
. 9
2
4
1
8
oF 14
*
0
1 £
by ;
”" x
{SL
FE
1
Fr #2
1
1
1 1
1
: -
/
+187 4
39
3
1
1
77
24 % -
'
”
4
N 1
iS
1
4
. 7D
„ i
4%
-
Y N
1
18
4 "9. 4
f 95
11 94
1
I; :
.

TY
1
44 f I
1
3
E
9 1
05
*

160 x AVELS IN

In Syria the plague is much leſs common: ſive- and.

twenty years have elapſed ſince it has been known
there. This ariſes, no doubt, from the ſmall num.

ber of veſſels which come directly from Conſtantino-
ple. It is remarked likewiſe, that it does not natu—
ralize itſelf fo eaſily to that province. When brought
from the Archipelago, or even from Damietta, into
the harbours of Latakia, Saide, or Acre, it will not
ſpread: it rather chuſes preliminary circumſtances,

and a combined route; but when it paſſes directly
from Cairo to Damaſcus, all Syria 1 E lure to be 1 in-.

ſected.

The doctrine of predeſtination, and All more the
barbariſm of the government, have hitherto prevent.
ed the Turks from at ttempting to guard againſt this
deſtructive diſorder: the ſucceſs, however, of the

precautions taken by the Franks, has of late began
to make ſome impreſſion upon many of them. The

Chriſtians of the country who traffic with our mer.
chants, would be diſpoſed to ſhut themſelves up like
them; but this they cannot do without the authority
It ſeems, indeed, as if the Divan

of the Porte.
would at length pay ſome attention to this object, if

it be true that an edict was iſſued laſt ycar for The el-

tabliſhment of a Lazaretto at Conſtantinople, and

three others at Smyrna, Candia, and Alexandria.
The government of Tunis adopted this wife meaſure
ſome years ago: but the Turkiſh police is every where

ſo wretched. that little ſucceſs can be hoped for from

theſe eſtabliſhments, notwithſtanding their extreme

importance to commerce, and the fafety of the Medi-

terranean ſtates. *

The very laſt year afforded a proof of this, fince 2s violent
2 plague as ever was known, broke out there. It was brought
by elle coming from Conſtantinople, the maſters of which

corrupted the guards, and came into r without performing

quarantine.

EGYPT AND SYRIA, -. "x61

8 Ti A | 2 XVIII.

De erh, ve Hatch of Egypt reſumed.

GYPT Jus ill furniſh matter for many

other obſervations ; but as they are either foreign to
my purpoſe, or may be included in thoſe which I
hall have occaſion to make on Syria, 1 ſhall PUriue.

them no further.
If the reader remembers my a0 of the na-

ture and aſpect of the country; if he figures to

himſelf a flat plain, interſected with canals, under
vater during three months, verdant and boggy for

three others, and dulty and full of cracks the remain-
ler of the year; if on this he imagines a number of

wretched mud-walled and brick villages, naked and
ſun-burnt peaſants, buffaloes, camels, ſycamore and

date-trees thinly ſcattered, lakes, cultivated fields,
and vacant grounds of conſiderable extent; and

adds beſides a fun, darting his rays from an azure
iky, almoſt invariably free from clouds; and winds
conſtantly blowing, but not always with the ſame
krength, he will have formed a tolerable juſt idea
of the natural aſpect of this country. He may have

| jadged of the civil ſtate of the inhabitants from their
diviſion into tribes, ſects, and claſſes; from the na-
ture of a government, which neither reſpects the
perſon or property of its ſubjects; and from the

abuſes of an unlimited power en to a rude and

4 eee ſoldiery. He may in ſhort have formed a
| jult eſtimation of the ſtrength of this government, by
conſidering its military eſtabliſhment, and the clias
| racter of its troops, by obſerving that, throughout
all Egypt and on its frontiers, there is not a. ſingle

fort nor redoubt, neither artil! lery nor EN; gingers; and

that its whole Davy conſiſts in twer ry-cight vellet:

p an
rr rn Cn, 2
las 1 _ * * *

4
1
* 1 7
4 2 *
N 1
[ \
f 5
"& -
- 2
* of
Pp
: 1
; 7
Ll 17
x;
:
4
0
Y N
;
: 4 -
. : g
-Þ
* 7
5
j
$3
«3
'þ y
{ 1
; 1
-
#3
:
4 7,
* ol
T Pa
4 2
is <=?
C -
4 JOS
5; «la
"2 . *
1 4
4
N *
15 —
*
—
: b
* 1 ES. .
4}
F q
1
* q
7 "© «
= |
128
-
. *
5 9
8
: 24% :
* o
„
= :
1. uu
' þ .
i
139 1
b *
1
2:
> 0d
4 13. 8
— . *
«1 * aj
" ; v
1 4 7 .
$3 —
3 * i ;
1
4 1
v2 Fg
PA 3 x \
8 26 1 -
. 9 + £%
* : "o
3281
N 1 55
Y
3 F N
45 0 :
. « - \
}
N «
- 2
*
1 5
1
9
. 5 l
1
. 7
1
1 %
1 4 \
1 5 :
ö 1
11 2
1
8 o
- 85 2
5 1 N,
5 =
1
7 *
1 *
F: o
* 7
4 5
7
2 * A
x :
1 .
F : 7
1 a
he - —5
1
1
l
717
4
© : |
1 1
* 9 2 \
. > £
3 d.
4 0
A 4's *
1 . __ \
- i. _
: (4 3
e
2 1
* „
19
- wy.
, *
+4 , 5
4 =
* bs |
1 2
"#3 _—
17 = FIR
oF :
- "3748 =
ICS.
Ti 3
7
3 ;
. = Sn
18 _
L 0
37 1
145 1 [+ "REP
1 $ 54
1 1
1 Ra
n
8 A.
'S 2 2
. *
1 2
2; =
* . $0 .
l 28,
4 *
„ 5 £9
q 4
8 1
1 *
a * —
* 4
'Y ; =
TE 4
190 AF
3 4
1 Mint
Sx 33
„ 1
3
* 4" 1
2 2
"Ss ©
5 —
84 | FF =
* RS / pd
- EY OE .
p4 _—
- &
% "
27. *
noch, —
1 "=
3 _ 1, EE
J 1
oe”. .—_<
- | .
oY th 5 5 **
8 e
* " 2 2
1
* 1
LS "$254
- $99
7 — I -
L \ 4
TY _ 5
Os, + 5
1 4
—
15 $$ .— oY
1 7
e 7 0
3 1
Y 3 + 2
1
1 F
"7 4 Pets
la S
* = 1 d;
4 n
BY! boy's 3
_
ww
= 44 4
"
35 LAS
7”

oF ay 2 0 5 $ 2
7 *

, | .
Deo ent —— PR . 1
N
N
2 1

"4-8 *

3
"1

_—

*

— 4 — = ——ů— -

6. * ih 5 7 ray N I ae — — =

— > o * Do ** 6 — coed we T —
— — . 3 Ix 7 = -X A 4s - IRE = 1 =
* * T? W, * > - 2 — . — < =
RL —— Wr 8 — * = -
n * © 'F < 5 1

„„.
= — -. — ono — — — ——x CS

— — row

F 5 E —
1 bet #
;-

r > 9 rere = — —
— rr — < — —

e * * — —
* — — __— - - 2

— ON
= ER.
Dd no:

* I - enn =
ESD CATLIN
— = * * r **
< "$422 — *
— * — 8 1 4 WW
boy Etc ORE Z 2

is in fact common to them and their critics, ſince it

at one moment, feems equally diſagreeable at another.

the moſt beautiful country upon earth, though be

„ TRAVELS IN

and cayailes of Suez, armed each with four ruſty
fwivels, and manned by ſailors who know not even
the uſe of the compaſs. „%% fs 2 Rs NY

From theſe facts the reader may judge for himſelf
what opinion he ought to form of this country,
which I may have repreſented in a different point of
view from fome other writers“. He ought not to
be aſtoniſhed at this diverſity; nothing can differ
more than the judgments of travellers reſpecting the
countries they have viſited : one will frequently dil.
parage what another has extolled; and deſcribe as
a Paradiſe what he who comes after him may con-
fider as having no charms. They are particularly
reproached with this contrariety of opinions, but it

is founded in the very nature of things. Notwith-
ſtanding all our efforts, our judgments are much leſs
directed by the real merits of objects, than by the
impreſſions we receive, or carry with us in viewing
them. Daily experience demonſtrates that foreign
ideas always obtrude themſelves ; and hence it is
that the ſame conntry which appears beautiful to us

Beſides that it is impoſſible to difengage ourſelves
from the prejudices of early habits. The inhabitant of
the mountains diſlikes the plain; the inhabitant o!
the plain is diſpleaſed with the mountains. The
Spaniard wiſhes for a clear ſky; the Dane preters
thick weather. We admire the verdure of our fields.
The Swede is better pleaſed with the whiteneſs of
his ſnow ; and the Laplander, tranſported from his
ſmoaky hut, would die with heat and melancholy
in the groves of Chantilly. Every man has his
taltes, according to which he judges. To an Egyp-
tian, I conceive that Egypt is, and always will be,

5 | | Th.
See De Maillet.

EGYPT AND STRIA. 163

has never beheld any other. But if I may be per-

mitted to give my judgment, from what I have my-

{elf ſeen, I confeſs that I cannot entertain fo high an
opinion of it. I am willing to do juſtice to its ex-
| creme fertility, to the variety of its productions, and
E the advantages of its ſituation for commerce; I ad-

mit that Egypt is but little ſubject to the variations of
the weather, which occaſion the failure of harveſts
with us; that the hurricanes of America are unknown

chere; that the earthquakes which have laid waſte
Portugal and Italy in our days, are there extremely
rare, though not without example“. I admit even
that the heat, which is ſo inſupportable to Europeans,
is no inconvenience to the natives; but the deſtructive
ſoutherly winds are certainly a very real evil: the
wind from the north-eaſt too is no ſmall inconveni-
ence, as it is the forerunner of violent head-achs ;
and another objection to be made, is that multitude
of ſcorpions, gnats, and eſpecially flies, which are fo
numerous, that it is impoſſible to eat without running
the riſk of ſwallowing them. Beſides, no country
preſents ſuch a lameneſs of aſpect. A boundleſs naked

plain; an horizon every where flat and uniform;
| date-trees with their flender trunks, or mud-Walled
| huts on the cauſeways, are all it offers to the eye,

which no where beholds that richneſs of landſcape,

that variety of objects, or diverſity of fcenery which

true taſte finds ſo delightful. No country is leſs pic-
tureſque, leſs adapted to the pencil of the painter, or

deſcriptions of the poet: nothing can be ſeen of what
conſtitutes the charm and beauty of their pictures;

and it is remarkable that neither the Arabs, nor the

ancients make any mention of Egyptian poets. What

indeed could an Egyptian ſing on the reed of Geſner

* There wasa very violent one, for inſtance, in the year 1112,

7 The reader may confult the views in Norden, in which
LAS 15 very conſpicuous. ; | | | |

*

1

164 TRAVELS IN

or Theocritus? He ſees neither limpid ſtreams, nor
verdant lawns, nor ſolitary caves; and is equally a
ſtranger to vallies, mountain fides, and pendent

þ 2 — —— * — - + : 7

< S 7, , "TY" - I 7 ” i - a *

— — n 2 18 — » i”
. —— EE 2 — » 4 2 Stet >. ö * PEN

WW. *
r . / 09
"ANI nb ED -

"Len : ——_— —— N
r EST. 5 — ud, * — 2 - —
Ede SEES En
- : = = <8 — N 18 9 4 "> N og n -
| K 2 Ie; BY p. 4 » -

rocks. F IE
Thompſon could not there have known either the 5
whiſtling of the winds in the foreſt, the rolling of |
= thunder among the mountains, or the peaceful majeſty |

of ancient woods; he could not have obſerved the
awful tempeſt, nor the ſweet tranquility of the ſuc:
= ceecding calm. The face of nature, there eternally
& the fame, preſents nothing but well fed herds, fertile
bs fields, a muddy river, a fea of freſh water, and vil.
lages which, riſing out of it, reſemble iflands. Should
the eye reach the horizon, we are terrified at finding
nothing but ſavage deſerts, where the wandering tra—
veller, exhauſted with fatigue and thirſt, ſhudders at
the immenſe ſpace which ſeparates him from the world.
In vain he implores heaven and earth: his cries, lolt
in the boundleſs plain, are returned to him only by
feeble echoes ; deſtitute of every thing, and ſeparated
from mankind, he periſhes in an agony of deſpair,
amid a gloomy deſert, without even the conſolation
of knowing he has excited the ſympathiſing tear.
The contralt of this melancholy ſcene, ſo near, has
probably given to the cultivated fields of Egypt all
their charms. The barrenneſs of the defert becomes
a foil to the plenty of the plains, watered by the r- WF
ver; and the aſpect of the parched ſands, ſo totally lat

rr
o IF, OS
6

8
i 4-4, 2103-2" ah

r
— NS er wer
F bu of re

*
g 2 arte
r

n

unproduttive, adds to the pleaſures the country offers. th
Theſe may have been numerous in former times, and ex
might revive under the influence of a good govern- ly
ment: but at preſent, the riches of nature produce to
not the fruits which might be expected. In vain do WW ti:
travellers celebrate the gardens of Roſetta, and of ee
Cairo. The Turks are ſtrangers to the art of gar- WWF Us,
dening, ſo much cultivated by peliſhed nations, and to

deſpiſe every kind of cultivation. Thronghout the
empire their gardens are only wild orchards, in which

EGYPT AND SYRIA. :

| trees are planted without care or art, yet have not
| even the merit of irregularity. In vain may they tell

us of the orange-trees and cedars, which grow natu-
| rally in the fields. Accuſtomed as we are to combine
| the ideas of opulence and culture with theſe trees,
ſince with ns they are neceflarily connected with them,
we do not diſcover the deception. In Egypt, where
| they are frequent, and, as I may fay, vulgar, they

are aſſociated with the miſery of the huts they cover,
and recall only the idea of poverty and deſolation.
In vain do they deſcribe the Turk ſoftly repoſing
under their ſhade, and happy in ſmoaking his pipe
without reflection. Ignorance and folly, no doubt,
have their enjoyments, as well as wit and learning ;
but, for my own part, I confeſs I could never bring
myſelf to envy the repoſe of ſlaves, or to dignify in-
ſenſibility with the name of happineſs. I ſhould not
even have been able to conceive from whence could
proceed the enthuſiaſm with which ſome travellers
have extolled Egypt, had not experience revealed to

me the ſecret motives.
_ 8 EC 7. II.
Of the exaggerations of Travellers,

It has long been remarked, that travellers particu-
larly affect to boaſt of the countries through which
they themſelves have travelled, inſomuch that the
exaggeration of their relations having been frequent-
ly diſcovered, we have been warned by a proverb,
to be on our guard againſt their falſehoods* ; but
the error ſtill remains, becauſe the cauſes have not
W ceaſed. Theſe in fact originate with every one of
us, and the reproach not untrequently belongs even
to thoſe who make it. For, let us obſerve a travel-

* Multum mentitur que multum vi dit,

1
0

—
V2,

a
17
14
*
14
i
.
*
190%
kay
199-96
- KT
* T
LE >
71 *
"tl N
1
E
Ms.
8 1 p
** '
Fr
TH 4
LY
2 3
þ $4 -
B
3
17.
1 „
N. 2
.
" . * .
100 i.
Wn
[8:7 *
1
1 Ne
G + 328178
. 15
12
1
1
: 8
N
44
"2
* 1;
- ,
vt! IN
2 111
BE.
ſ
1
1 .
«5 1
1
45
1
}
h :
1
14
4 1
.
„
10
1
"=
7
=}
. 7B
4 ;
"7 -
1 F
SY
"8 *
1
„
1.135
0 PM.
'» FE:
0-4
! 4.3 X
1
.
* it oy
; ”;
41 4
WS: [ *
„
. 8
. My.
. -
1
2, IF. 1
17 TIS 7
þ 9 oy
1 5
1
4 8-2
2» 187 31.
o 71 *
* * "i
TH * 64
Wo : 7
I 51
5 3%:
. 4
: 1
*
| .
*
14
. i 1
2 ET
* 7
7 wt +
7 HET
* 4 ;
8
1
1 5 i ©
r .
1
.
5 t &
0 1
„
r
1 ; 14
7 N 7
1.337% 8
1 2 2 5
.
ME
2442 286
! i bf if T2
) SR
1
r
1 5 1
$25 467255
2 */ * "nd
. 8
0082 *
* 1
FINE | v9
R149 o
87 208
| 93
1
I | 4 +BY
| 1
r
17 1
r
EY: 1 *
47 "4. N.
A l
. [2 k =
5 S
(3+ 29 16
W
$144 .
_ :
1 19
1 5 }
1 1 R
li; 46255 By
L 7" 9
Narr *
[hi FTI *
[IM
1 1 N
4
1 F £ $$
ET | *
{43% * 5
1 "© vi
$1,508
o 7
* 44
4 i
1 ＋

to be ranked in this claſs as they have not time te

166 TRAVELS IN

ler, newly arrived from ſome diſtant country, and
endeavouring to amuſe the idleneſs and curioſit
of the company around him. The novelty of his

relation procures him attention, which even extends

to perſonal reſpect. He is loved becauſe he amuſes,
and becauſe his pretenſions claſh not with thoſe of
others. On his fide, he is ſoon fenfible that he cea-

ſes to be intereſting, when he can no longer raiſe
new ideas. The neceſſity of ſupporting, the defire

even of increaſing this power of pleaſing, induce him
to beſtow higher colouring on his pictures; he paints
the greateſt objects, that they may be the more ſtrik-
ing; and his fucceſs encourages him to proceed.

He catches the enthuſiaſm of his hearers, and ſhortly,

a kind of emulation takes place between him and
his auditors, by which he returns, in wondrous

narrative, what he receives in admiration. The
marvellous in what he has ſeen, is reflected, firſt

upon himſelf, and by uſual conſequence, on thoſe
who have heard, and in their turn relate it. Thus
does vanity, which prevades every thing, become
one of the cauſes of propenſity we all have, either
to believe, or recount prodigies. We have beſides
leſs defire to be inſtructed than amuſed, and it is
from theſe reaſons that tale- makers of every kind,
have always held a diſtinguiſhed rank in the eſteem
of mankind, and in the claſs of writers.

There is alſo another cauſe of the enthuſiaſm of
travellers. Remote from the objects which have
given us pleaſure the imagination takes fire ; abſence
again inflames deſire, and the ſatiety of ſurrounding
enjoyments beſtows a new charm on whatever is 00
Jonger within our reach. We regret a country from

which we were often anxious to eſcape ; and pleale

ourſelves with the remembrance of places in which,

were we there, we could not bear to remain. Tra-

vellers who have only paſſed through Egypt, are not

. 00 rf

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 167

| !ofe the illuſion of novelty ; ; but this remark applies
to whoever has made a long reſidence in the coun-
try. Our merchants know it ; and have made a

very juſt obſervation on this ſubject: they remark
that thoſe. among them, who have experienced the
greateſt inconveniencies from reſiding in a foreign
country, are no ſooner returned to France, than
erery thing diſagreeable is effaced from their memo-
ry; their recollection aſſumes cheerful colours, and
in two years after, one would not imagine they had
ever been there. Do you ſtill think properly of
“ us, and our ſituation,“ wrote a reſident at Cairo to
me lately? * Do you retain juſt ideas of this place
* of miſery* ; for we have experienced that all thoſe
who return to Europe, ſo far forget them as to
| © aftoniſh us?” Such general and ſuch powerful
cauſes would not have failed to produce their uſual
effect upon myſelf, had I not taken particular pains
to guard myſelf againſt them, and to retain my
former impreſſions, in order to give my deſcriptions
the only merit they can have, that of truth. It is
time now to proceed to objects more extenſively in-
tereſting; but, as the reader would not pardon me
| ſhould 1 quit Egypt without mentioning the ruins
and the Pyramids, I ſhall content myſelf with beſtow-
ing on them a few words.

| * No perſon has leſs aso then myſelf to be Airis with
Egypt; I experienced from our merchants j in that country the
utmoſt generoſity and politeneſs; I never met with any diſa-
greeable accident, nor was even obliged to alight in reverence of
the Mamlouks. It is true that, notwithſtanding it is held fo
Gilgraceful, [ ogg walked on boot in the {treets.

1658 TRAVELS IN
CHAP. XIX.
Of the ruins and the Pyramids.

| "= 8 — x
8 — WEIS 7: ny RNT Bo l e
od : — =. > X> 23.2: mk 11
A I 2 — — — — ——— — 8 — —
on — 2 3 = . — : — 3 =
pn es 23 1 = ng — 2 — t Een ä =>... >-
— — — — 3 72 © 7 I my . S
- 8 . We. 2 — IS a y Feen — eo — == —
p 2 7 -—v 7

[1 HAVE already explained how much the conſtant

THF 3 :
EPT to OLE > ͤ— —

r — — — * =
r / EE iT |
— > 2" * — e 4 —
8 : 2 i 5 2 — 2 — — — > Bo —— — — —
- - _ — = . 2 I — > Ro
> — — — —— Lear 2 .

on |
18 diticulty of travelling in Egypt, which has increaſed
14 of late years, is unfavourable to reſearches into an-

tiquities. For want of means, and above all of
_ favourable circumſtances, we are reduced to be con-
tent with ſeeing what others have already ſeen, and
to relate nothing but what they have already pub-
liſhed. For this reaſon, I ſhall not repeat what has
been repeated more than once in Paul Lucas, Mailler,
Sicard, Pocock, Greaves, Norden, and Niebukr,
and ſtill more lately on the Letters of M. Savary.
I thall confine myſelf to a few general conſidera-
tions.
The ads of N are a ſtriking example of
the difficulty which I have already ſaid attends the
making of obſervations. Though only tour leagues
diſtant from Cairo, where the Franks reſide, though
they have been viſited by a crowd of travellers,
their true dimenſions are not yet Known with cer-
tainty. Several times has their height been meaſured
by geometrical methods, and each operation has
given a ditterent reſult*. In order to decide this

ueſtion, a new and accurate menſuration ſhould be
undertaken by perſons of known abilities. In the
interim, however, we may ſafely affert that thoſe
are miſtaken who have affirmed the height of the
great pyramid 18 equal to the length of the baſe,
fince the angle of the vertex is lenſibly too large.

1
— fo K : 2 * — . 82
5 DP CEOS bn} 7 7 ne = Coe — <——
£2 2. > 2 11 - bi TR OE ME PO NO 2 =
o
* N Nr

| * To the liſt of theſe di Ferenc given by M. Savary, may
be added a late menſuration, which alſigns {1x hundred feet to
each face of the Great Pyramid and four hundred and eighty-_

feet for its perpendicular height.

EGYPT. AND SYRIA, 169

The knowledge of the true length of this baſe appears
to me the more intereſting, as I am inclined to think
it has ſome affinity with one of the ſquare meaſures
of the Egyptians ; and if the dimenſions of the ſtones
ſhould be found frequently the ſame, we may poſſibly
rom them deduce their other meaſures.
The difficulty of underſtanding the deſeription of
the inſide of the pyramid, has been frequently com-
plained of, and, in fact, without being well verſed in
the nature of plans, it is not eaſy to form any ade-
quate idea from engravings. The beſt method to con-
vey ſuch an idea of it, would be to form of clay, or
| baked earth, a pyramid i in miniature, in the reduced
proportion, for inſtance, of an inch to a toiſe. Such
| an imitation would be eight feet four inches at the
| baſe, and near ſeren and one half in height. By
cutting it into two portions from top to bottom, it
would be poſſible to form the firſt channel, which de-
ſcends obliquely, the gallery which aſcends in the
lame manner, and the ſepulchral chamber at the ex-
tremity. Norden would furniſh the beſt deſcription;
but ſuch a model mult be executed by an artiſt accul-
| tomed to this fort of work.
The ledge of rock on which the Spray are built
does not riſe more than forty or fifty feet above the
level of the plain. The ſtone of which it conſiſts, is,
| 33 I have ſaid, white and calcareous, of a grain ſimi-
lar to that known in ſome provinces under the name
of Ratire, That of the pyramids is of a ſimilar na-
| ture. It was imagined, at the beginning of the pre-
ent century, on the authority of Herodotus, that
the materials of which they have been built had been
| brought from a diſtance ; but travellers, obſerving
the reſemblance I am ſpeaking of, think it more na-
| tural to conclude they were taken from the rock
| itſelf; and, at this day, the narrative of Herodotus
is treated as a fable, and ſuch a removal of the ſtones
s an abſurdity. It has been calculated that the level-

= —

—
* r —— ——
- GI — —

m Me :
we T7 1
4 5 1
i Lt;
**
"Fat
| 5
9
+ ; 74
i IS
14 + we
"1 by rs! 1
: | 428900
Eb
0 ; 5
7."
q 1
is : x
r
4 1
i ” 4
8 8 4
4 7
185
( ! ,
'

* — — 25 =, — —

3 Ry — PX ; RE ie or — Ta, ? DT OO > l
— * = — — ES LEE Toit 7” E ES 75 — == — wes FH I ER _— a

— * = IE 7 - — * 2 — F : "Wt \ —
K 4 7D F (EY «ine rg ow oy = pe ——— N . * EP gs 45 — =D ws 4 y = FY —

N — — 8 2 rer * rr wh * 8 > - 4 * — = - — 3 7 — —
— > * © 5 . : 2 ——————— — 4 —— =
2 wh * ob xc + | N 55

170 | TRAVELS IN

ling of the rock would furniſh nearly enough, and
the deficiency 1s ſupplied by ſuppoſing ſubterranean
cavities, which are magnified at pleaſure. But if the
ancient opinion have its improbabilities, the modern

iyitem is mere ſuppoſition. It is by no means an ade.

quate motive of judging, to fay: it is incredible
they ſhould have tranſported whole quarries from
* ſuch a diſtance, and abſurd to multiply expenſes

** to ſo enormous an amount.” In whatever relates
to the opinions, and governments of ancient nations,

it is difficult to ſay what is probable. However im.
probable therefore the fact in queſtion may ſeem, if
we conſider that the hiſtorian who relates it drew his
materials from the original archives of the ancient
Egyptians ; that he is remarkably accurate in every
thing we are able to verity; that the Lybic rock no
where preſents elevations ſimilar, to thoſe which are
ſuppoſed, and that the ſubterranean cavities remain
{till to be diſcovered; if we recolle&t the immenſe

quarries which extend from Saouadi to Manfalout,
for the ſpace of five-and-twenty leagues ; if we re-

flect, in ſhort, that the ſtones extracted from them,

which are of the ſame kind, were for no other viſible |

purpoſe ;* we ſhall at leaſt be tempted to ſuſpend
cur judgment, until the fact be decided, by bettet
%%% ũ ũ i i a BE oe,
Other writers, in like manner, tired of the opinion
that the pyramids were tombs, have converted them

into temples or obſervatories. They conſider it 25

abſurd to ſuppoſe a wiſe and poliſhed nation woult
think the ſepulchre of its king a matter of ſo muci
importance, or that a prince would impoveriſh hu
people by forced labours, merely to encloſe a ſkeleton

*I do not mean the pyramids of Djiza only, but all of then
In general, Some of them, ſuch as thoſe of Bayamout, are ner
ther founded en rocks, nor are there any rocks near. de
F@cock. © 5 e 5 Rs

EGYPT AND SYRIA.

of five feet in a mountain of ſtones ; but I repeat it,
we judge of the ancients improperly, when we make
our own opinions and cuſtoms a ſtandard of com-
pariſon. The motives which influenced them, may
appear to us extravagant, and poſſibly may really de
ſo in the eye of reaſon, without having been leſs pow-

| erful, or leſs efficacious. Beſides, we muſt engage
in endleſs and idle contradictions of all hiſtory, to

ſuppoſe in them a wiſdom conformable to our princi-
ples: we reaſon too much from our own ideas, and

do not ſufficiently attend to theirs. But from which-
ever we reaſon in the preſent diſpute, we may affirm

that the pyramids never can have been aſtronomical
obſervatories,* ſince Mount Mokattam would have at.
forded a {till more elevated ſituation, and which bounds
the former; becauſe every elevated obſervatory is

uſeleſs in Egypt, where the country is very flat, and

where the vapours hide the ſtars for ſeveral degrees

| above the horizon; becauſe it is impracticable to
aſcend to the top of the pyramids in general; and

becauſe it could not have been neceſſary to erect eleven
obſervatories ſo near each other as the eleven pyra-

mids of different ſizes, which may be ſeen from Djiza.

From theſe reaſons, we ſhall be led to think that
Plato, who firſt ſaggeſted the idea in queſtion, could
only have ſome particular caſes in view, or that he
has in this inſtance only his ordinary merit of an elo-
quent writer. „„ 5 |

If, on the other hand, we weigh the teſtimonies of
the ancients, and local circumſtances ; if we obſerve
that near the pyramids there are thirty or forty monu-
ments, which preſent rough outlines of the ſame

It has been alledged the pyramids are built ſo as to correſ-
pond with the four cardinal points; but the ancients, in the
greateſt part of their monuments, have obſerved this praQtice,
and it was well adapted to tombs, which, from their ideas of a
feſurrection, Tartarus, Elyſium, &c. were connected with al-
tronomy, e N

172 TRAVELS IN

pyramidal form ; that this ſterile ſpot, remote from
all cultivable land, poſſeſſes the quo 555 requiſite for
an Egyptian cemetary, . ud that near it was that of
the whole city of Memphis, the plain of Mummiet,
we {hall no Tet doubt that the pyramids are only
tombs. We ſhall ceaſe to wonder that the deſpots of

a ſuperſtitious people ſhould have made it a point of
zinportance and pride, to build for their ſkeletons

igen efrabſe habitations, when we are informed that,
even before the time of Moſes, it was a dogma at
Memphis, that fouls at the expiration of ſix thouſand
years, ſhould return to the bodies they had quitted.
It was for this reaſon that fo much pains were taken
0 preſerve the body from putrefaction, and that en-
deavours were made to retain even its form, by means
of ſpices, bandages, and ſarcophagi. That which is
ſtill in the ſepulchral chamber of the great pyramid,
is preciſely of its natural dimenſions ; and this cham-
ber is ſo obſcure and narrow,“ that it never can have
contained more than one dead body. Attempts have
been made to diſcover ſome myſtery in the ſubterra-

2an cavity which deſcends perpendicularly within
the pyramid, forgetting that it was the uniform prac-
tice of all antiquity to contrive communications with
the infide of their tombs, in order to perform, on
certain days preſcribed by their religion, the cuſtom-
ary ceremonics; ſuch as libations, and offerings of
food to the deceaſed. We muſt recur, therefore, to
the ancient opinion, antiquated as it may ſeem, that
the pyramids are tombs ; and this hypotheſis favoured
by a varity of circumſtances, is {till more confirmed
by their name, which, according to an analyſis, con-
formable to every principle of etymology, I think
have diſcovered to ſignity chamber, « or cave of the

22 ad.

* Itis thirteen paces long by eleven wide, and nearly « of the
ſan e height. |

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 153

The great pyramid is not the only one which has
deen opened. There is another at Sakara, the in-
fide of which appears conſtructed in the ſame manner.
A few years ago, one of the Beys tried to open the
third in ſize of thoſe that are at Djiza, to obtain
che ſuppoſed treaſure he imagined , concealed there.
He attempted this on the ſame fide, and at the ſame
| height at which the great one has been opened;
but after forcing out two or three hundred ſtones,
with conſiderable labour and expence, he relinquifh-
ed his avaricious enterprize. The time when the
greateſt part of the pyramids were built is unknown,
but that of the great one is ſo evident, that it ſhould
never have been called in queſtion. Herodotus at-
tributes it to Cheops, with a detail of circumſtances
which prove his authors were well informed.“ But
Cheops, in his liſt, which is the beſt extant, is the
ſecond king after Proteus, f who was cotemporary
with the Trojan war; whence it follows, that this
pyramid was erected about one hundred and forty,
or one hundred and fixty years after the building
of Solomon's Temple, or eight hundred and fixty
years before Chrift. „ =

Deſtructive time, and the ſtill more deſtructive
hand of man, which have ſo defaced and deſtroyed
all the other monuments of antiquity, have hitherto
been able to effect but little againſt the pyramide.
The ſolidity of their conſtruction, and their enor-
mous ſize, have ſecured them againft every attempt,

This prince, he tells us, reigned fifty years, twenty of
which he employed in building the pyramids, The third part
of the Inhabitants of Egypt were employed, by forced lervice,
'n hewing, traniporting, and railing the ſtones. F |

+ It is remarkable, that if we were to write the Egyptian
ame of Proteus, as given by the Greeks, in Phæxician charac-
ers, we ſhould make uſe of the fame letters we pronounce
| #2720 ; the final o in the Heb:ew 1s an , which, at the eng
: words, frequently becomes. => 0M

8

U
i 4
L
$
iT;
}
'
il
A
7
.
7
ity
4 5
iſ
1 fy
|
þ
*
+4581
46
1
4
9
1 N
|
LF
1
V
N
4
N
| 7
|
17
50 [4
14
17775
1
I,.,
$$
V.
A.
Te !
) 1
Nl;

1
4

2 8 2 —
— 6
2 ——
— 'F
— —

174 2N TRAVELS

and ſeem to promiſe them an tema Aae Alt
travellers ſpeak of them with enthuſiaſm, and en.
thuſiaſm they may well inſpire. Theſe artificial
mountains are at firſt diſcovered at ten leagues diſ.
tance. They ſeem to. retire in proportion as they
are approached ; and when ſtill a league off, tower
with ſuch loftinefs above our heads, that we imagine
ourſelves at their feet ; but when at length we reach
them, nothing can expreſs the various ſenſations
they inſpire.“ Their ſtupendous height, the ſteep
declivity of their ſides, their prodigious ſurface, their
enormous ſolidity, the diftant ages they recall to
memory, the recollection of the labour they muſt
have coſt, and the reflection that theſe huge rocks
are the wok of man, ſo diminutive and feeble, who
crawls at their feet, loſt in wonder, awe, humiliation,
2 reverence, altogether impreſs the mind of the

ſpectator in a manner not to be deſcribed; but to
this firſt tranſport other ſentiments ſoon ſucceed,
Elevated as we are with ſo exalted a proof of the
power of man, when we conſider the purpoſe for
which theſe amazing works were intended, we can-
not but view chem with regret. We lament, that

* I know nothing, at Paris, ſo proper to give an heb of the
Pyramids, as the Hotel des Invalides, ſeen from the Cours la
Reine, The length of that building, being fix hundred feet,
18 preciſely the ſame as the baſe of the great pyramid ; but to
conceive their height and ſolidity, we muſt ſuppoſe the front
I have mentioned to riſe into a trian the perpendicular of
which ſhould exceed the height of . dome of that building
by two thirds of the dome itſelf, (it is three hundred feet high.)
The ſame ſurface muſt be repeated on the four ſides of the
' ſquare, and the whole maſs contained in them be ſuppoled
ſolid, and offer to view nothing but an immenſe Hope on every
fide, diſpoſed in ſteps,

[The En gliſn reader has iy to ſuppoſe * vaſt ſquare of
Lincoln's inn . the dimenſions of which are the exact bale
of the great pyramid, wholly filled up from ſide to ſide, and
gtadually rifing in a pyramidal form, to a height exceeding on
of St. * by at leaſt one third. T. |

EGYPT. AND SYRIA. 17%

a0 ede A vice ſepulchre, 2 -whole -nation
mould have been rendered miſerable for . twenty
hears: we proan over the numberleſs acts of injuſ-

| tice and oppreſſion theſe tireſome labours —

have coſt, in conveying, preparing, and piling up
ſuch an inan mals of ſtones; and we are wfjam-
ed with indignation at the tyranny of the deſpots
ho enforced theſe barbarous works, a ſentiment

indeed which too frequently recurs on viewing the
different monuments of Egypt. Thoſe labyrinths,
temples, and pyramids, by their huge and beavy
ſtructure, atteſt much leſs the genius of a nation,
opulent and friendly to the arts, than the ſervitude

of a people who were flaves to the caprices of their

monarchs ; and we are even inclined to pardon that
avarice, which, by violating their tombs, has fruk-

| rrated their idle hopes: we beftow leſs pity on thele

ruins; and while the lover of the arts beholds with
indignation, at Alexandria, the columns of her pa-

| | laces ſawed into ull.ſtones, the philoſopher, after the

firſt emotion, occaſioned by the defiruQion of every
ine work, cannot ſuppreſs a ſmile at the ſecret
juſtice of that deſtiny, which reſtores, to the people
what coſt them fo much fruitleſs toil, and which

renders the pride of unprofitable luxury lebten
to the meaneſt of neceſſities.

The happineſs of the people, rather than the pre-

ſervation of the ancient monuments of Egypt, ſhould
certainly dictate the wiſh: of ſeeing that country un-
er the government of another nation; but were it

only in the latter point of view, ſuch a revolution

| would ſtill be very deſirable. Wes Egypt poſſeſſed by

2 nation friendly to the fine arts, diſcoveries might
be made there, which would make us better 2c-
quainted with antiquity than any thing the reſt . of
the world can afford us. Perhaps even books might

be found. Ir is not above three years ago, that up-
wards of one hundred volumes, written in an un-

—

——

yi!
g
ki, io
by «8
n
Che.
" *
„
N
: J
3
Ws i
i]. i
1 l
F I |
"hs.
tl, oy
1
"; ; \ '
2
11
Tu :
4 .
8 144
Ne 7 [1 *
J fy 1 *
: 4 ;
„
n
.
4, $7
l
ih
in ity
4 115
8 3000
1
1 Nan
„, In F A
(NJ ip
441 | Abs
ame. [0
©} {4
+® 4
” N 5
e
44 +! F108
1 FS.
l Mo N
14 '#
Wn os
OP Ye
þ "lf +
wp 0s þ
„ i
N
11 hi J
1
72
'% : 85
o £2 X
**
44%
J F 36-1
WIS
bh 4 8
es : e
+12 Þ
.
af 1% the
£8 4
6 1
448803 8
1
439 2
* *
13 a
44,3 - BE
21% =»
if wh
1 * „
W
1
.
1
97, £75
R
3 1 .
r
U 4 ,
. N
15 8
+)
1K: Ni
ne 15
1
1
By
no
' $5
i. 1
1 j $67
, 1
„ 1
1.4, W202
_—
B
wn
{PX
| 11:

5 8
7. mb!
TT SES
5

-n \
+ |
1 "oy t
9
1 5
' .
7 3
17-6
1 I
. yy 4
r
nz * 7
178
Dy. :
5. ?
I
'&i8 4
a * 1 *
bet *
r- t *
+
1
Rs + vi 71
* af
* w
1
i mY
.
N „
« *
1
Firn
4 0
1
5 5 „
8-7-8
1
34 v
.
3
r a;
T8" i
{1's $i :
19 * y
E
4
1 4
1 153; 9
11 N.
.
| 3248 3
* © *
1 15
*
is | 7 7
(1 + Þ
2584 .
. *.
a "
4.343
18
IF
. 55
18
LESS
* 1
5
1
2 8
.
"TS A \
5
. .
. 3 &
112 .
.
145 4 N
+3 :4% * 14
5 43 y 15
4:59) oF: 4%
F
. 17 1
* .
8 3
1
18 1 7
131
T
\
-

ww Travers: th

known language, were dug up near Damietta,* but
immediately committed to the flames, by command

of the Shaiks of Cairo. Indeed the Delta no longer
affords any very intereſting ruins, as they have

been all deſtroyed by the wants, or the ſuperſtition
of the inhabitants. But the Said, which is leſs in.
habited, and the edge of the deſert, ſtill lefs peopled,
poſleſs ſeveral yet untouched. We may hope to

find them ſtill more certainly in the Oaſes, thoſe

iſlands ſeparated from the world by an ocean of
ſand, where no traveller we know of, has ever pens.
trated ſince rhe time of Alexander: Theſe coun.
tries, in which formerly were cities and temples,

having never been ſubje& to the devaſtations of the

Barbarians, muſt have preſerved their monuments,
and the rather as it is probable they are but thinly
inhabited, or perhaps entirely deſerted ; and theſe
monuments, buried in the ſands, muſt be preſerved
there, as a depoſite for future generations. To a

riod leſs remote, poſhbly than we imagine, we
muſt defer the gratification of our wiſhes and our
hopes. We may then be allowed to fearch every part
of the country, the banks of the Nile, and the ſands
of Lybia. We may then be permitted to open the
ſmall pyramid of Dijiza, the total demolition of
which would not coſt fifty thouſand livres (two thou-

fand pounds.) It is probable too, that till that
period, we mult remain ignorant of the ſignification

of the hieroglyphics; though, in my opinion, the
means we at preſent poſleſs might be Oe to

explain them.
But enough of conjeQures. It is now time to

proceed to the examination of another country, the
ancient and modern ſtate of which 1 is not leſs inter.

Wit even than that of Egypt.

1 I have this falt FINK ſome: merchants of eie who told it
me on the credit of a Marſcilles Captain, who, at that ume was |

taking in a cargo of rice al Damzeus.

STATE or SYRIA.
A

Gecgraphy and Natural Hiſtory of Syria.

| ravine Egypt by the Iſthmus which ſe—

of the Mediterranean, we enter a ſecond province
| of Turkey, known to us by the name of Syria.
| This name which, like ſo many others, has been
| tranſmitted to us by the Greeks, is an abridgement
| of AHria, which was firſt adopted by the Ionians
| who frequented thoſe coaſts, after the Aſſyrians of
| Niniveh had reduced that country to be a province
| of their empire“. The name of Syria had not

E therefore ſo extenſive a ſignificatian as it has fince

| obtained. It comprehended neither Phoenicia nor.

winch ſignifies country of the left; and is given to
the whole ſpace contained between two lines drawn,
the one from Alexandretta to the Euphrates, and

the other from Gaza in the deſert of Arabia, bounded

* That is about the year 705 before Chriſt, This is the reaſon

E why Homer, Who wrote a little before that time, no where uſes
| this name, though he ſpeaks ofzthe inhabitants of the country;
| but employs the oriental word aram, changed into arimean and
| frenbos, _ | 3

W Geogtaphers, however, ſometimes write it Souria, from the
conſtant change of the Greek upfilon into the Arabic waw,

El. eam allo is the name of the city of Damaſcus, the repu-
ed capital of Syria, I am at a loſs to diſcover why M. Savary
hes made it El- ams, os the City of the Sun. |

parates Africa from Aſia, and following the coalt

| Paleſtine, The preſent inhabitants, who, according
to the conſtant practice of the Arabs, have not adop-
| ted the Greek names, are ignorant of the name of
eit; inſtead of which they call it Barr-el-Sham}, -

r

* 22 2 3 8 * -S
rr af Pe x i SIE ee
— r
n 22
| . 8

,
7
I
iT!
TY
f
* r s
8
74
1
3
— }
114
1
- +
*}
38
, ;
5
"i
in 14
a 1 o
12
3 7
* 4
4
T N
nc "1
1 9
1
224
EE
FAT a
5. 4
4 +
1
M. 1
Y 2
"7% -
==
45 Ke
7
= "
4 p
*
1
+...
4. 8 *
2 * 4
4
: —
* ad 4
-- +
— *
:
- .
Mr. i142
9 8 *
* 4
. 7
AN
54
2
* 5 J
43
. +
.
:7zY
» T7
4#?
975
1
* 2.74
1
;
:
*
44
32
1
5
4
q
+: -
77
- 0
—— ax
8
*
A
3.
T7
I 2
®
O87
11
10
Ly it
"”
4.
43
1
.

ä nl "7 * 0 A F
* 4 8 88 Wr Ir eS "a 3 rt ns Wet A 0
R e 9 1 5
q * Ji 8 K 5 — > -& + P
2 9 NS j - * : > IH n 8 2
. 7 2

on the eait by this deſert, and on the weſt by tte
Mediterranean. This name of country of the %,
from its contraſt with that of the Tamin, or country
of the right, indicates ſome intermediate place as 3
common point, which muſt be Mecca; and from ity
alluſion to the worſhip of the ſun* proves at once,
an origin anterior to Mahomet, and the exiſtence,
which is already certain, of this worihip, in the tem.
of the Cab? „„

nnn It
General appearance of the country.

if we examine a map of Syria, we may obſervs
that this country is in ſome meaſure only a chain of
mountains, which diſtributes themſelves in various
directions from one leading branch; and ſuch, in
fact, is the appearance it preſents, whether we ap-
proach it from the fide of the ſea, or by the immenſe
plains of the deſert. We firſt diſcover, at a great

diſtance, a clouded ridge, which runs north and

ſouth, as far as the fight extends; and, as we ad.
vance, diſtinguiſh the ſummits of mountains, which,
fometimes detached, and ſometimes united in chains,
uniformly terminate in one principal line which over-
tops them all; we may follow this line, without in.
terruption, from its entry by the north, quite into
Arabia. It firſt runs cloſe to the fea, between Alex
andretta and the Orontes, and, after opening a pal
lage to that river, continues its courſe to the ſoutih>

ward, quitting, for a ſhort. diſtance, the ſhore, and,

in a chain, of continued ſummits, ſtretches as far 3

* The ancient nations, who worſhipped the ſun, paid theit
homage at the moment of his rifing,; their faces were therefote
turned towards the eaſt. The north was on their left, the
fouth on their right, and the welt behind them, called in the
oriental languages, acheron and aAdren. .

r . , . , ⁵̃ꝗ¶Vùꝙb n ̃ ̃ ̃ , ¾ tl... ⅛ ING

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 179

the ſources of the Jordan, where it ſeparates into
two branches, to encloſe, as it were, in a baſon, this
river and its lakes. In its courſe, it detaches from
this line, as from a main trunk, an infinity of rafft- 2
cations, ſome of which loſe themſelves in the deſert,
where they form various encloſed hollows, fuch as
thoſe of Damaſcus and Hauran, while others advance
toward the fea, where they frequently end in ſteep
declivities, as at Carmel, Nakoura, Cape Blanco, and
in almoſt the whole country between Bairout“ and
Tripoli of Syria; but in general they gently termi-
nate in plains, ſuch as thoſe of Antioch, Tripoli,
Tyres. and Acre.

8 E r. II.

Of the Mountains.

Theſe mountains, as they vary their levels and ſitu-
ations, are alſo greatly changed in their form and ap-
pearance. Between Alexandretta and the Orontes,
the firs, larches, oak, box-trees, laurels, yews, and
myrtles, with which they abound, give them an air
of livelineſs, which delights the traveller, wearied
with the melancholy nakedneſs of the iſle of Cyprus.
On ſome dechvities he even meets with cottages, en-
vironed with fig-trees, and vineyards; and the fight
of theſe repays the fatigue he has endured on the road
which, by rugged paths, leads him from the bottom
of valleys to the tops of hills, and from the tops of
hills to the bottoms of valleys. The inferior branches,
which extend to the northward of Aleppo, on the
contrary, preſent nothing but bare rocks, without

verdure or earth. To the ſouth of Antioch, and on

* The ancient t Berytus.
+ All veſſels which go to Alexandretta touch at Cyprus, the

'outhern part of which is a naked and deſolate plain,

YL

> ==

— :
th

3 :

*

7 N
2 2 ane Deg : - — OG _ 8
* HL on Mon : = LN — 5 Frome 3 — 2 =
ran . —_— * —_ — il ne. eee I 2 * 8 :
* ' 2 —o Gd "= > _ - > yy . 8 g —
— — . — — — = - — N by
"= 2 * — L — — — — __ Is — * * * =
888 2 — — = = — —— < 4 - - l
NT — ACT; 22 3 — — — fr —-- — 2 . = [>
— — — wo ts. 1 2 Ry — = = 2 — — — = 2
— 5 2 . Il-- 1 + =
. - * * 1 CS...
_ * 2 — 4 2-4. * 2 oy
Q — 2 = FF" gt age

„

-_ => : med —
Fr..

i " i
1 .
>,

NC +
© 1
I.
1
1
Ie
29
.
„
4 -:
"=
oh 15
. f
kf
LE
- *
.

180 TRAVELS IN

the ſea-coaſt, the hill-ſides are proper for the cultiva.

tion of tobacco, olives, and vines“; but, on the fide
of the detert, the ſummits and declivities of this

chain are almoſt one continued ſeries of white rocks,

Towards Lebanon, the mountains are lofty, but are

covered in many places, with as much earth as fits

them for cultivation by induſtry and labour. There,
amid the crags of the rocks, may be ſeen the no very
magnificent remains of the boaſted cedars+ ; but a
much greater number ot firs, oaks, brambles, mul.

 berry-trees, figs, and vines. As we leave the country

of the Druzes, the mountains are no longer fo high,
nor fo rugged, but become fitter for tillage. They
riſe again to the ſouth-eaſt of Mount Carmel, are
covered with woods, and afford very pleaſant pro.

pects; but as we advance toward Judea, they loſe

their verdure, their valleys grow narrower, they be-
come dry and ſtoney, and terminate at the Dead Sea
in a pile of deſolate rocks, full of precipices and ca-
verns} ; while to the weſt of Jordan and the lake,

another chain of rocks, {till higher, and more rug-

ged, preſents a ſtill more gloomy proſpect, and an-
nounces, afar off, the entrance of the deſert, and
the end of the habitable lands.

A view of the country will convince us that the

moſt elevated point of all Syria is Lebanon, on the
ſouth-eaſt of Tripoli. Scarcely do we depart from

Larneca, in Cyprus, which is thirty leagues diſtance,
before we diſcover its ſummit, appel with clouds.

bs Mount Caſius muſt be excepted, which riſes above Anti-
och to a prodigious height, But Pliny ſurpaſſes hyperbole,

when he ſays that, from its ſummit, we may diſcover at once

both the morning's dawn and the evening twilight.

+ There are now but four or five of theſe trees which de-
ferve any notice.
+ This is a place called the Crotiaes of Engaddi, which have
been a refuge for vagabonds in all ages. Some of them are ca-
pable of containing fifteen hundred men. 55

the courſe of the rivers. The Orontes, which flows
from the mountains of Damaſcus, and loſes itſelf
below Antioch; the caſmia, which, from the north

of Balbek, takes its courſe towards Tyre; the Jor-

dan, forced by the declivities towards the ſouth,
prove that this is the higheſt point. Next to Leba-
non, the moſt elevated part of the country is Mount
Akkar, which becomes viſible as ſoon as we leave
Marra in the deſert. It appears like an enormous

flattened cone, and is conſtantly in view for two days

journey. No one has yet had an opportunity to
aſcertain the height of theſe mountains by the barome-
ter; but we may deduce it from another confidera-
tion, In winter their tops are entirely covered with
now, from Alexandretta to Jeruſalem ; but after the
month of March it melts, except on mount Lebanon,
where, however, it does not remain the whole year,
unleſs in the higheſt cavities, and towards the north-
caſt, where it 1s ſheltered from the ſea winds, and
the action of the fun. In fuch a ſituation 1 ſaw it
ſtill remaining, in 1784, at the very time 1 was al-
moſt ſuffocated with heat in the valley of Balbek.
Now, ſince it is well known that ſnow, in this
latitude, requires an elevation of fifteen or ſixteen
hundred fathom, we may conclude that to be the
height of Lebanon, and that it is conſequently much
lower than the Alps, or even the Pyrenees“.

Lebanon, which gives its name to the whole ex-
tenſive chain of the Keſraouan, and the country of
the Druzes, preſents us every where with majeſtic
monntains. At every ſtep we meet with ſcenes in
which nature diſplays either beauty or grandeur,

lometimes lingularity, but always variety. When

Mount Blanc, the joftieſt of the Alps, is eſtimated at two
thouland four hundred fathom above the level of the ſea ; and
tae Peak of Oſſian, in the Pyrenecs, at nineteen hundred.

: ET pet
. 4 eo a
— — — 2

3 —

1 a 9%! *

EGYPT AND SYRIA. I81

<4;
f

i |
11

4
W .
1
H
+
{1%

This is alſo diſtinctiy perceivable on the map, from

*
—
e

0 * 5 . 2 . B 1 **
* f 0 = as , . — N :
2 2 PR Þ 2 we  DIICIIEEY — . r — 2 98 32 hg | O's.
= 2 — — * — — D cer oe * , . rr < 4
— we ˙¹ m DO OS G73 — . — < — — r >» > 20% Be NS? — ent are” 2
— — 4x — — __ . pr =, og. . - 2 5 oy; ET 3 ö 2 — q 5 7
n . 7 —— > rs . — he r R 56 2 2 4K — -
g N - . — 1 3 r * 2 q— * 2 3
- — i "_ — hoo at DINE nr RY RW 4 . : ET F *
8 r TR _—_— 1 _e -, _— — : IN Ie ry * N A C J 4 p
y 0 6 4 ah pt G * » : . - —
- = 2 C "5 n 4 "of ? 2 < 0 = -
ET. . 8 as
* - - — 2 *. 4 K ” - o
- 1 5 Wd 4 F . x * F .
R l 4 $4408
 . - Dn
- e * - 0 * C > — on % _— * ' - =y , om
RET: = =_ — — 7 5

RES

ä —

— — — — 5 — —
r F eee
« ſoa . ICEES — —
—
= " * NE DS
—_ — 5 0 * TIL 5
1 ** nm tes © 2 th .4 46

TOOL CINE Wot SD IRS > 2 RE EVRA
af 2 —— — IM - roms — — —

FR . £2, 0x; W 2 W
* — — 1 —— ys —— — — ” a4 Spe — —_— —— 2 — — r SAS Lens,
Na © gs bbs 4 nes; COIN — : We Pg 3 — ==
Nr mas 5 EI
. — er en gee wn — — 4 -
[4
* reads. A 3
2 3 „ BE Ray
" x - > IH MF 3 1 Lg 2 Y =, 1 Let 7
7 1 A S100 1 493 * — - Fes cob EY. ad * 1 4
. = 3 2 2 RN, vv 2 3 * oy HB 005. Rs © I, Frys
2 2 * , N ., wy * Ne . Si Sond 1 .
Wo y — Py Sn YE 2 — * * , y 24 * 2
— 2 R A X44 XZ 8 g *
* at * e

R
—

* nts bs

P

—

be... SY

wi

era

py - — ——— ——
W 4 226 4 0 EIS LINES (rd rg > =

the clouds, inſpire altomiſhment and reſpect. Should

tains, the ruggedneſs of the roads, the ſteepneſs of

182 TRAVELS IN

we land on the coaſt, the loftineſs and ſteep aſcent
of this mountainous ridge, which ſeems to encloſe
the country, thole gigantic maſſes which ſhoot into

the curious traveller then climb cheſe ſummits which
bounded his view, the immenſity of ſpace which he
diſcovers becomes a freſh ſubject of admiration ; but
completely to enjoy this majeſtic ſeene, he maſt al.
cend the very point of Lebanon, or the Sannin. There,
on every fide, he will view an horizon without bounds;

while, in clear weather, the fight is loſt over the de.

ſert, which extends to the Perſian Gulph, and over
the fea which bathes the coaſts of Europe. He ſeems
to command the whole world, while the wandering
eye, now ſurveying the ſucceſſi ve chains of mountains,
tranſports the 1magination in an inſtant from Antioch
to Jeruſalem; and now approaching the ſurrounding
objects, obſerves the diſtant profundity of the coali,
till the attention, at length, fixed by diſtincter objects,
more minutely examines the rocks, woods, torrents,
hill-fides, villages, and towns; and the mind ſecretly
exults at the diminution of things, which before ap-
peared ſo great. The ſpectator contemplates the val.
ley obſcured by ſtormy clouds, with a novel delight,
and ſmiles at hearing the thunder, which had ſo ol
ten burſt over his head, growling under his feet;
while the threatening ſummits of the mountains arc
diminiſhed till they appear only like the furrows ol 1
ploughed field, or the ſteps of an amphitheatre ; and
the mind is flattered by an elevation above ſo man
great objects, on which pride makes it look dow
with a ſecret fatisfaction. Vʒf(;̃̃ PT:
When the traveller viſits the interior of theſe moun-

the deſcents, the height of the precipices ſtrike hin
at firſt with terror; but the ſagacity of his mule foo
relieves him, and he examines at his eaſe thoſe pic
tureſque ſcenes which ſucceed each other to enterial

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 183

him. There, as in the Alps, he travels whole days,
to reach a place which is in fight at his departure; he
winds, he deſcends, he ſkirts the hills, he climbs;
and in this perpetual change of oppoſition it ſeems as

if ſome magic power varied for him at every ſtep the

decorations of the ſcenery. Sometimes he fees vil-
lages ready to glide from the rapid declivities on which
they are built, and ſo diſpoſed that the terraces of one

row of houſes ſerve as a ſtreet to the row above them.

Sometimes he ſees a convent ſtanding on a ſolitary
eminence, like Mar-Shaya, in the valley of the I igris.

Here is a rock perforated by a torrent, and become a
natural arch, like that of Nahr-el-Leben*. There

another rock, worn perpendicular, reſembles a lofty

wall. Frequently on the fides of hills he fees beds of

ſtones {ripped and detached by the waters, riſing up
like ruins diſpoſed by art. In many places, the wa-

ters, meeting with inclined beds, have undermined

the intermediate earth, and formed caverns, as at
Nahr-el-kelb, near Antoura: in others are formed
{ubterranean channels, through which flow rivulets

for a part of the year, as at Mar-Elias-e-Roum, and

Mar-Hannaf; but theſe pictureſque ſituations ſome-
times become tragical. From thaws and earthquakes

rocks have been known to Joſe their equilibrium, roll

* The river of milk, which falls into Nahr-el-Salib, called

allo the river of Bairout ; this arch is upwards of one hundred

and lixty feet long, eighty-five wide, and near two hundred

* _ . D
high above the torrent.

+ Theſe ſubterraneous rivulets are common throughout Syria;

there are ſome near Damalcus, at the ſources of the Orontes,

and at thoſe of Jordan. That of Mar-Hanna, a Greek convent
near the village of Shouair, opens by a gulph called EU- Baloua

| Or the Swallower. It is an aperture of about ten feet wide,

ſituated at the bottom of a tunnel: at the depth'of fftcen feet
is a fort of firſt bottom; but it only hides a very profound lateral

opening. Some years ago it was ſhut, as it had ſerved to con-

ccal a murder. The winter rains coming on, thigwaters collec-
ied, and formed a pretty deep lake; but ſome {mall ſtreams

2 «>a — — *.
reer: —

F

_— Gs 7 a 44 $i 26442"
3 —

A =

We. WA

* wo 4
Iron TURNS.
2 7 * *

; rr — ” $A WOE — —
r or gt SEA NES negro, mnas
oo 4 —_ > * KA "TB my 25 Ae» *
* D — - —— 2 . — > 8 F

pus eh ——— — 1 we

- £4 SWINE, eee RAR a

| — —
' 2

e e

7 . 5 7 N
= 5 F —— 4» 2 - — _ ; * r r W vey 2
. — 1 g * —
a 25 43 "—_ * — * _ . 288 — * eo Phy: u FX > + 1 — 8 — > aw & eras TIF =o, > oo We > ee gs . rs. Ale — r * * *
8 2 _ „ BY 5 D & . — re 8 8 "oh 1 0 * WW 4-4 — vt . -* 4 TEA e n U . 5 2 : e a2 — . Ml
1 ": 2 7 2 rr 5 1 " 4 * . , « > : 1 5 8 2 2 5
We 2+ Wi e Ne 0 © ie * L 9-7 1 JET = he -
5 5 2 — ; n 3 5 8 Fe, 0 pe } N | = k Fi : & 1 1 F Hr od. « *
* s : 7 : * 7 22 : — N re * Nera oh > % 5, _ \ 3
- * 5 2 nf = IT \ — . : 3 dads © g 7 . * 7 by 5 D . x 5 . \
„ JB>7, — ELECT - : . * 8

8 A
.

7 "4 1h *
* * 4 o 7
* — een BAS.
* * 2 Fe 2 1

i 3
n yy —*

— nd
I
7. * *

W „ A CAPRI ou mating
#5 $629 4 - " n *

" * . t

bh ID
oat * + >

*
v3
.

vo PERS o
+>,” yy ITS

ap
10
Sn

Ps 91

en *
* * * ooo r ER
Dr —

formerly ſtood.

N — p 133 — 8 — 64
Dr . 22 8 — . — — 27 IM aps * — 2 —
. ... LIAR Fx Bra mee 2; ro 1 —— — — — — l 4 ” e * — = en IN * 5
* . 5 — * — — — R on — - > 8 : 5 "© v * hw n
ITY Mor AW; : ©: EAST tie a ney ee ow F 2 " : *
; 7 1 — = 2 3 — 8 »

r 2:06 vor ett tore oy 3

$94 as 1
* A —
3 — 2 — x
—— . * | +3, TIT ICT ER one: Yen: & 3
* 2 * bd — „* — _ - Boe 5 — — rs BRI 8
„ ae S . 3 12 2 8 2 — N
8 4 * \ „ k = * — 5
4 75 - Baht 5 „ x
* er 3 C
54 » a 2 7
& wo AS TIRE © q
— .
— 2
8 R 2 * >
- > - 2 2 e Z ” xz

TRAVELS IN

Sn upon the adjacent 5 and bury the inet.

ago, and overwhelmed a whole village near Mardjord.
jos, without leaving a ſingle trace to diſcover where it
Still more lately, and near the ſame
ſpot, a whole hill ſide, covered with mulberries and

vines, was detached by a ſudden thaw, and ſliding on

the declivity of the rock, was launched altogether,

like a ſhip from the ſtocks, into the valley. Hence

aroſe a whimſical, but reaſonable litigation, between

the proprietor of the original ground and the owner

of the emigrated land ; the cauſe was carried before
the tribunal of the Emir Youſet, who indemnified
both parties for their mutual loſſes. It might be ex.
pected ſuch accidents would diſguſt the inhabitants of

thoſe mountains; but beſides that they are rare, they
are compenſated by an advantage which makes them

prefer their habitations to the moſt fertile plains, 1
mean the ſecurity they enjoy from the oppreſſions of

the Turks. This fecurity is eſteemed ſo valuable a
bleſſing by the inhabitants, that they have diſplayed

an induſtry on theſe rocks which we may elfe-where

look for in vain. By dint of art and labour they have
compelled a rocky ſoil to become fertile.
to profit by the water, they conduct it by a thouſand
windings along the declivities, or ſtop it by forming

dams in the et bs while in other places, they prop
up grounc, ready t0 crumble away, by walls and ter-
Faces. Almoſt all theſe mountains, thus laboured,

enetrating among the ſtones, they were ſoon. tripped of the
earth which taltened them, and the preſlure of the mals of
water prevailing on, the whole obſtacle was removed with an
ex ploſion like err and the reaction of the compreſſure all

was ſo violent, that a column of water {pouted up, and fell up-
on a houſe at the diſtance of at leaſt two hundred paces, The

current this occahoned formed a Whirlpool, which FOI red up
the trees anggvines planted in the tunnel, and threw them out
by the leco: id aperture. |

tants : ſuch an accident happened about twenty years

Sometimes,

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 185

preſent the appearance of a ſlight of ſtairs, or an
4inphitheatre, each ſtep of which is a row of vines

or mulberry-trees. I have reckoned from a hundred

to a hundred and twenty of theſe gradations on the

| fame declivity, from the bottom of the valley to the

top of the eminence. While amid theſe mountains,
| forgot I was in Turkey, or, if I recolleQted it, only

felt more ſenſibly the powertul influence of even the

feeblelt Cray of Beeren
Ser. HE

Structure of the mountains.

If we examine the ſubſtance of theſe mountains,

we ſhall find they conſiſt of a hard calcareous ſtone,
of a whitiſh colour, ſonorous like free-ſtone, and diſ-

poſed in ſtrata variouſly inclined. This ſtone has
| almoſt the fame appearance through the whole ex-
| tent of Syria; ſometimes it is bare, and looks like

the peeted rocks on the coaſt of Provence: ſuch,

| for inſtance, is the chain of hills on the north- fide

o| the road from Antioch to Aleppo, and which

ſerv es as a bed to the upper part of the rivulet which

piles by the latter city. Near Ermenaz, a village

lit cated between Serkin and Kaftin, is a defile where
| they perfectly reſemble thoſe we paſs in going from
Marſeilles to Toulon. In travelling from Aleppo to
Hama, veins of the fame rock are continually to be

met with in the plain, while the mountains on the

right preſent huge piles, which look like the ruins
of towns and caſtles. The ſame ſtone, under a more
regular form, likewiſe compoſes the greater part of

Laban: Anti-Lebanon, the mountains of the Dru-

zes, Galilee.; and Mount Carmel, and ſtretches to
the louth of the Lake Aſphaltites. The inhabitants
gg. where build their houſes, and make me with

I.

1 baye 1 never ſeen, nor he card it fad, that theſe

—— —— _—— —_ A n
"> ** INES *
is -

IS es

8 *

7
7
8 *
*
7 4
"Aa
E
>
7s
+2 4
& ws
. > *
—
1
44}
at.
"1 -
4
*
iN 3
29
2 F,.
BB
7
48
,
-
1 *
_ .
14
Ft 4
7 1
9 I
8

*% 4 %
1

- A
1
* 9

j __
1 1
+ _"—
&
"# „ -
"x: 2

Be f
oh -B
8
1
1 .

S

mri IN

ſtones contained any petrified ſhells in the upper
regions of Lebanon; but we find, between Batroun
and Djebail, in the Keſraonan, at a little diſtance
from the fea, a quarry of ſchiſtous ſtones, the flakes
of which bear the impreſſions of plants, fiſh, ſhells,
and eſpecially the fea onion. The bed of the tor-
rent of Azkalan, in Paleſtine, is alſo lined with 2
heavy ſtone, porous and falt, which contains a great
number of ſmall volutes and bivalves of the Medi.
terranean. Pocock found a large quantity of them
in the Dead Sea. Iron 1s the only minerial which
abounds here; the mountains of Keſraouan, and of
the Druzes, are full of it. Every ſummer the in.
Eabitants work thoſe mines, which are ſimply och.
reous. FJudea cannot be without it, fince Meſes
obferved above three thouſand years ago, that its
ſtones were of iron. There is a vague report, that
there was anciently a copper mine near Aleppo,
but it muſt have been long ſince abandoned : I have
been told likewiſe among the Druzes, that in the
declivity of the hill I have mentioned, a mineral
was diſcovered which produced both lead and ſilver;
but as ſuch a diſcovery would have ruined the whole
diſtrickt, by attracting the attention of the Turks,
they made haſte to deſtroy every veſtige of it.

* 21 —— r. —— E
3». > M4 — — ＋ — 8 — A - _- == £ -
N — — N * — — T* —
ar 88 * 7 r — = —
he | : : = 5 = * 2 — 4 Ep 9 — — — — 4 — 2 = 2 * 7 * _ * ” p + - x FS my

4 8 1
.

8 —
2

4 —— —

— a= +
ST
R . — —

SECT IV

K 2 £ - pe 14 : 2 won  OI” * 2 ** _ ; =" * y _ —— * 72 — - 5 1 0 s =o A K 5 . * 3 = ua — 2 * 5 — 1 8 — —
i wn IT 2 2 R — SEA - Fa r EE 4 . >"; Xs. „ oP. " , . w_ wv a * 3 nr — — — — 2
AY x. r 1 1 4 WV : i es A IE FS I... vat A L — —Þ 2 3" SO WO ob OAT — 2 5 D — 1 n . £ LEE Tre : £ 2 2228
— — — - ——— 12 = PORT Ban 5 _ ” 3 A | Y — 2 * 8. © — ee — — —— 7 n 2 2 2 2 2
* 2 WV, 3 — bl G NF a ws . 20" O . 1 4 - —— = b 8 3 —*
n . — 2 4 — 5 SONS 3 e 3 ä = = — — = I—_— 2 —.— I l "al =
: 4 - © ns 177 rar Pg.s 7 — — * 3 wh * 3 : 5 — — _ N - 9 -,- =
C1 r : : roars ee $724 eat eee 2 — ASL Cnc 2 I : *
2 —— — NY get 5 T5 ? «m2 tg —— — 8 1
8 Po — * — Aiane: A *

222 ONT So A 4 r
R 2 5 2727 © CES =
2 wu 3 - 8 8 SORES « ER — —— 3 N
, L.A . N TE n Pp d

0 1
* * Dn — —— — —
& ; % = . —

5 Volcanoes and Earthquakes.
ö = v7

? The ſouth of Syria, that is, the hollow through
_ which the Jordan flows, is a country of volcanos;
* the bituminous and ſulphureous fources of the Lake
_ Aſphaltites, the lava, the pumice-ſ{tones, thrown upol
=” its banks, and the hot bath of Tabaria, demonſtrate
that this valley has been the ſeat of a ſubterraneous
fire which is not yet extinguiſhed. Clouds of ſmoke
are often obſerved to iſſue from the lake, and ne

k 42 — * — — 232 —
— fe Ld + * . 2 * £ . = =
CERES REGED oe to WP nn Goin Sri C
g Y "On — 4s F — — F 5 . : 2 7
Le” 8 — — .. bo ne eee Ru * _—_— 1 Wr Thar — 7
. 12 oP Fa. * >

o 3 2 ore 992 r
1 -4 3 > 4 - * — s

N *.
Mo
1
_ + —
vx

EGYPT AND 8YRIA, 187

crevices to be formed upon its banks. If conjeQures
in ſuch caſes were not too liable to error, we might
ſuſpect that the whole valley has been formed only by
a violent ſinking of a country which formerly poured
the Jordan into the Mediterranean. It appears cer-
tain, at leaſt, that the cataſtrophe of five cities, deſ-
troyed by fire, muſt have been occaſioned by the erup-

tion of a volcano, then burning. Strabo expreſsly

fays,* © that the tradition of the inhabitants of the
© country, (that is, of the Jews themſelves,) was,
« that formerly the valley of the Lake was peopled
by thirteen flouriſhing cities, and that they were
« ſwallowed up by a volcano.”* This account feems
to be confirmed by the quantities of ruins ſtill found

by travellers on the weſtern border. Theſe eruptions

have ceaſed long ſince, but earthquakes, which ufu-
ally ſucceed them, ſtill continue to be felt at intervals
in this country. The coaſt in general is ſubje@ to
them, and hiſtory gives us many examples of earth-
quakes, which have changed the face of Antioch,
Laodicea, Tripoli, Berytus, Tyre, Sidon, &c. In
our time, in the year 1759, there happened one

which cauſed the greateſt ravages. It is faid to have

deſtroyed, in the valley of Balbek, upwards of twenty
thouſand perſons, a loſs which has never been repair-
ed. For three months the ſhocks of it terrified the
inhabitants of Lebanon ſo much as to make them
abandon their houſes, and dwell under tents. Very
ately (the 14th of December, 1783,) when I was at
Aleppo, ſo violent a ſhock was felt, as to ring the
bell in the houſe of the French Conful. It is re-
marked in Syria, that earthquakes ſeldom happen but
in winter, after the autumnal rains; and this obſerva-
tion, conformable to that made by Doctor Shaw in
Barbary, ſeems to prove that the action of water on
the dried earth has ſome ſhare in theſe convulſive

Ib. 16, p. 764.

188 © TRAVELS IN

motions. It. may not be improper to remark, that
the whole of Aſia Minor is ſubject to them in like
manner. |

SECT. TOM.
/ the Locuſis.
Syria, as well as Egypt, Perſia, and almoſt ali

the ſouth of Aſia, is ſubject to another calamity no
leſs dreadtul, I mean thoſe clouds of locuſts, {o often

inentioned by travellers. The quantity of theſe

inſects is incredible to all who have not themſelves
witneſſed their aſtoniſhing numbers; the whole earth
is covered with them for the ſpace of ſeveral leagues.

The noiſe they make in browzing on the trees and
herbage, may be heard at a great diſtance, and re.

ſembles that of an army foraging in ſecret. The
Tartars themſelves are as leſs deſtructive enemy than
thete little animals; one would 'imagine, that fire
had followed their progreſs. Wherever their myri-
ads ſpread, the verdure of the country diſappears,
as if a curtain had been removed; trees and plants,

tripped of their leaves, and reduced to their naked
boughs and ſtems, cauſe the dreary image of winter
to ſucceed in an inſtant, to-the rich ſcenery of the

ſpring. When theſe clouds of locuſts take their

flight, to ſurmount any obſtacles, or to traverſe more

rapidly a deſert foil, the heavens may literally be

laid to be obſcured with them. Happily this calami-
ty is not frequently repeated, for it is the inevitable
forerunner of famine, and the maladies it occaſions.
The inhabitants of Syria have remarked, that locuſts

are always bred by too mild winters, and that they

conſtantly come from the deſert of Arabia. From
this obſervation, it is ealy to conceive that, the cold
not having been rigorous enough to deſtroy their

eggs, they multiply ogy Lf and, the herbage

— . FRAIL

failing them i in the immenſe as of the deſert, in-
numerable legions iſſue forth. When they make
their firſt appearance on the frontiers of the culti-

their herbs and wet ſtraw fail them; they then dig
are the ſouth and ſouth-eaſterly winds, and the bird

| flocks, like ſtarlings, and not only greedily devour
they are reſpected by the peaſants, and nobody is

 ſouth-eaſterly winds, they drive with violence theſe

their carcaſſes are thrown on the ſhore, they infect
| the air for ſeveral days, even to a great diſtance.
We may reaſonably preſume, that in ſo extenſive

ga country as Syria, the quality of the ſoil is not
WH crery where the ſame. In general the land of the
| mountains is rude ; that of the plains fat and loamy,
and exhibits every ſign of the greateſt ſecundity. In

the territory of Aleppo, towards Antioch, it reſem-

WH very fine brick-duſt, or Spaniſh Snuff. The

waters of the Orontes, however, which traverſes this
WH viiric, are tinged with white, which proceeds from
* the nature of the lands towards its ſource. Almoſt

ind a pebble. The winter rains occaſion deep quag-
mires, and on the return of ſummer, the heat pro-

feet deep.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 159

vated country, the inhabitants ſtrive to drive them
of, by raiſing large clouds of ſmoke, but frequently

trenches, where numbers of them as buried; but
the two moſt efficacious deſtroyers of theſe inſects,

called the ſamarmar. Theſe birds, which greatly
reſemble the wood-pecker, follow them in numerous

them, but kill as many as they can; accordingly,

ever allowed to ſhoot them. As for the ſoutherly and

clouds of locuſts over the Mediterranean, where
ſuch quantities of them are drowned that, when

every where elſe the earth is brown, and like fine
F garden mould. In the plains, ſuch as thoſe of Hau-
ran, Gaza, and Balbek, it is often difficult even to

duces, as in Egypt, large cracks i in the earth ſev eral

_— · 5
ae
-— = |

*
5
1
i
:
:
4 *
bi
1
þ
} 1
2
" }
. >
*9
2
* '
.
1
1
+ o
7 !
4
:
b 3 * 5
5 1
*
+6
=
K
= » 6
1 1
i
* Big my
44.5 #
+ \
„
3 »
"WM
— Bf ,
8 4
7 þ 4
.{:%
. o
:
[2 * *
Ty . :
: a4 :
©87 (1 7
1 9
* 1 -
*%
is" ?
© :
bb *
1 1
1 q
+35 —
48
»F* 2
« 1 —
== |
WH
IK
»; "—
- LY
. * *
—_
& <0
q
18 7
- =
at 5
* = *
3 : 3
4 = .5-.--
n 8
12 "_
Þ 3
R ©S
* 4
* , n
1 12
* *
* Wo
iS 10
Ly
: 3
5
: *
Py. 4
od 1,
7 þ
"TS
5 4
4
©
* .
- .- =
32 - «
' * J .
9
#3 "7
92
186? "» 6
-.,*
—
25
*
1
2:8
1H -
4 1
11
3
* .
> C :
. -_-
1 1
[7 1
So
= 4 N
1
% 4
- DS.
& -—*
ons -
« 78
oF
:: 1
1
9
4
«<
7 27
: 'f 1
1
„
: bs
1
.
ar.
* -
; —_
$5 1 38
+, 8
+23: Bl
1 7
287713 *
Ty
*
15 s
$538
|
:
(3: 'uR
11
27's
av
i
$$ .7
i} #
: 2
[| My
[+
1

—

th * * 5 —_ tou cath 3688 >... OW lh” 1 SUP
4 — 2 — . . —
. —

190 TRAVELS IN

Secr VI.
Of the Rivers and Lakes,

The exaggerated, or, if you will, the grand idea
which hiſtory and travellers uſually give us of diſtant
objects, have accuſtomed us to {peak of the waters of
Syria with a reſpect which amuſes our imagination.
We are fond of ſaying the river Jordan, the river
Orontes, the river Adonis. If however, we wilh to
preſerve to words their proper fignification, we ſhall
hardly find in this country any other than rival,
The channels of the Orontes and the Jordan, the two
moſt conſiderable, are ſcarcely ſixteen paces vide
at their mouths ;* the others do not merit to be
mentioned. If the rains and melted ſnow give then
ſome importance in the winter, their courſe is only
to be diſcovered, during the remainder of the year,
by the round ſtones and fragments of rocks with
which their beds are filled. They are nothing but
torrents and caſcades; and it may be conceived that,
from the proximity of the mountains, among whic
they riſe, to the ſea, their waters have not time t0
collect in long valleys, ſo as to form rivers. The
obſtacles oppoſed by theſe mountains, in ſeveral plz
ces, at their iſſue, have formed conſiderable lakes
ſuch as thoſe of Antioch, Aleppo, Damaſcus, Houia
Tabaria, and that which is honoured with the name
of the Dead Sea, or Lake of Aſphaltites. All thels
lakes, except the laſt, are of treſh water, and contain
ſeveral ſpecies of fiſh, different fromf thoſe we al
acquainted with.

* The Jordan, it ak be owned; has conkdewble depth bu
if the Orontes were not impeded by repeated obſtacles, it would
be quite dry during the ſummer.

I The lake of Antioch abounds particularly with eels, and!
ſort of red Aſh. of an indifferent OT" The Cn wid

EGYPT: AND SYRIA. =

Lake Aſphaltites, alone, contains neither animal

nor vegetable life. We ſee no verdure on its banks,
nor are fiſh to be found within its waters; but it
zs not true that its e>halations are peſtiferous, ſo.
as to deſtroy birds flying over it. It is very com-

mon to fee ſwallows ſkimming its ſurface, and dip-
ing for the water neceflary to build their neſts,

The real cauſe which deprives it of vegetables and
| animals is the extreme ſaltneſs of the water, which
is infinitely ſtronger than that of the ſea. The ſoii

around it, equally impregnated with this ſalt, produ-
ces no plants, and the air itfelt, which becomes

loaded with it from evaporation, and which receives

alſo the ſulphureous and bituminous vapours, cannot

be favourable to vegetation: hence the deadly af-
pect which reigns around this lake. In other re-

pets, the ground about it, however, is not marſhy,
| and its waters are limpid and incorruptible, as muſt
de the cafe with a diſſolution of ſalt. The origin of

this mineral is eaſy to be diſcovered: for on the

ſouth-weſt ſhore, are mines of foſſil ſalt, of which 1
have brought away ſeveral ſpecimens. They are
| ſituated in the ſide of the mountains which extend
along that border, and for time immemorial, have
ſupplied the neighbouring Arabs, and even the city
of Jeruſalem. We find allo on this ſhore fragments
ot {ulphur and bitumen, which the Arabs convert
into a trifling article of commerce; as alſo hot foun-

tains, and deep crevices, which are diſcovered at a
diſtance, by little Pyramids built on the brink of

them. We like! iſe fnd a ſort of ſtone, which, on
rubbing, emits a noxious ſmell, burns like bitumen, |

receives a poliſh like alabaſter, and is uſed for pav-
ing of court-yards. At intervals, we alſo meet with

unſhapen blocks, which prejudiced eyes miſtake for

keep a perpetual Lent, Ee great quentities of them. Lake
Tabariaſis ſtill richer; crabs, eſpecially, are very numerous, but,

5 To environs are inhabited only by Mahometans, it is but little
Mi ied,

—

. AS

— — —

» £944 Am? — 1
* K r s :

Athena. CE
— 2 — 2

» * 3
7 ns

N
1
4

;
+; =”
. i; 25
1 564
.
9
* 4
.
LEM 53
3
e
. * *
4 11 7
* "3k
cn
1778
7
Aer 3
Ws 55
n
2x45 2
wy
o
£1.10
3
So We:
2 47
4 A 4
117
4 -
4 K
* t ,
i;
WE
.
RE J
R ;
vet *
© > $-
.
4
9
*
4.
u C n
1461
bis? *
th 3
1:7 4 ,
4 *
*
9
by,
TK +6
; ,
7;
=
4
om
| *
t
*
i
. k
hy
187
1
291
18
15
1
* 2 y
7
„
A
Bs +
144
£ KI;
Fe.
x4
.
1 **
if . 1 *
.
es
"WM
0 1 *
19
4
is 4
1
1 K
1 70

M$
.
IF!
i
[3H
F

— *
e
_—_—
Sm.
r

1 TRAVELS IN

mutilated ſtatues, and which paſs with ignorant and
ivperſtitious pilgrims, for monuments of the adven-
ture of Lol's wife, though it is no where faid the
was metamorphoſed into ſtone like Niobe, but into
falt, which mult have melted the enſuing winter.
Some naturaliſts have been greatly embarraſſed to
find a diſcharge for the waters which the Jordan is
continually pouring into the lake, and have therefore
been inclined to ſuſpect it had a communication with
the Mediterranean; but, beſides that we know of no
gulph to corroborate this ſuppoſition, it has been de.
monſtrated, by accurate calculations, that evaporation
1s more than ſufficient to carry off the waters brought
by the river. It is, in fact, very conſiderable, and
frequently becomes ſenſible to the eye, by the ſogs
with which the lake is covered, at the riſing of the
fun, and which are afterwards diſperſed by the heat.

SEC T. "FI
Of the Climate

It is an opinion pretty generally received, that
Syria is a very hot country; but it will be neceſſary
to- make ſeveral diſtinctions : firſt, on account of the
difference of latitude, which, from one extremity to
the other, is not leſs than ſix degrees: ſecondly,
from the natural diviſion of the country into low and
flat, and high and mountainous, which divifion occa-
ions a ftill more ſenſible difference; for while Reau-
mur's thermometer ſtands at twenty-five and twenty-
fix degrees upon the coaſt, it hardly riſes to twenty
or twenty-one among the mountains*. In winter,

* Along the coaſt of Syria, and at Tripoli, in particular, the
Jowelt degrees to which the thermometer falls in winter, are
eight and nine 18 Shes above the Treezing point ; in ſummer, in
cloſe apartments, it riſes from 25 to 269, As for the barome-
ter, it is remarkable that at the latter end of May, it fixes 24
28 inches, and neve; varies till October.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 193

therefore, the whole chain of mountains is covered
with ſnow, while the lower country is always tree

muſt firſt then eſtabliſh two general climates ; the one
very hot, which is that of the coalt, and the interior

Acre, Gaza, Hauran, &c. the other temperate, and

mountains, at leaſt at a certain height. The ſummer
of 1784 was reckoned, among the Druzes, one of
the hotteſt they remembered, yet I never found the
heat to be compared to that I had felt at Saide or
Bairout. „ .

the ſame as in the middle provinces of France ; the

and the earth is frequently covered ſeveral feet deep
with it for months together; the ſpring and autumn

portable. In the plains, on the contrary, as ſoon as
tie lun returns to the equator, the tranſition is rapid
to oppreſſive heats, which continue to the end of
October. But then the winter is ſo moderate, that
the orange, date, banana, and other delicate trees,
Houriſh in the open air; and it appears equally ex-
| traordinary and pictureſque to an European at Tripoli,
to behold, under his windows, in the month of Ja-

| while the lofty head of Lebanon is covered with ice
and ſnow. It muſt nevertheleſs be obſerved that, in
the northern parts, and to the eaſt of the mountains,

ng leſs hot. At Antioch, Aleppo, and Damaſcus,
there are ſeveral weeks of froſt and ſnow every win-

ter; which ariſes from the ſituation of the country
[till more than the difference of latitude. For, in
fact, all the plain to the eaſt of the mountains 1s

from it, or at leaſt it lies only for an inſtant. We

plains, ſuch as thoſe of Balbek, Antioch, Tripoli,

almoſt like our own, which is the climate of the

In this climate, the order of the ſeafons is nearly

winter, which laſts from November to March, is
ſharp and rigorous. - Not a year paſſes without ſnow,

are mild, and the ſummer heat is abſolutely inſup-

nuary, orange-trees loaded with flowers and fruit,

the winter is more rigorous, without the ſummer be-

. P ˙ IDC LAID AG — — — — ——
A . m 22 — *
- ————_ _— 1 rr
2 a po ER - **

194 TRAVELS IN

very high above the level of the ſea, expoſed to alt
the parching winds of the north and north-eaft, and
fereened from the humid winds of the ſouth and
fouth weſt. Beſides, Antioch and Aleppo receive
from the mountains of Alexandretta, which are with:
in fjoht, an air which the ſnow, that covers them
fo long, muſt neceſſarily render very ſharp. _
Syria, therefore, unites different climates under
the ſame ſky, and collects, within a narrow compaſs,
pleaſures and productions which nature has elſe—
where difperſed at great diſtances of times and pla-
ces. With us, for inſtance, ſeaſons are feparated by
months; there we may ſay they are only ſeparated
by hours. If in Saide or Tripoli, we are 1ncomme-
ded by the heats of July, in fix hours we are in
the neighbouring mountains, in the temperature of
March; or, on the other hand, if chilled by. the
froſts of December, at Berſharria, a day's journey
brings us back to the coaſt, amid the flowers of
May“. The Arabian poets have therefore ſaid, that
the Sannin bears winter on his head, ſpring upon
his ſhoulders, and autumn in his boſom, while |
* ſummer lies fleeping at his feet.” I have myſel!
experienced the truth of this figurative obſervation,
during the eight months I refided at the monaſtery.
of Mar-Hanna+, ſeven leagues from Bairout. A!
the end of February, I left at Tripoli a variety of
vegetables which were in perfection, and many flow.
ers in full bloom. On my arrival at Antouriaf,

I ——— —
5 = 05 2 2 — 1 = - K _ 8
3 3 * 8 "= — * ig "4 W
a of toe — ME; nh G — x =O
G OE * of r = = tA 97. =
1 — inks, VE. 2!

* >>

—ů — DD —
— 8 proy n * 8
5 3K 2 * 55
- S
A 5 : - -
*

2
— *
IR —ů— — =
— — —

— — 494 > > 3" AAR * —
. — — — 2 —
4 =y y
* 2 8
* * I A x — -= * of
2 2 25 aL x 9p

—

— — —
— —

Y —— :
IP ren Lott ER — Q— yt ne 5
— "rg 2 — —— — 3 RR. — 1555 — 2
— * 9 N — — -
— .

In  ——- —_— 7 — "> My * * = 8 — . * — ** 18 * 8 . 1 ERC — =o —2 7 2 — M \ = - 4 \ <>
"6 * 5 _ "Roms Keg A — — 1 3 ee. DJ EY 2 — r wa —— = ” = Ix 2 ap Ss : — >. 2 — — 8 ä 8 - =
* 3 5 ö — 5 ae —— Tp — — L 7 25 EARS ns . 4205 — — . — tr ay * DET : * 8 — — — - = = == — - =
= I 2 PX ; . r ——ů e * [& 25 8 8 — — : — : - IS — ER &. 4
- To — * 2 3 » + 446; ” 4 Ee 242 2 — — 2 — Z 8 * ” — BN — — - — N — I TE. "a 4
— 2 7 .. . ̃ ᷣ > by hoe ꝶ —ͥÜU . ̃ĩͤG— 3 9 *
7 — — r (os or > Ss 4, 7 „ F r W - - =" > * 2
— EINE. ant TAK * . n * 5 — „ A ET Ion — -* . n 2 mn a
a a —_—+ es oy e 5 . a » CPD 2. 2
— — ; 5 + I Re Þ a
— — 2 WF . : *
. q " = - * ** #
— —

*

Tas

. - —_—— ˙

2
—
— 2 —
2 — = *
. 4 — 2
— . DTS: I

=. ; ——

*
v7
4 7
*
Is
4
IF:
.
1 'T
Fe
5
8 N.
HR
1
* WH
1:5 k
1 ! 5
f 7
* ww > it
r
45 e.
7 * 1
1G EH F249
4 15 *, N.
N. + i *
Na
4 * 1
1 1
N ts 118
_——
138%  LISL
2, FIRE *
a F
bots!
[
. (1 [2 . 17
. 1
17 4 wh
* 1 I
5
*

* This is the practice of ſeveral of the inhabitants of this dif
rrict, who pals the winter near Tripoli, while their houles dle
buried under the ſnow, e

+ Mar-Hanna el Shouair; i. e. St. John, near the village of
Shouair. This monaſtery is ſituated in a ſtoney valley, Which
Joins to that of Vahr el Keb, or Tortent of the Dog. The rel,
ous are Greek Catholics, of the order of Saint Baſil: 1 {hal
have occaſion to {peak of it more amply,
t A houſe formerly belonging to the J<ſaits, but occupies #
pretent by the Lazariſts. Cs CE ns Jo

wa .

P_—

— ww

——

dont —

pos
—

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 195

{und the plants only beginning to ſhoot ; and, at

Mar-Hanna, every thing was covered with ſnow. It
had nor entirely left the Sannin till the end of April,

and, already, in the valley it overlooks, roſes had
begun to bud. The early figs were paſt at Bairout,

when they were firſt gathered with us, and the ſilk-
worms were in cod, before our mulberry-trees were
half ſtripped. „ 15 is
To this advantage, which perpetuates enjoyments
by their ſucceſſion, Syria adds another, that of multi-
plying them by the variety of her productions. Were

nature aſſiſted by art, thoſe of the moſt diſtant coun-

tries might be produced within the ſpace of twenty
leagues. At preſent, in ſpite of the barbariſm of a

government which is an enemy to all induſtry and

improvement, we are aſtoniſhed at the variety this
province affords. Beſides wheat, rye, barley, beans,

and the cotton plant, which is cultivated every where,

ue find a multitude of uſeful and agreeable produc-

tions, appropriated to different ſituations. Paleſtine
abounds in ſeſamum, from which oil is procured,

and doura* as good as that of Egyptfſ. Maize thrives
in the light ſoil of Balbek, and even rice is cultivated,

with ſucceſs, on the borders of the marſhy country
of Havula. They have lately begun to plant ſugar-

canes in the gardens of Saide and of Bairout, and
they find them equal thoſe of the Delta. Indigo

grows without cultivating, on the banks of the Jor-

dan, in the country of Biſan, and only requires care
to make it of an excellent quality. The hill-fides. of
_ Latakia produce tobacco, which is che principal arti-
dle of its commerce with Damietta and Cairo. This
is now cultivated throughout all the mountains. As

A ſort of pulſe, ſomething like lentils, which grows in
cluſters, on ſtalks fix or ſeven feet high. It is the holcus arun-
ainaceous of Linnaeus. „ b 1 |

I I never ſaw any buck-wheat in Syria, and oats are very rare,
Nye and ſtraw are given to the horles, .

AA

— —
r

r
r 4 7
)

= b % 4 $ 7 1 5 1
> ps r e 7 2 . * 3. "_ My „ r 7
= . fed M . WIE. $ x A ET” . * 2 _ = 5 F a + ba, „ Ac 5 Fs or tinged r = Js Ie. = * ; 7 * 2 + 55 2 y >> . Jn 4 Nom; — EE 72
p n 4 2 1 * Si ch. = I * 8 - . N 8 — EINE WY _ PII: . N _ o - \ p . ga — CINE -
1 _ ——
0 — ——— — — — . ee OO OLED woe 4

þ 4 pa i a
:
* n
n * :
5 RR

a —— —E— * n Ü — Er AP FA SET 2 IO — TLSNE 8 7 : .
—— . rn . —— 4 q 5 - — — — — —— +76 2 — — Y 8 * 4
"I - bans > ts, 3 ++ D — l 4 wot i A $9445 be eel _ 7 — 2 0 , >; * 8 2 LEED n *
\ kt 4 260 Ln CoM i Eres n r 8 , : 2 3 * n — 2 * * 2 n * 3 > * — —— — mr ney » — —— Roy
ES es ee e — r rent, Fark ' . x; N F : . Wwe Ou 4 6
v4 8 N r Fre 21 * * 2 8 3 = * Sk , 2 0 5 Ss
: 7 er 2 a 3 * yd a - p, | Co q oo " — $ *
1 1 4 1 e * 2. .
*

—

—

— —
——

1
3355 4 45
o * 4 4
. 1
E
3 7
Bt).
iv
FM. "8; -4
NH SLA,
N We
14 14
1
= if
1 a
| HP
U 44“
an
i WM 4
1 Ms
=y "tit
" ;
11 1
nyt p
1 Md
07 n
1 Vi
oc 71
FR) n
2 4 o
*% il
ff un
fo
. i
ie
0
1
M 4 1
N F
> Nj x
71
+ Att 1
n
Ul a] 8
i 89; 5? TL
. 4 i, ma
\ . 12 bj
. j
.
e
7 9
N "WHIT
' 1
If BI .
5 =
WISE
i 1
N
3 wes 1 3
"bo =
* i
119 74
N
4 0 N
1 4 4
12
. 4
5 %
* 4
F * 12
hats 1 5
. =
12 1
16. .
Les 15
17 1
her? 65
* kt el
»#4; ITY
k Fa
" 7 42 I
: 1
1 N 14
Hip LIES
4 T
kk *
3
N 1.
SI
þ ET
4 wet \
| 17 i 3 C N
Yo N. 1
9 187
- 7 3 9 it
4 .
4 n
0 1 1
ki "As -+
L 4, 1
( Wy
. . 5
5 $45 k
74 ms 115 1
N
I Na
( „ 44
"18K
14% G
1
. t
i ö 7
WH. © |
ö 148%
111
ts Fm
r 15
=} 0
1.
1:6 '
14
|
MY
1 *
17 71 fi
{ .
4 $6
1 ;
13
"1 d
LIT: 4
7 "733k 1
91. & ny
„
r
Ny Mc
„ 1
n
{ff WER! 4
_
ER
C W
y Py ol
% „ 1
.
107 wv
* WIT:
$4 12
ſy *% 10
5 „ &
16 .
D
14 * 8
pi 1 4
by #7 ;
7” #8
1
. 1
b 2 .
[ vi
n
nnn
15
I! * kt
44 WE
4% N. Me þ 6
n
iin.
11/51 307008
70
j Li
* *
1 |
8+ WU;
N
1
HP
. A 3+ $3
* 1
* 4
.
144
* 8
1
, 4
* 1
. © 5 ll
1
ee
in *
14170 *
1
U $ 4:06
. xe
| WE
+4. ©
1 144
419 2.
G 1
an
i 17 F.
. 1
, „
. 11 *
T0
14 4 Wh
I i} „
l WA 6 oy |
; 1
'4*7 3." W
06-54} TH
Nein.
1842
[ 15; Wag
1 11 me
We 4" i
r
2:01 of
I } 1
r
r
58.
r y
Z g 3;
N
*
7

: 8

which afford red and white wines that might rival

grew rapidly, nor has this town loſt its lemons, its

rout figs like thoſe of Marſeilles, and bananas not in.

tection as It 1s found in Mexico and St. Domungo] 3

196 TRAVELS IN

for trees, the e dee of Provence grows, at Anti.
och, and at Ramla, to the height of the beech. The
white mulberry-tree conſtitutes the wealth of the
whole country of the Druzes, by the beauritul filks
which are produced on it, while the vine, ſupported
on poles, or winding round the oaks, ſupplying grapes

thoſe of Bordeaux. Before the ravages occaſioned
by the late troubles, there were, in the gardens of
Vaffa, two plants of the Indian cotton-tree, which

enormous citrons*, or its water-melons, which are
preferable even to thoſe of Broulosf. Gaza produces
dates like Mecca, and potnegranates like Algiers;
Tripoli affords oranges equal to thoſe of Malta; Bai-

ferior to thoſe of St. Domingo ; Aleppo enjoys the
excluſive advantage of producing piſtachios ; and Da-
maſcus juſtly boaſts of poſſeſſing all the fruits known
in our provinces. Its ſtoney ſoil ſuits equally the
apples of Normandy, the plumbs of Touraine, and
the peaches of Paris. Twenty ſorts of apricots are
reckoned there, the ſtone of one of which contains
a kernel highly valued through all Turkey. In ſhort,
the cochineal plant, which grows on all that coaſt,
contains, perhaps, that precious inſect in as high per-

* 4 have ſeen Grams which weighed eighteen pounds, The

+ Broulos on the coaſt of Egypt, produces better water-mel-
ons than are found in the reſt of the Delta, where the fruits 18
general are too watery,

＋ It was long imagined that the inſect of the cookinesl Was
peculiar to Mexico; and the Spaniards, to ſecure the excluſive
poſſeſſion of it, have prohibited the exportation of the living
cochineal, under pain of death; but M. Thierri, who ſucceeded
in bringing it away, in 17971, and carried it to St. Domingo,
found the nopals of that iſland contained it before his arrival.
It ſeems as if nature ſcarcely ever le parated inſects from che

plants appropriated : to chem.

6 8

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 197

and if we conſider that the mountains of the Yemen,
\ which produce ſuch excellent coffee, are only a con-

tinuation of thoſe of Syria, and that their ſoil and
climate are almoſt the ſame*, we ſhall be induced to
believe that Judea, eſpecially, might eaſily cultivate

this valuable production of Arabia. With thele nu-
merous advanfages of climate and of ſoil, it is not

aſtoniſhing that Syria ſhould always have been el-
teemed a moſt delicious country, and thar the Greeks
and Romans ranked it among the moſt beautiful of
their provinces, and even thought it not inferior to
Egypt. In more modern times, alſo, a Pacha, who
was acquainted with both theſe provinces, being aſked
to which he gave the preference, replied, © Egypt,
„ vithout doubt, is a moſt beautiful farm, but Syria
„is a charming country-houſe.“ SS.

* The ſituation of the country of Yemen and Tahama is very

ſimilar to that of Syria, See M. Niebuhr Voyage en Arabie.

+ To complete the Natural Hiſtory of Syria, it is proper to
add that it produces all our domeſtic animals, and, beſides them,
the buffalo and the camel, whoſe utility is ſo well known. We
allo find gazelles (antelopes) in the plains, which ſupply the
place of our roe-bucks; in the mountains are numbers of wild-
boars, not ſo large nor ſo herce as ours, The ſtag and the deer

re unknown there; the wolf and the real fox are very rare;

but there is a prodigious quantity of the middle ſpecies named
Chacal (jackall) which in Syria is called wauwee, in imitation of
its howl; and in Egypt dib, or wolf. Theſe jackalls go in
droves, and frequent the environs of the towns, where they
feed on what carrion they can find. They never attack any
body, but are always ready to fave themſelves by flight, Every
evening they ſeem to give each other the watch-word, to begin
howling, and their cries, which are very doleful, ſometimes
laſt a quarter of an hour, In unfrequented places there are alſo
hyenas, in Arabic named daba, and ounces, improperly called

gers (in Arabic nema), Lebanon, the country of the Druzes,

Nablous, Mount Carmel, and the environs of Alexandretta, are
their principal haunts. But, in return, the country 1s exempt
from lions and bears. Water fowl are very plentiful ; land
game is not ſo abundant, except in particular diſtrifts, The

dare and the large red partridge are the molt common; rabbits,

198 TRAVELS IN

8 K C To VIII. EN,

 Sualities of the Air.

I muſt not forget to ſpeak of the qualities of the
air and waters. Theſe elements preſent in Syria
very remarkable phenomena. On the mountains,
and in all the elevated plain which ſtretches to the
eaſtward, the air is light, pure and dry; while on
the coaſt, and eſpecially from Alexandretta to Vala,
is moilt and heavy, thus Syria is divided lengthways
into two different diſtricts, ſeparated by the chain of
mountains which alſo cauſe their diverſity ; for theſe
preventing, by their height, the free paſſage of the
weſterly winds, force the vapours which they bring
from the ſea to collect in the valleys; and as air is
light only in proportion to its purity, theſe are un-
able to riſe above the ſummits of this rampart. The
conſequence is, that the air of the deſert and the
mountains, though ſufficiently wholeſome for ſuch
as are in no danger of pulmonary complaints, 1s
hurtful to thoſe who are, and it is neceſſary to ſend |
ſuch from Aleppo to Latakia or Saide. This good
property of the air on the coaſt is, however, out.
weighed by more ſerious bad oncs, and it may in
general be pronounced unhealthy, as it cauſes, in-
termittent and putrid fevers, and thoſe deijuxions
of the eyes, of which I have ſpoken in. treating of
Egypt. The evening dews, and fleeping on the

if there are any, are extremely ſcarce. The francolin, or ati
gen, is more numerous at Tripoli, and in the neighbourhood of
Vafa. Nor ought we to omit obſerving that a ipecies of tie
colibri (or the humming- bird) ſtill exiſts in the territory of Side.
M. J. B. Adanſon, formerly interpreter in that city, who cut
tivates natural hiſtory with equal taſte and ſucceſs, met with one,
which he made à preſent of to his brother the Academiclan
This, and the pelican ac the only remarkable birds in Syria.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 199

terraces; are found much 1 init in the moun-

tainous and interior parts of the-eountry, as tbe
diſtance from the ſea is greater, which confirms |
what 1 have already obſerved upon that ſubject.

| 8 E © > r. IX.

Lualities of the Waters.

"The waters of this country have alſo a remarkable
iiference. In the mountains, that of the ſprings is
light, and of a very good quality; but in the plain,
whether to the eaſt or weſt, it it has no natural or
artificial communication with the ſprings, we find
nothing but brackiſh water, which becomes ſtill.
| more ſo the nearer we approach the deſert, where
there is not a drop of any other. This inconveni-
ence has rendered rain fo precious to the inhabitants
of the frontiers, that they have in all ages taken
care to collect it in wells and caverns carefully clo-
led: hence, among all ruins, ciſterns are the firſt
i things we diſcover.
Ihe face of the heavens, in Syria, particularly
on the coaſt, and in the deſert, is in general more
conſtant and regular than in our climates; rarely is
the ſun obſcured for two ſucceſſive days. In the
coarſe of a whole ſummer we ſee few clouds, and
ſill leſs rain; which only begins about the end of
October, and then is neither long nor plentiful.
The huſbandmen wiſh for it to ſow what they call
their  8 TY OM ones 4 +6 N * 2 . | CIT ——

In eenber and January, the rain becomes more
country. It ſometimes rains alſo in March and

April; and the huſbandman avails himſelf of it to

the year is uniform, and drought is more irequently

About the autumnal equinox, the north-weſt wind

and ſouth-weſt, which prevail from November to

of the Arabs, the fathers of the rains. In March

22 m_ nts. - a. a

EGYPT AND SYRIA, _ 20k

they become teebler as we advance toward the
north, and are much more ſupportable in the moun-
tains than, in the flat country. Their duration, at
each return, is uſually of four-and-twenty hours, or
| three days. The eaſterly winds which follow, con-
| tinue till June, when a north wind ſucceeds, with
which veſſels may go and return along all the coaſt.
At the ſame ſeaſon too, the wind varies through all
the points, every day, paſling with the fun from the
caſt to the ſouth, and from the ſouth to the weſt, to
return by the north, and recommence the ſame cir-
cuit. At this time alſo a local wind, called the land-
breeze, prevails along the coaft, during the night;
it ſprings up after ſun-ſet, laſts till ſun-rifing, and
reaches only two or three leagues out at ſea.
The caules of all theſe phenomena are problems
| well deſerving the attention of natural philoſophers.
No country is better adapted to obſervations of this
kind than Syria. It ſeems as if nature had there
prepared whatever is neceſſary to the ſtudy of her
operations. We, in our foggy climates, in the
depth of vaſt continents, are unable to purſue the
great changes which happen in the atmoſphere : the
| confined horizon which bounds our view, circum-
ſeribes alſo our ideas. The field of our obſervation
is very limited; and a thopſand circumitances com-
bine to vary the effects @ natural cauſes. There,
en, the contrary, an immenſe ſcene opens before
us, and the great agents of nature are collected in
a [pace which renders it eaſy to watch their various
| operations. To the welt is the vaſt liquid plain of
the Mediterranean; to the eaſt the plain of the de-
(rt, no leſs vaſt, but abſolutely dry; in the midſt
of theſe two level ſurfaces, riſe the mountains, whoſe
lummits are fo many obſervations, from whence the
| Upht may diſcern full thirty leagues. Four obſer-
ers might command the whole extent of Syria;
and from the tops of Caſius, Lebanon, and Tabor,

202 IR AVELS IN

let nothing eſcape them within that boundleſs hori.
zon. They might obſerve how the region of the
ſea, at firſt unclouded, veils itlelf with vapours ; in
what manner theſe vapours form into groups, and
ſeparate, and by a conſtant mechamiſm, aſcend and
riſe above the mountains; while on the other hand,
the deſert, invariably clear never produces clouds,
and has only thoſe it has received from the ſea,
They might reply to the queſtion of M. Michaelis,“
„Whether the deſert produces dews?“ that the de.
dert, containing no water, except in winter, after
the rains, can only furniſh vapours at that period.
On viewing the valley of Balbek, burnt up with
heat, whilit the head of Lebanon is hoary with ice
and ſnow, they would be ſenſible of the truth cf
an axiom, which ought no longer to be difputed,
that the heat is greater in proportion as we approach
the ſurface of the earth, and diminiſhes as we remett
from it; fo that it ſeems to proceed only from
the action of the rays of the ſun upon the earth,
In ſhort, they might ſucceſsfully attempt the folution
of the greateſt part of meteorological problems.

© QED; M;

Obſervations on the winds, clouds, rains, es, an
thunder. =

Um this ſhall be undertaken by perſons
capable of undertaking ſuch experiments, and mak:
ing them with all the accuracy ſo important a difcut
ion merits, I ſhall ſubmit, in a few words, ſome

4

See the queſtions propoſed by M. Michaelis to the travelles
For the king of Denmark. i

i 8
c * 8
3
9 4 .
nh 4 ©
- k
TX .
By r
771 *
= WES:
- 14
g *
U N.
7
. *
S447 ©
\ 133
1 i
NF 4 5 * 1
*
1
4 K
o 14
- U
rer 8
88 þ
; "7
14
4 a"
F 09-3
7 . \
* 18 ,
4 0+ ©]
— —_ x
** n
= *
FS ER
4 *5 4 »—
3 . 8
2 1 *
3 1
1 4% B
7 **
o K5
BE. : 7
a "I 4
* 1 by -
; AT 9
£ r
- 8&5
—

1

e

8 "_& *

» N I x
8 Fans £
Nr 8
r
+ 4 I
8 A þ J

n

i 4 51 4

. ©

ra, **

« SS

o I. 2 N
7
n

-, 4 1
-.+ >
—

4 =

1 = N
1
r
+ FL

— © *

bd.” "0 2

1 438

131 3

2 ir

1 * & .

Pe 2 \ xs

WW: :

7 3 7 1

r

"ty 2

"Ty <>» 2

N 89 + * >

- WF. * 2 F Li *

| 4 9

, il, -

1 >» 7 \ we c 4
8 F 5 N Py

*

8 "$6 -- 87
+... * H

. he . 3

2 $3
1 1

3 EE

bo 5
1 8 *

1 8 p *
71 0 AY
5 88 2 *

o MF 74

9 FT vo

1 %

4 * *
14 * 1

— x
8 + *
fo. 10 2 8

= - 5 C 7's
_—_ : 1
F'Y 2 3
n
i «

77 e
a : »
34 Fi b "2
: 5 -

" *E & > 3
+ T1 EE
2A . $4 .*
$3
+ ” 49 "Ef

=” 7 . 58

8 fy I;

? N

3 iS
„ 548. 2.
' q r
* L 43 A

1 9 L .
1 0 1 :

443 537 DL 2

N 11

"1 : A
LT , £ "3%
=: N
25 * 1 2
1 +; >

1 ny
+ r F
\ 3 o 7 2
*2 Gn * 5 © *
1 85 2 * Fi —
24 SEES

n 1
A

t 2 —
1 12
17. 45-5
;/-
n
. $38.48 1

„„ :
r

+ +,

a -- +» ©
1424 * 1
3: KY
R
. jo 7 "oF
* n+ s
FRA os: 4
ES: + „
- 4. LY 4

1 5

E © »- N

133 35 x
x © SIR
* (> 5 $a
* 2 * *
3 ©: 5440
EE 88089
£2 : | :
ST

4 2
2 Log x
- "2%
*W Es +

'% 1 o
1 71 b x *
5 So "rf *
r *
„ *
82 S&-

. . =

> #7 L

1

N \

. I

*

3 ab
2 37 o

. g

7 Wet £ 9

1 0 2 2.
r
7 oe ©, 17

1 * <5
* 4 8 %

1

8

_—

= * 1

E W

"XY 7 2

* 4 .

* fx 1

* "2.4.69

1 $758

* bh IS Sy.

$ 8 9

ab 1

% wn Ly

7 7 *

* ad 1 *
* 40

—— *

1 * 4
— +. =

n

a 8
7 i
_—— .
1 * *
5 3
+. 8%
18 7 E
2 5 I N 2
- 2 $
1 py o Us |
_—

* . .+Y
w=_ 1
4 7 * V
* WW +.»
= * 4 =

. 1
. * *
= - EL» - .

a . 9

35 . =

* R

2 1
8 =

— * N
* 1
2

r

11 3

* 1

* 2 * ?
4 .
; .

.

*
4
-4, VR
b >
_—
8 s
E

7 33
* * .

Da
3 1

3 eo 47

1
„ #44 # FN 5 „
As Ea +> 4
n L TI be
: 1 1 15 0 * *
E
xs

.

on

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 203

1-5cral ideas ſuggeſted by my own obſervations. I

nave already mentioned the relation there is between

the winds and the ſeaſons; and have hinted that the
ſun, from the connection between his annual progreſs,
and their varieties, appears to be the principal agent.
His action on the atmoſphere which ſurrounds our
globe, ſeems to be the primary cauſe of all the vari-
ous motions in the upper regions of the air. To con-
ceive cleany how this is effected, we mult trace back
theſe ideas to their origin, and confider the properties
of the element put in action.

Firlt, the air, we know, is a fluid, all the particles
of which, naturally equal and moveable, tend, like

| water, invariably to a level; fo that if we ſuppoſe a
chamber ſix feet ſquare, every way, the air introduced

into it will fill it equally. Secondly, another property
of air is to be capable of dilatation or compreſſion;
that is, the ſame quantity of it may occupy a greater

or a leſs ſpace. Thus, in the caſe of the chamber,

were we to draw off two thirds of the air it contains,

the remainder would replace it by expanſion, and ftill
continue to fill its whole capacity; it inſtead of draw-

ing off the air, the quantity of it be doubled or trip-
led, the chamber will re contain it; which is
not the caſe with water.

This property of expanſion is more eſpecially called
into action by the preſence of fire; and as then the
heated air contains in an equal ſpace fewer particles
than cold air, it becomes lighter, and riſes. If, for
example, in the ſuppoſed chamber, you introduce a
grate full of fire, ihe air affected by it will riſe in-
ilantly to the ceiling, and that which was near it will
take its place. When this air is heated it will follow
the firſt, and a conſtant current-upwards, ſupplied by
the influx of the lateral air, be produced ;* fo that
che hotteſt air will Gitfule itſelf in the upper part of

1 8 of chimpay and ſto ve-baths,

Bb

This is the mech

2 8

204 TRAVELS IN

the room, and the leſs heated in the lower, each of
them continuing to leek an equilibrium, agreeably to
the general laws of fluidity.“
Let us now apply theſe obſervations to what paſſe
in the elements, on a larger fcale, and we hall find
they explain the greater Part of the phænomena of
the winds.
The atmoſphere v kich ſurrounds the earth may be
conſidered as an ocean formed by a peculiar fluid, the
bottom of which we occupy, and whoſe ſurface is at
an unknown height. From its primary law, that is,
from its fluidity, this ocean has a conſtant tendency
to an equilibrium, and to remain ſtagnant; but the
ſun, calling into action the law ot expanſion, excites
an agitation in it which keeps all its component parts
in a ſtate of perpetual fluctuation. His rays, applied
to the ſurface of the earth, have precilely the fame
effect as the fire in the ſuppoſed chamber ; they pro-
duce a degree of heat which dilates the contiguous air,
and cauſes it to rife towards the upper region. Were
this heat equal throughout, the general procels would
be uniform; but it varies from an infinity of circum-
ſtances, which become the efficient cauſes of the vari-
eties we continually obſerve.
Firſt, it is certain that the earth is heated in pr r0-
portion as it is expoſed to the perpendicular rays of
the ſun, The heat is nothing at the poles, but ex-
ceſſive under the line. For this reaſon our climates
are colder in winter and hotter in ſummer ; and for
the ſame reaſon, likewiſe, the temperature may be
very different in the ſame place, and under the fame
latitude, according as the country, inclining towards

* There is beſides this a continual effort of the rarified alt
avainſt the obltacies by which it is confined ; but this 1 is of no
conleqdence in the prelent cate, |

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 205

the north or ſouth, preſents its ſurface more or leſs
obliquely to the folar rays.*

Secondly, it is equally true that the farface of the
water is leſs retentive of heat than that of the earth:
the air over the ſea, lakes, and rivers, therefore, will
be leſs hot than that over the land in the ſame lati-

unde; humidity is every where a principle of coolneſs,

and hence a country covered with foreſts, and abound-
ing in moraſſes, is colder than when thoſe marſhy
grounds are drained, and the foreſts felled.

A third conſideration, not leſs important, is, that
the heat diminiſhes as we riſe above the general
plane of the earth. This is demonſtrated by the
obſervation, that the ſummits of high mountains,
even under the line, are covered with eternal ſnows,
:nd demonſtrate the conſtant coldneſs of the upper
region of the air.

If we now conſider the comb effects of theſe

diſterent circumſtances, we ſhall find they account

for the greateſt part of the phenomena we are at-
tempting to explain.

Firſt, the air of the polar regions being colder and
more denſe than that of the countries near the equi-
noctial, its endeavour to preſerve an equilibrium,
nceſlantly forces it from the poles towards the equa-
tor, And this reaſoning is ſupperted by facts, ſince

the uniform obſervation of all navigators proves that
the winds moſt common in both hemiſpheres pro-

ceed from that quarter of the horizon of which the

pole occupies the center; that is to ſay, from be-

'ween the north-weſt and north-eaſt. What paſſes
on the Mediterranean, in particular, 1s s periecly
analogous to this remark.

* This is the revſann why, as Monteique has well obſerved,
Tmary, which is under the ſame parallel 28 France and Eng⸗
and, 15 infinitely colder than theſe countries.

> This explains v. 'by ancient. Gaul was much colder than
dern F 1ance,

206 TRAVELS IN

I have obſerved, in ſpeaking of Egypt, that the
"northerly winds are moſt frequent in that fea, where
they prevail nine months out of twelve. A very
plauſible ſolution of this phænomenon may be given
from the confideration that, the coaſt of Barbary,
ſtruck powerfully by the rays of the ſun, heats the
ſurrounding air, the rarefaction of which caufes it
to riſe, and paſs into the interior part of the coun.
try, while that of the fea, meeting with lefs reſiſtance
on that ſide, immediately ruſhes into its place; but
being itſelf heated, follows the former current, till,
by degrees, the Mediterranean loſes a great quantity
of air. By this proceſs, the air which covers Euro
having no longer any ſupport, diffuſes itfelf on that
ſide; and thus a general current is eſtabliſhed. This
will be the ſtronger, in proportion as the air of the
north 1s colder; and hence the greater impetuoſity
of the winds in winter than in ſummer; and it will
be more feeble as the air of the different countries
approaches nearer to an equilibrium; and hence
theſe winds are more moderate in the fine ſeaſon,
and in July and Auguſt terminate in a fort of general
calm, becauſe the fun then heats almoſt equally the
whole hemiſphere, even to the pole. The uniform
and conſtant courſe that the north-weſt wind takes
in June, is occaſioned by the ſun, which, advancing
as far as the parallel of Aſouan, which is almoſ:
that of the Canaries, occaſions, behind mount Atlas,
a conſtant and regular wind. The periodical re-
turn of the caſterly winds, at the time of each equi-
nox, has alſo doubtleſs a geographical reaſon ; but,
in order to diſcover this, it would be neceffary to
have a general table of what paſſes in other parts
of the continent; and here, 1 confeſs, my ſyſtem
ſeems to fail me. I am ignorant, likewiſe, of the
cauſe of that conſtant duration of three days, which
the ſoutherly and northerly winds affect to oblerve,
whenever they blow at the time of the equinoxes.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 207

Varietics are ſometimes obſervable in the fame
wind, which arife from the nature of the country.
Thus, if a wind meets with a valley, it follows that
qirection, like the currents of the ſea. And hence,
doubtleſs, it happens, that in the Adriatic Gulph
ſcarce any but north-weſt and ſouth-eaſterly winds
are known; ſuch being the direction of this arm of
the ſea. From a fimilar cauſe, the wind in the
| Red-ſea blows conſtantly from the north or ſouth ;
and the frequency of the north-weſt, or M:/ral,
in Provence, mult ariſe from the currents of air,
occaſioned by the Cevennes and the Alps, and which
are forced to follow the direction of the valley of the
Rhone URS U 5
But what becomes of the air thus attracted by
dhe coaſt of Africa and the torrid zone? This may
be diſpoſed of in two different ways.

Firſt, the air, arrived under theſe latitudes, forms
there a great current, known by the name of the
Eaſtern Trade-wind, which extends, as is well known,
irom the Canaries to America,* which when it has
reached, it ſeems to be broken by the mountains of
the continent : and thus diverted from its original di-
rection, it returns in an oppoſite one, whence that
weſterly wind which prevails under the parallel of

Dr. Franklin has thought, that the cauſe of the Eaſtern.
Trade-wind has a connection with the diurnal motion of the
earth; but were it ſo, Why is not this wind perpetual ?\> Be-
ſides, how ſhall we explain, on this hypotheſis, the two Mon-
inons of India, the ſhiftings of which conſtantly follow the
paflage of the fun over the equincctial line; that is, the weſterly

and loutherly winds prevail during the fix months the ſun is in
_ the northern figns ; and the eaſterly and nertherly winds, during

the fix months he is in the ſouthern, Does not this prove,
that all the varieties of the winds depend ſolely on the ation of
the ſun upon the attno{phere ? The moon too, which has ſo

great an effect upon the ocean, may alſo produce ſome on the Mi

_ winds ; but the influence of the other planets ſeems chimam ſui:- -
ed only to the aſtrology of the ancients. . |

208 TRAVELS IN

Canada, 2nd ich by this means, repairs the lofle;
of the polar regions.

Secondly, e air which ruſhes 5 the Media i
7anean upon Africa, rarefied there by the heat, riſes
into the ſuperior region; but as it cools at a cer-
tain height, the ſpace it occupies is infinitely reduced
by condenſation. It may be alledged, that having
recovered its weight, it ſhould deſcend ; but beſides
that, on returning towards the earth, it becomes
again heated, and conſequently expands, it experi-
ences a pow erſul and continued effort of the interior
air which ſupports it. Theſe two /irata, of the
ſuperior air refrigerated, and the inferior air dila-
ted, maintain a perpetual {truggle with each other.
it the equilibrium be loſt, the ſuperior, obeying the
law of gravity, may ruſh into the inferior region,
even to the carth. To accidents of this nature we
muſt aſcribe thoſe ſudden torrents of frozen air,
known by the name of hurricanes and ſqualle, which
ſeem to fall from heaven, and produce, in the warm-
eſt ſeaſons, and the hotteſt regions of the earth,
the cold of the polar circles. If the, ſurrounding
air reſiſts, their duration is limited to a ſhort time; :
but when they fall in with currents already eſtab—
liſhed, they increaſe their violence, and become
tempeſts, which lait ſeveral hours. Theſe tempeſts
are dry when the air is pure; but when it is loaded
with clouds, they are attended with a deluge of rain
and hail, which the cold air condenſes in its fall.
Ic may alſo happen that a continued fall of water
hall accompany the rupture, increaſing by the ſur-
rounding Hauch, attracted to the ſame vortex; and
hence will reſult thoſe columns of water, known by
ihe name Y7ybbons and water mn Theſe water-
pouts are not unuſual on the coalt of Syria, towards
Cape Wedjh and Mount Carmel ; and it is obſer⸗

* Dr, F:ank!lin has explained them in the ſame manner.

* + 01

EGYPT AND SYRIA. _ $60

ved that they are moſt frequent at the equinoxes,
and in a ſtormy ſky, obſcured by clouds.

Mountains of a certain height often afford exam-
ples of this deſcent of refrigerated air from the upper
region. When their ſammits are covering with
ſnow, at the approach of winter, impetuous tor-

ents of wind called by mariners ſ19Ww winds, ruli
down from them. They then ſay, the mountains
are defonding themſelves, becauſe the winds blow on
you, In whatever direction you approach them.
be gulphs of Lyons and Alexandretta are remarked
frequently to furniſh inſtances of this kind of winds.

On the ſame principles we may explain the phæno-
| mena of thoſe winds of the coaſt, vulgarly called
land breezes. It 1s obſerved by mariners, that, in the
Mediterranean, they blow trom the land during the
nicht, and in the day from the ſea; the cauſe of
which i is, that the air, rarefied by the heat of the day,
and condenſed by the coldneſs of the night, ruſhes al-
ternately from the land to the ſea, and the fea to the
und. Thus, in Syria, the fide of Lebanon which faces
the ſea, being heated by the fun during the day, and
clpecially towards noon, the air, on its declivity, be-
ing rarefied, and loſing its relative equilibrium with
that of the ſea, is forced upwards ; but the new air,
which takes its place, becoming heated, likewiſe, ſoon
loliows it, until, by this ſucceſſion, a current is form-
ed ſimilar to that we obſerved in the funnels of a ſtove
or chimney. When the lun ſets, this action ceaſes,
the mountain cools, the air condenſes, and, condenl-
ing, becomes heavier, and falls down again, thus
forming a torrent which ruſhes along the declivity to
the fea. The current ceaſes in the morning, on the
lun's return, and the ſame round is repeated. This

* This is often ſenſible to the eye; but it is rendered ſtill
more evident by approaching a ilk thread Or a Piece of dow tr
to the tunnels,

923 24;
2 1
GT oy 4 *
1 = "Wi
ny i 483
4 * : y
Fl n ;
Ke « . 1
= 2 ; 5
. .
oh Cay - 3
85 . FY 1
N 4% | 4 x
l "42
* '14.% 3 KV
+ . i
n 1 2 N
N r
i 1 1 Lis
_ s ! «
FAY R * *
4 bs :
= f a ?
l  =
4 '_ * 1. >
. r
. * Be © KS.
1 1
$15 IL * 4
N %. 14:1
© 1
2% * + 5 . 4
r
we '. FR
15 _ _——
= - ba „
1 8 IVEY
4 0 4 8
if e 7 Ti : *
5 : ”
RIES
-! RE
ET
ATT 25 9 *
* IE
jet Th
1
10 90
4

4

* 2 *
M nt 2

2

3

— — =_
— I es fo — pu FAS. —
5 ua; : Re” * 7

, 2 * r - pe *
and ny DIGGS cial: x
* 9 *
$f An Ss 2
* 5 - J
oo Waun, * 8
22 ws et „
IR» SI 2 = 22
TY ew = —
— —

; — 3
2 — - : 2
— .
8
2 * 2
— * 8

wind does not advance above two or three league;

den ſqualls at the mouth of the Kaſmia,* the deep

nel, propels it as from a funnel. Theſe winds do not

fea there is a plain of four or five leagues; and at

that of continents, is the cauſe of a phenomenon
long ſince obſerved, viz. the general property of all
land, and eſpecially mountains, to attract clouds.

210 TRAVELS IN

into the ſea, becauſe the impulſe of its fall is prady.
ally deſtroyed by the reſiſtance of the maſs of air into
which it enters. It is in proportion to the height and
rapidity of this deſcent, that the land breeze is ex.
tenſive. It reaches further at the foot of Lebanon,
and the northern chain of eminences, becauſe the
mountains in that quarter are loftier, ſteeper, and
nearer to the ſea. There are often violent and ſud-

valley of Bekaa collecting the air in its narrow chan.

extend ſo far on the coaſt of Paleſtine, becauſe the
mountains there are lower, and between them and the

Gaza, and on the coaſt of Egypt, they are never
known, becauſe that country has no declivity proper
to cauſe them. In ſhort, they are every where
{tronger in ſummer, and feebler in winter, becaule
in the latter ſeaſon the heat and rarefaction are leſs
conſiderable. oy >.
This comparative ſtate of the air of the ſea, and

Whoever has viſited different fea coaſts, cannot but
have remarked that clouds continually ariſe at ſea,
and regularly direct their courſe towards the land,
and eſpecially the higheſt mountains. Some philolo-
phers have aſcribed this to an attractive virtue; but
beſides this, that occult quality is as unintelligible as
the ancient horror of @ vacuum, the mechanical caule
of that phænomenon may be explained by material
agents; I mean the law of the equilibrium of fluids,
by which the heavier air forces the lighter upwards;

* Theſe ſqualls are fo violent, that they ſometimes overiet
boats: as I was once very near experiencing myſelf.

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 211

dor continents, when under the ſame parallel, and of
like elevation, being always more heated than ſeas, a
conſtant current of air muſt take place and drive
the clouds from the ſea towards the land. This direc-
son will be the more conſtant, the more the moun-
tains are heated. If the vapours meet with a flat and
level country, they will glide over it without ſtop-
ping, becauſe the land being equally heated, there is
nothing to cauſe them to condenſe. This is the rea-
On why it never, or but very rarely, rains in ſummer,
in Egypt, or the deſerts of Arabia and Africa. The
air of theſe countries being heated and rarefied, re-
els the clouds, and, as it is the nature of all vapours
to be elevated by hot air, they continue to float in the
middle region, where the prevailing current carries
them towards the higher parts of the continent, which
perform in ſome meaſure, as I have already faid, the
office of a chimney. Being then at a greater diſtance
from the ſurface of the earth, which is the great re-
ceptacle of heat, they are refrigerated and condenſed,
till their particles reſolve into rain or ſnow. In win-
ter, the effects vary with circumſtances. During that
ſeaſon, when the ſun is remote from the countries we
are ſpeaking of, the earth being leſs heated, the air
in general aſſumes a temperature more nearly ap-
proaching to that of the high mountains; it becomes
8 colder and more denſe; the vapours are no longer
| elevated to the ſame height; the clouds are formed
_iower down; and frequently fall quite to the earth,
and are called fogs. At this period, accumulated by
the weſterly winds, and by the abſence of the cur-
Tents which carry them oft in ſummer, they are com-
pelled to fall upon the plains, and hence the ſolution
of the problem:“ © The evaporation being more
* confiderable in ſummer than in winter, why are
there more clouds, fogs, and rains in winter than

* See Chap, IV.
88

212 TRAVELS IN

*in ſummer?” Hence alſo we are able to explain
another appearance obſervable both in Egypt and
Paleſtine,* “ that if there be a continual and gentle
rain, it will fall rather in the night than in the
ee day.” In theſe countries, it is generally obſerved
that clouds and fogs approach the earth at night, and
riſe from it in the day, becauſe the preſence of the
fun ſtill excites a degree of heat ſufficient to repel
them; I have often experienced the truth of this at
Cairo, in the months of July and Auguſt, 1783. At
ſunriſe, we frequently had a fog, the thermometer
being at ſeventeen degrees ;F two hours after, the ther-
mometer being at twenty, or, perhaps, twenty-four
degrees, the ſky was covered with ſcattered clouds
driving to the ſouth. On my return from Suez,
about the ſame time, that is, between the 24th and
26th of July, we had no fog during the two nights
we paſſed i in the deſert; but on arriving, at break of
day, in fight of the valley of Egypr, I obſerved it
covered with a body of vapours which had the ap-
pearance of a ſtagnant lake. As the day came on,
they began to move and rife, and, before eight o'clock
in the morning, they had left the ground, and the
air only ſhewed ſome ſcattered clouds, which took
their courſe along the valley. The following year,
being among the Druzes, 1 obſerved nearly ſimilar
phenomena. Firſt, about the end of June, there
was formed a Chain of clouds, to be attributed, no
doubt, to the overflowing of Egypt by the Nile, f and
Which, in fakt, proceeded from that quarter, and

9 4 beet obſerved this in Paleſtine, in the months of No-
vember, December, and January, 1784 and 1783. The tem-
Perature of the plain of Paleſtine, eſpecially ne . is
nearly the ſame with that of Egypt. 1 8

By Reamur's ſcale. |
＋ It is not ſuperfluous to obſerve that the Nile, at that period

canes a current along the whole coaſt of Syria, which extends
from Gaza to Cyprus

EGYPT AND SYRIA.

213

were paſſing to the north. eaſt. After this firſt ir-
ruption, towards the end of July, and in Auguſt,
there was a ſecond ſeaſon of clouds. Every day,
towards eleven o'clock, or about noon, the ſky was
overcaſt, the ſun was often inviſible the whole after-
noon, the ſannin, or ſummit of Lebanon, was capped
with clouds, and many of them, aſcending the decli-
vities, remained among the vineyards and the pines, .
and I was frequently ſo enveloped in a white, humid,
warm and opake miſt, as not to be able to ſee four |
paces before me. About ten or eleven at night, the
| ſky grew clear, the ſtars appeared, and the remainder
of the night was very fine; the ſun roſe ſhining, and,
towards noon, the like appearances returned in the
ſame circle. This repetition puzzled me the more,
as I could not conceive what became of all this quan-

tity of clouds. Part of them, it is true, paſſed the
chain of the Sannin; theſe I might ſuppoſe had pro-
ceeded to Anti-Lebanon, or the deſert; but what
was to become of that portion which was paſſing
along the declivity, at the moment the ſun ſet, for
there was neither dew nor rain in which they could be
conſumed ? To diſcover the cauſe of this, I aſcended
ſeveral mornings ſucceſſively, at day- break, a neigh-
bouring eminence, and there, looking down upon the
valley, and the ſea, diſtant, in an oblique line, about
five leagues, I examined attentively the ſtate of the
atmoſphere. I at firſt perceived nothing but a body
of vapours which veiled the waters ; and the horizon,
towards the ſea, appeared to me very thick, while on

| the fide of the mountains it was quite clear; as the

lun enlightened that part, I diſcovered clouds by the
reflection of his rays ; theſe at firſt ſeemed to me very
3 low; but, as the heat encreaſed, they Ur and

7 fg BY F bis. appears to me to be the column of x VERT 3
by Baron de Tott. I have alſo obſerved the miſtinels 91 the

| horizon of Egypt, of which he ſpeaks,

breath is vilible i in winter, in oyr climates, ang not in former,

214 - © TRAVELS IN

roſe higher, and continnally proceeding towards the
mountain, continued there the remainder of the day,
as | have deſcribed. From hence I concluded that the

clouds I ſaw, thus mounting, formed a great part of
thoſe which were on the declivities in the evening,
and which, not being able to rife ſufficiently high,

had been ſeized by the cold air, and thrown back on
the ſea, by the land breeze; I imagined thar they
were retained there the whole night, till the ſea breeze,

getting up, drove them back upon the mountain, and

urried part of them over the ſummit, to fall on the

other fide in dews, or to moiſten the parched air of
the deſert.

[ have ſaid that theſe clouds conveyed no dews;

and I have frequently remarked that there were

fewer when the ſky was clouded, than when the
heavens were clear. But the dew is at all times le
abundant on theſe mountains, than on the coaſt,

and in Egypt, which may be caſily explained, by
ſuppoſing that the air is not able to elevate to that

height rhe excefs of humidity with which it is load.

ed; for the dew as js well known, is the exceſs of
humidity which the heated air raiſes in vapour during
the day, and which, condenſing by the coolneſs of the

evening, falls down again in greater or leſs abundance,

according to the vicinity of the country to the ſea.“
Hence the exceſſive dews in the Delta, which are
leſs conſiderable in the Thebais, and the deſert, as
1 am well aſſured ; and if the moiſture does fall when
the heavens are obſcured, it is from its aſſuming
the form of clouds, or being mrereepted dy them.

* This reſolves a queſtian propoſed to me at Yaſa: viz. * Wiy
% one {weats more at Yaſa, on the borders of the ſea, than at
% Ramla, which is at three leagues diſtance up the country ?”
The realon is, that the air of Vafa, being laturated with humid
2; Ke excites perſpiration but floly, While at Ramla, the air

eing more dry, caules it quicker. For this reaſon, alſo, the

EGYPT AND SYRIA, 215

In other caſes, the ſky being ſerene, we ſee ihe
clouds ſometimes diſperſe and diflolye, like ſmoke ;
at others, form in an inſtant, and from a ſmall
feck, become of a prodigious ſize. This is par-

ticularly obſervable at the ſummit of Lebanon, and |

mariners have experienced that, the appearance of
à cloud, on this peak is an infallible preſage of a
weſterly wind. At ſun-ſet, I have often obſerved theſe
imoky clouds adhering to the fides of the rocks of
Nahr-el-Kelb, and avgmenting ſo rapidly, that in
an hour the valley was quite full of them. The in-
habitants fay, they are the vapours of the valley
itfelf; but this valley being all ſtone, and without
water, it is impoſſhble that they ſhould be exhala-
tions from that; it is more natural to ſuppoſe them
rapours of the atmoſphere, which condenſed at the
approach of night, fall in an imperceptible rain, and
cauſe the miſt which is then obſerved. Fogs are
explicable on the ſame principles. There are none
in the hot countries diftant from the ſea, nor du-
ring the ſummer droughts; for in theſe caſes, the
air has no ſurplus of humidity. But they appear
after the autumnal rains, and even in ſummer, after
heavy ſhowers, becauſe the earth has then imbibed
matter for evaporation, and acquired a degree of
coolneſs ſufficient to cauſe a condenſation of the
vapours. In our climates, they always begin in the
meadows, in preference to til hd ground, We fre-
quently obſerve, at the ſetting of the ſun, a ſheet
of ſmoke, forming on the graſs, which ſoon increaſes _
in extent and height. The reaſon of this is, that
humid and cool places condenſe the falling vapours
ſooner than thoſe which are dry and duſty. _

A variety of other obſervations might be made
on the foundation and nature of theſe vapours,
which though, in reality, the ſame, are called fogs,
when they reſt on the ground, and clouds, when
they riſe into the air. By conſidering their various

ſtorms always Proceed from che lea.

216 © FRANELSAIN-

properties, we ſhall perceive SRP are governed by
the laws of combination, diſſolution, precipitation,
and ſaturation ; of which modern phyſics, under the

_ appellation of chemiſtry, is employed i in 1

the theory. But to treat of them, in this place,
ſhould be under a neceſſity of entering into details
which would lead me too far from my ſubject. ]

ſhall confine myſelf, therefore, to one concluding
obſervation, relative to thunder.

Thunder is known in the Delta as well as in Syria;

but with this difference, that in the Delta, and the
plain of Paleſtine, it is extremely rare in ſummer,

and more frequent in winter; while in the moun—
tains, on the contrary, it is more common in ſummer,
and very ſeldom heard in winter. In both theſe
countries, it happens ofteneſt in the rainy ſeaſon, or

about the time of the equinoxes, eſpecially the au-
tumnal one; it is further remarkable, that it never

comes on from the land- ſide, but always from the

fea. The ſtorms which fall on the Delta and Syria

conſtantly come from the Mediterranean.“ Thele
ſtorms in general, happen either in the evening or
morning, and rarely in the middle of the day ;+ they

are accompanied with violent ſhowers, and ſometimes

with . hail, which, in an hour's time, render the

5 full ot little lakes. 1helſe circumſtances,

* 1 * not know what "aſſes. in this reſpe& i in Upper Egypt:

ds for the Delta, it appears that it lometimes receives clouds an
thunder from the Red Sca. On the day that I left Cairo, (26th
September, 158g.) as night was coming on, a ſtorm appeared in

the ſouth-eaſt, which ſoon produced leveral claps of thunder,

and ended by a violent fall of hail, as large as the largeſt fort of
Peas. It continued ten or twelve minutes; and my compani-

ons and I bad time enough to colle& a quantity of hail ſtones,

ſufficient to fill two large glaſſes, and could ſay that we drank

iced water in Egypt. It is proper to add that it was at the time
when the loutherly monſoon begins to blow at the Red Sea.

+ M. Niebuhr has alſo obſerved, at Meuka and Vander, that

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 419

and, above all, this perpetual connection of clouds
with thunder, may ſuggeſt the following remarks.

If thunder is conſtantly attended with clouds, and

3 they are abſolutely neceſſary to its exiſtence, it muſt
he cauſed by ſome of their elements. But in what

manner are clouds formed? By the evaporation of
water. How is this evaporation effected? By the
preſence of the element of fire. Water of itſelf is
not volatile; ſome agent is neceſſary to raiſe it; this
agent is fire; and hence, as has been already obſer- |

ved, © evaporation is always in proportion to the

« heat applied to the water.” Each particle of
water is rendered volatile by a particle of fire, and
unqueſtionably, alſo, by a particle of air 1
with it. This combination may be regarded as 2
neutral ſalt, and by comparing it with nitre, we
may ſay the water in it repreſent the alkali, and the
fire the nitrous acid. The clouds, thus compoſed,

float in the atmoſphere until they meet with ſome-

thing which ſeparates their conſtituent parts. If,
from any cauſe, theſe particles are ſuddenly dſuni-
ted, a detonation is the conſequence, accompanied
% in nitre, with exploſion and light. The igneous
matter, and the air, being inſtantly diſſipated by
the ſhock, the water which was combined with
them, reſtored to its natural gravity, falls precipi-
ately from the height to which it has been elevated ;
and hence the violent ſhowers which follow loud
claps of thunder, and which happen, generally at
the end of ſtorms, the igneous matter being then
expended, Sometimes the particles of fire being
combined with the air only, it melts like nitre; and
this it is, doubtleſs, which produces thoſe lightnings,

when no thunder is heard, called fires of the hori-
z0n (feux 4 borixon 9. But is this igneous mat-

* Shoot: ars em allo to 1 a particular combination of

neous matter. The Maronites of Mar-Elias aſſured me that

ter diſtint from the electric? Does it obſerve
peculiar laws ani affinities in its combinations and
detonations? This is what I ſhall not take upon
me to examine. Theſe reſearches are not ſuited to
2 narrative of travels: I ought to confine myſelf
to facts; and the few explanatory remarks I have
added, though they were naturally ſuggeſted by
them, have already led me too far from my ſub.

HAP. II.
Of the Inhabitants of Syria.
r RIA, as well as Egypt, has undergone revolu-
tions which have confounded the different races of
its inhabitants. Within two thouſand five hundred

years, we may reckon ten invaſions, which have
tatroduced into that country a ſucceſſion of foreign

f nations. Firſt, the Aﬀyrians of Nineveh, who, ;
„ paſſing the Euphrates, about the year 750 before |
E | the Cniſtian era, within ſixty years, obtained pol-
* ſeſſion of almoſt the whole country lying to the ;
n+ ; | * ; F<
3 north of Judea. Next the Chaldeans, of Babylon,
18 who having deſtroyed the power on which they
' Mid | | | . — S *
. were dependent, ſucceeded, as by hereditary right,

to its poſſeſſions, and completed the conqueſt of
Syria, except only on the iſte of Tyre. The Ohal-
deans were followed by the Perſians, under Cyrus, |
and the Perſians, by the Macedonians, under Alex
ander. It then ſeemed as if Syria was about to

TS he
1 0

one of theſe ſtars falling, three years ago, on two mules of the
convent, killed them both, making an exploſion like the repo”
of 2 piſtol, and leaving no more traces than thunder. | .

J Re. ASSES. mea Son TE

r ²⁴˙]2 ß VG, >

| EGYPT AND srRIa. 219

ceaſe being a vaſſal to foreign powers, and to obtain
a diſtinct and independent government, according
to the natural right of every country; but the peo-
ple who found in the Seleucideæ only cruel deſpots
and oppreflors ſeeing themſelves reduced to the ne-
ceſſity of bearing ſome yoke, preferred the lighteſt;
and Syria yielded to the arms of Pompey, became a
province of the Roman empire. oo EI:
Five centuries after, when the ſons of Theodoſius

divided their immenſe patrimony, this country chan-

ged the capital to which it was to appertain, without
changing its matters, and was annexed to the empire
of Conſtantinople. Such was its fituation when,
in the year 622, the Arabian tribes, colle&ed under
the banners of Mahomet, ſeized, or rather laid it

| waſte. Since that period, torn to pieces by the

civil wars of the Fatmites, and the Ommiades, wreſt-
ed from the Califfs by their rebellious governors, ta-
ken from them by the Turkmen ſoldiery, invaded by
the European cruſaders, retaken by the Mamlouks of
Egypt, and ravaged by Tamerlane and his Tartars,

it has at length fallen into the hands of the Ottoman

Turks, who have been its maſters for two hundred

| and ſixty eight years.

- Theſe vicifitudes have introduced inte tht coun.

| try diſtinct tribes of inhabitants, as various as the

revolutions it has undergone, ſo that the people of
Syria muſt not be conſidered as one ſingle nation,

| but rather as a mixture of different nations.

They may be divided into three principal elaſſes.
Firſt, the poſterity of the people conquered by

the Arabs, that is, the Greeks of the lower Empire.

Secendly, the poſterity of the Arabian conquer» |

on +2

Thirdly, the preſent ruling people, the Ottoman

„Ok theſe three claſſes the former muſt be again
ſub· divided, in conſequence of ſeveral diſtinctione

4＋

2 = 1 W e WG. "RD N * =P 2 * * _
cn * 9 N a ere. $7 . ALT = S * #* + 1. x 7 *
* A PEI 2 5 WPF».
4” — —

220 - TRAVELS IN

which have taken place among them. The Greeks
then muſt be divided into

_ Firſt, Greeks proper, vulocly nd Schiſmati
Or ſeparated from the Romiſh communion.

Secondly, Latin en re- united to that com.
mun oon.

e onites, or Greeks of 150 ſe& of
the Monk Maron, formerly independent of the two
communions, but at preſent united to the latter,

The Arabs mult be divided into,

Firſt, the proper deſcendents of the conquerors,
who have greatly intermixed their blood, and are
conſiderably the moſt numerous.

Secondly, the Motoualis, diſtinguiſhed from theſe

by their religious opinions.

Thirdly, the Druzes, diſtinct likewiſe, from the
ſame reaſon.
Fourthly, The Anſarians, who are alſo deſcended
from the Arabs. :
Io theſe peop'e, who are the cultivators and: ſet.
tled inhabitants of Syria, muſt ſtill be added three
other wandering tribes, or paſtors, viz. the Turk-
men, the Curds, and the Bedouin Arabs. _

Such are the different races diſperſed over the
country, between the fea and the delert, from Gaza
to Alexandretta.
In this enumeration, it is table that tbe an-
cient inhabitants have no remaining repreſentative;

their diſtinguiſhing character is loſt and confounded
in that of the Greeks, who, in fact, by a continued

reſidence from the days of Alexander, have had
ſufficient time entirely to take place of the ancient
people; the country alone and a few traits of man-
ners and e e the veſtiges of diſtant
ages.

Syria has not, Res Egypt, reſuſed to 0 the

ſoreign races. They all become equally natural:

zed to the country. The features and complexion

CC f A . 221

ire governed by nearly the ſame laws there as in
the ſouth of Europe, with the differences only which
naturaliy reſult from the nature of the climate.
Thus the inhabitants of the ſouthern plains are more
ſwarthy than thoſe of the northern, and theſe more
o than the inhabitants of the mountains. In Le-
danon, and the country of the Druzes, the com-
plexion does not differ from that in out 'provinces
in the middle of France. The women of Damaſcus
and Tripoli are greatly boaſted for their fairneſs,
and even the regularity of their features; but we
muſt take this praiſe on truſt, ſince the veil, Which
they perpetually wear, allows no perſon to make
nice obſervations. In ſeveral diſtricts, the women
are leſs ſcrupulous, without being leſs chaſte. In
Paleſtine for example, you may ſee married women
almolt uncovered ; but want and fatigue have rob-
bed the countenance of all its charms; their eyes
alone are almoſt every where beautiful; and the
long drapery, which forms their general dreſs, per-
mits the body freely to diſplay its ſhape 7 it is
lometimes without elegance, but its proportions at
leaſt are no way injured. I do not recollect having
[cen in Syria, nor even in Egypt, two perſons crook-
ed or deformed. It is true, they are ſtrangers to
thoſe tight laced waiſts which are ſo much admired
among us: they are in no eftimation in the eaſt;
and the young women, aſſiſted by their mothers,
very early ſtudy, even ſuperſtitiors receipts, to ac-
quire an embonpoint : happily, nature, by reſiſting
our caprices, has ſet bounds to our ſingularities, for
Fe do not perceive in Syria, where the ſhape is not
confined, that the body becomes any larger that in
France, Where it is ſo tightly lace ..
The Syrians are, in general, of a middling ſtature,
nd are, as in all warm countries, leſs corpulent than
ne inhabitants of the north. We find, however, in
le cities, ſome individuals whoſe amplitude of belly

In other reſpects, Syria has no diſeaſe peculiar to

when 1 come to ſpeak of that ey. Other diſordery
are dyſenteries, inflammatory and intermittent tevers,
which are the conſequences of the bad fruit which
the people greedily devour. The ſmall-pox is ſome.

imminent cafes, cream of tartar and tamarinds have
"She: molt certain ſuceels. hen te

have been told only that in the towns of Maloula and

rupted, that it is difficult to be underſtood. But thi

proves that the influence of diet is able: 1 1

degree. to counterbalance that of climate.

itſelf, but the pimple of Aleppo, which I ſhall notice

times. very fatal; but the general and moſt frequent
illneſs is the cholic, the cauſes of which are very evi.
dent, when we conſider that every body eats to exteſ
of unripe fruit, raw vegetables, honey, cheeſe, olives,
ſtrong oil, four milk, and ill-fermented bread. - Theſe
are the uſual food of all the inhabitants ; and the acid
juices. they contain produce crudittes, nauſea, and
even frequent vomitings of bile. Accordingly, the
farit preſcription in almoſt all. diſorders is an emetic,
which method of treatment, however, is only known
to the European phyſicians. Bleeding, as I have
already ſaid, is neither neceſſary, nor very uſeful. [n

The general language of Syria is the Arabic tongue.

NM. Niebuhr reports, upon hearſay, that the Syriac i
ſtill uſed in ſome villages of the mountains; but,
though I interrogated, on this ſubject, ſeveral monks,

who, are perfectly well acquainted with the countiy,
TI have not been able to learn any thing like it. I

Sidnaia, near Damaſcus, they ſpeak a dialect ſo cot

difficulty proves nothing, ſince, in Syria, as in all tit
Arabian countries, the dialects vary at every place
The Syriac may be, therefore, regarded as a deat
language; for the Maronites, who have preſerved !
in their liturgy, and in their maſs, underſtand vel
little of it, while they recite them. We may aflent
the ſame of the Greck. Among the monks 4

EGYPT. AND. SYRIA. 2a3

ahiſmaic prieſts, there are very few who have any

knowledge of it, unleſs they have made it their par-
 ticular-{tudy in the iſlands of the Archipelage: beſides,
we know that the modern Greek is fo corrupted, that

it would no more enable a man to underſtand De .
moſthenes, than the Italian to read Cicero. The
Turkiſh language is only uſed, in Syria, by the mili-

tary, perſons in office, and the Iurkman hordes.*
Some of the natives learn it, as the Turks learn Arz-

bic, to lacilitate their dealings with ſtrangers 2 but
the pronunciation and accent of theſe two languages
have ſo lintle analogy that they always continue foreign

| to each other. The Turks, habituated to a naſal and
pompous profody ; are rarely able to imitate the harſh

founds and iftrong aſpirations of the Arabic. This

tongue makes ſuch repeated ufe of vowels and guttu-
ral conſonants, that, on hearing it ſpoken for the firſt
time, you would imagine they were gargling their

throats. On this account it is difagreedble and diffi-
cult to all Europeans; but ſuch is the power of habit

that, when we complain to the Arabs of its aſperity,
they accuſe us of a want of ear, and retort the charge
upon our languages: Of theſe the Italian is that
which they prefer; and they compare, with ſome
reaſon, the French to the T th arid the Engliſh
to the Perſian. In the dialects of their own we find
almoſt the ſame difference. The Arabic of Syria 1$

much harſher than that of Egypt; the pronunciation

of the profeſſors of the law at Cairo is eſteemed the
model of facility and elegance. But, according to
the obſervation of M. Niebuhr, that of the inhabi- Y
tants of the Yemen, and the ſouthern coaſt, is infi- |

nitely fofter, and gives a fluency do the Arabic, of
which * e not have 5 it n At-

N e pt Beilam, which is contiguous, they
gk ſpeak. Turkiſh ; but they muſt be regarded 2s frontiers: of Cara-·
5 aui, where Turkiſh 15 the e tongues Wy

224 TRAVELS IN

tempts have been made to eſtabliſh an analogy: *
tween the climates and the pronunciation of lan.
guages; it has been ſaid, for inſtance, that the inha.
bitants of the north ſpeak more with their lips aud
teeth than thoſe of the ſouth. This may be juſt when
applied to ſome parts of our continent; but, to decide
univerſally, ſhe muſt make more circumſtantial and
extenſive obſervations. We ſhould not too haſtilyj
pronounce theſe general deciſions concerning lan.
guages and their different characters; becauſe we are |
always naturally led to judge from our own, and,
conſequently from a prejudice of habit extremely
inimical to juſt reaſoning.

Among the different inhabitants of Syria I: have £
mentioned, ſome are diſperſed, indifferently, over
every part of the country, others confine themſelves
to en e ien it 92 be neceſſary to deter.
mine.

The Gronker: proper, the- Turks, and the Azabiah 5

* peaſants, belong to the former claſs, with this differ.
” ence, that the Turks reſide only in the towns where

they are in poſſeſſion of the military employ ments,

WW and the offices of the magiſtracy, where they exer-

” cifethe arts. The Arabs and the Greeks inhabit the

F villages, and form the claſs of huſbandmen in the
country, and the inferior people in the towns. The
* {
W art of the country which contains the molt Greek
I villages i is the Pachalic of Damaſcus. 0
Fil The Greeks of the Romiſh communion, who are
much leſs numerous than the ſchiſmatics, are all re-
tired within the towns, where they cultivate the arts
and commerce. The protection of the Franks, pro-

cured them, in the late war, a decided ſuperiority in
trrade, wherever there are European ſettlements.
The Maronites form a national body, which oc-
cupies, almoſt excluſively, the whole country com-
priſed between Nahr-e/-kelb (the river of the Dog)
and Nahr-el-bared (the cold river), from the ſum-

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 225

mit of the mountains on the laſt, to the Mediterranean
on the weſt. 1

The Druzes e upon 8 and extend om
Nahr-el-kelb to the neighbourhood of Sour, (Tyre)
| between the valley of Bekaa and the ſea.
The country of the Motoualis formerly included
the valley of Bekaa, as far as Sour: but this peo-
ple, of late years, have undergone a revolution which
has reduced them almoſt to nothing. |
As for the Anſarians, they are diſperſed chrough- |
out the mountains, from Nahr-akkar as far as to
| Antakia ; they are diſtinguiſhed into different tribes,
ſuch as the Kelbia, the Kadmouſia, the Shamſia, &c.

The Turkmen, the Curds, and the Bedouins, have
no fixed habitations, but Keep perpetually wander- |

with their tents and herds in limited diſtricts,

75 which they look upon themſelves as the proprie-
tors. The Turkmen hordes generally encamp on
the plain of Antioch; the Curds in the mountains
N N Alexandretta and the Euphrates; and the
Arabs [pread over the whole frontier of Syria, ad-
jacent to their deſerts, and even the plains of the
| interior part of the country, as thoſe of Paleſtine,
| Bckaa, and Galilee.

To form more diſtin& ideas of theſe different
claſſes, let us conſider more circumſtantially what
is peculiar to each of them.

— * - — r - ——
r —— 2 : —
. og EOS — ER
. * — — CRIES 5 * 2 i
8 2 = —

uy * — 5 IT
e

ny

A Sv oth

N * . * a,

PS 2 -
_

== — : o9 hy ä

.

W 5 ** 7 „ n Ly a
1 # £9 "I wr Rs © : LE 2 2 — * vp -*- = =P 15
| OY IRE PIT RE EE. · W. · · · · ‚· ü
— — - 0" N © BY * 7 1 — r g *
: * - _— - 8 2 . ” . e A — av EH AO ST SE LENT TSS * > b "os £X *
— - * 2 "7 : " * OO I 2 er —— 0 - — "1 1 .
r ö * F.. PR 4 JI EG 2 - S . 5 > __ — . ann” Ngo 3: 3
=o b FT a; ta AM JJ // we > es An = . SLES chad; ——ů . Cs Ka — — 5 ; F hes)
2 — II : 2 EIS . th SEE. — * : LT * RN Fe, vin” — :
- : — — — : 6 5 CON. _ — — 1
” 4 — mc tl — = S — — — 5
9 — I — — oe :
- n * A ;
'

2

rr
PTT. A
r —

226

XA VS
S

"TRAVELS iN

＋

_

CHAP. X 7. 26h
Of the paſtoral, or wandering Trivei of Syria, ©
880 r. I.

O the Turkmen,

0 : : HE Turkmen are of the number of thoſe Tar.

tar hordes, who on the great revolutions of the

empire of the Califs, emigrated from the eaſtward
of the Caſptan fea, and ſpread themſelves over the

vaſt plains of Armenia and Aſia Minor. Their lan:
guage is the ſame with that of the Turks, and their

mode of life nearly fimilar to that of the Bedouin

Arabs. Like them, they are paſtors, and conſequent-
ly obliged to travel over immenſe tracts of land to
procure ſubfiſtence for their numerous herds. But

there is this difference, that the countries frequent.

ed by the Turkmen being rich in paſturage, they
can feed mate cattle. on them, and are therefore tes
diſperſed than the Arabs of the deſert. Each of
their ordozs, or camps, acknowledges a Chief, whole
power is nat determined by fixed laws, but govern-

ed by cuſtom and circumſtances. It is rarely abuſ

ed, becauſe the fociety is compact, and the nature
of their ſituation maintains ſufficient equality among
its members. Every man able to bear arms 18
anxious to carry them, ſince on his individual force
depend both his perſonal ſafety, and the reſpect paid
him by his companions. All their property confilt:
in cattle, that is camels, buffaloes, goats, and eſpe-
cially ſheep. They live on milk, butter, and meat,

which are in great abundance among them, and tlie

ſurplus of which they fell in the towns and the
neighbouring country, for they are almoſt able alont

38 a
2 * Y N

* * „

9 : _

mw "5 Ob |
r T RESET wen

| EGYPT AND SYRIA. = 225

to ſupply the butcheries. In return, they take arms,

clothes, money, and corn. Their women ſpin wool,

and make carpets, the uſe of which is immemorial

in theſe countries, and conſequently indicates, their
manner of lieing to have been always the ſame.

As for the men, their whole occupation conſiſts in

ſnoking, and looking after their flocks. Perpetu-
ally on horſeback, with their lances, on their ſhould-

ers, their crooked ſabre by their ſides, and heir
piſtols in their belts, they are expert horſemen and |

indefatigable ſoldiers. They have frequent differen-
ces with the Turks, who dread them; but as they
are divided among themſelves, and form ſeparate.
camps, they do not afſume that ſuperiority which
their combined forces would enſure them. The
Pachalics of Aleppo and Damaſcus, which are the
only parts of Syria they frequent, may be computed to
contain about thirty thouſand wandering Turkmen.
A great number of theſe tribes paſs, in ſummer, into.
Armenia and Carimania, where they find graſs in
greater abundance, and return to their former quar-

ters in the winter. The Turkmen are reputed Muſ-

ſulmen, and generally bear the diſtinguiſhing mark,
eircumciſion. But they trouble themſelves very
üttle about religion, and they have neither the cere-
monies, nor. the fanaticiſm of ſedentary nations.

As for their manners, to deſcribe them accurately,
it would be neceflary to have lived among them.

They have, however, the reputation of not being
robbers, like the Arabs, though they are neither
leſs generous, nor leſs hoſpitable than they; and
ven we conſider that they live in plenty, withouc |
deing rich, and are inured to war, and hardened
by fatigue and danger, we may preſume they are
equally removed from the ignorance and ſervility of
the peaſants, and the corruption-and ſelfiſhneſs of the
uhabitants of the ks” 0 et i

ND

in
\ *

e
a
2 228

- „ 9 *

DESDE LES

hs i, * ob 5 FE 7

r 8

my 15
— —
jg IT”
'N ATE T I ——
— — —

... ² A 2og E, aer: 2 — = oy
* N 1 N 5 4 as — TR. WT 2 $4 $ 8 : 3 +” SAL e "7 * N *
* * * 8 r 1 / OT TR
* 1 8 3 4 N —

AY ns Rees. were

EDITS IO pr.

3 r 37
Xt = I Soros in Ger nes. per
FRAME 5% 24 N Tag

iti du or ret ep NE E

IC

—— —

A

* OF
— rr
. * — SEN 3 2 -

x Os. OSS, inter pe ot

— 33 RE 9 a
—

7

TL *

—
—

» ATR 2 * 2 * 1 Y * 2 2 1 A 9 :
TE EYE ERIE So. EE FS ln
— P — * — » *

"> —

2 = Se - >>
EA. ARES: tre
Io

—
e
1 2

— ERS IS EEG x >

Irak-adjami, or Perſian Irak“.

. — — — , — 2 — r j ” pow r ———— —
— * 8 — . "OF x 2 n : —_—_ wo 1 8 - A _— V 5
2 "+ 8 A r. 0 1 S 2 — 7
2 * 2 r 3 an wy fot Sh — IL-4 — —
* e 1 Bp oe Rt Se = Een 2 Sr ns. ons.
Mz. . 2 * 5 | 3. = A u — —_ Ce. : o K ** <<

I 42 :
_ . wor une
ee SW n
2 * : 1 8 8
Os * £ =} r
h E - 1 A OBS +

= MIT 2648. —

e
r

24 8 1 5 FR AVEL 81 N +

8 EC r. Cid
Of the Cl
T he Curds are "another Pet body, the divided

tribes of which are equally diſperſed over the Lower
Aſia, and have extended themſelves pretty conſidera.

bly, eſpecially within the laſt hundred years. Their

original country is the chain of mountains, from
whence iſſue the different branches of the Tigris,

which, ſurrounding the upper part of the great Zab,

paſſes to the ſouthward, as far as the frontiers of the
In modern geography,
it is known by the name of Curd-e/tan. This coun-
try is mentioned in the moſt ancient tradations and
hiſtories of the eaſt, in which it is made the ſcene of

ſeveral mythological events. The Chaldean Beroſus,
and the Armenian Maribas, cited by Moſes Chorenen-

iis, aſſert that it was in the mountains Gord-ouzis,
that Xiſuthrus landed after eſcaping from the deluge;
and the local circumſtances which they
what was otherwiſe ſufficiently evident, that Gord and
Curd are the fame.” 'Thole were the ſame Curds who

are mentioned by Xenophon under the denomination

of Carduchi, and who oppoſed the retreat of the Ten
Thovſand. This hiſtorian obſerves that, though ſhut
in on all ſides by the Perſian empire, they had con-

ſtantly braved the power of the Great King, and the

They have changed but little
gh, in appearance,

arms of his Satraps.
in their modern ſtate; and, the
tributaries to the Porte, pay very
orders of the Grand Signior,

2 Adjam is the Arabic name for the 1 erſians. The Greeks

were acquainted with it, „and expreſſed it by Achemen- mer.
1 Strabo, lib, 11. ſays, that the — and its — of |

mountains, are called Gordouæi. Ks

add, prove,

F his Pachas, M.

bometans, but they never troub

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 229

Niebuhr, who travelled in theſe countries in 1769,

reports, that in their mountains they are ſubject to a
ſort of feodal government, which appears to me ſimi:
lar to that we obſerve among the Druzes. Each. vilz

lage has its chief, and the whole nation is divided
into different and independent factions. The diſ-

putes inſeparable from this ſtate of anarchy have de-
tached from the nation à great number of tribes and

families, which have adopted the wandering life of
the Turkmen and Arab ] ĩ .
Theſe are diſperſed in the Diarbekir, and over the
plains of Arzroum, Erivan, Sivas, Aleppo and Da-
maſcus: all their tribes united are eſtimated to exceed
one hundred and forty thouſand 'tents, that is, ons
hundred and forty thouſand armed men. Like the
Turkmen, theſe Curds are paſtors and wanderers;
but differ from them in ſome particular cuſtoms: ; The
Turkmen give their daughters a marriage dower: the
Curds receive a premium for them. The Turkmen
pay no reſpect to that antiquity of extraction which
we call nobility: the Curds honour it above every
thing. The Turkmen do not | ſteal: the Curds are
almoſt every where looked upon as plunderers; on

| which account, they are much dreaded in the neigh-

bourhood of Aleppo, and of Antioch, where: they
occupy, under the name of Bagdaſhlia, the moun-
tains to the eaſt of Beilam, as far as near Kles. ln
this Pachalic, and in that of Damaſcus, their number
exceeds twenty thouſand tents and huts; for they
have alſo fixed habitations. They are reputed Ma-
ſe themſelves about
religious rites or opinions. Several of them, diſtin-
guilhed by the name of Yazdia, worſhip Shaitan, or
Satan, that is, the genius who is the enemy (of God.)
This notion, eſpecially prevalent in the Diarbekir,
and the frontiers of Perſia, is a relic of the ancient
Irſtem of the good and evil principles, which varied
cording to the ſpirit of the Perſian, Jewiſh, Chril-

tian, and 3 doctrines, — pre.
vailed in theſe countries. Zoroaſter is generally con.
ſidered as its author; but, long before his time, Egypt
acknowledged Oraſinades and Ataminius, under the
names of Ofiris and Typhon. It is no lefs an error,
likewiſe, to ſuppoſe, that this dogma was not Propa-
gated prior to the reign of Darius Hyſtaſpes, fince
Zoroaſter, who taught it, flouriſhed in Media, and
was cotemporary with Soloman.
Language is the principal indication of the cotiſac.
guinity of nations. That of the Curds is divided
into three dialects. It has neither the aſpirations nor
the gutturals of the Arabic; and I am affured that
it does not reſemble the Ferſian; ſo that it muſt be
an original language. |
Now, if we conſider the eee of the adoph
who ſpeak it; and that we know they are related to
the Medes, Aſfyrians, Perſians, and even the Parthi.
ans, we may be allowed to conjecture, that a know.
ledge of this tongue might throw fome light on the
ancient hiſtory of theſe countries. There is no
known dictionary of it; but it would be no difficult
matter to form one. If the government of France
fhould think proper to offer encouragements to the
Progmen, or to the miſfionaries of Aleppo, the Diar.
bekir, or Bagdad, proper perſons NN loon be fou |
to © acc pin ſuch an wann *

* 0 N — * * 51 4 ac 4 . bo
— 7 2 4 A 1 * * 7 — ny *
— ” N . y 4 _— TH AIR ES = 1 5 l * =
——_— >>I — - . ” — — — RE o 1 Ir PAIRS +" 3 mts A 7 PI — TEN -
1 S —— — * - - < 8 —— OE OS . A 8 1
1 3 — 2 Inns — R er —— iy — a Y , n * 20 wn , re: pA Seb ry
** Sr A. ( ( / te © Og F Loy —— — mes: ra — 2 — ——— nets * n RD : A *
VE. = Cog rtonarg yon nnd . — 8 8 3 * > WM AA. 2 ABCS. >=. n 4 - © — "© 1227.5 2298 - - 8 LET — 2 = 2 bs
ding _ a «IT F — cr Arty os : 8 e 3 l "Sy - — rn 2a G - : - . mm . L
—— : : TIS. 2 5 * re” ; GETS 0 2 D > enmgy 3 on $9 3 Bl hes Ef N 2 ———x _—_— — ore - — 2 > rs OIL 32 aye tres, *
2 —— — EE. 3 * 5 - >. — 4 . 3 — 1 < =. uh — — * — — "4 n —_ W — A
22 *. - 5 u 2 "0 LY = =; 7 _ . — * oe} tr I — — * of — 7 * — _ — ba / (ay Bic
— 2 L — RES 1 P 3 , = <= 7 s < ——— — e 12 . XX RE; I'S.
_— x 2 - ; * = — 4 = x N 7 a 7 5 — — 2 5
w — — — — CD URS a . — — =: < 4 3 — 5 82 - = — —. — —
”— 7 2 SERINE ITY — — Row ol
, p n — = I —— = —
P _ — 2

7 on tr 2a a ne Free : | :
r RS . n N — — =_
> * . CR? ny $f” ERR o 5
1 9 * * * e A
2 72 . 2
* 2 3 — — . Lg”
— — CREE == IE

BL

l . ix On the Tigris“, fon Strabo, lib. 36, are -
i | cds: to the Parthians, whom the ancients called Carducli.
, I + The Empreſs of Ruſſia has lately given erders to Dottot
1 5 Pallss to make a collection of all the eee, ſpoken in the
17 Ruſſian empire; and theſe reſearches muſt extend even to the
1 Cuban and Georgia ; and, perhaps, to Curdeſtan. When thi
„ collection is compleated, it will be neceſſary to reduce all the

128 _ alphabets bf theſe languages to one; for this diverſity of Au.
bic, Armenian, Georgian, Iberian, ace Tartartan alphabets 152
reat obſtacle to the advancement of ſcience, This will, per
Favs appear impoſſible to many perſons ; but, from ſome exe
perimetits of the lome nature, Which I have wyſelf wade,

Lg
— 5 * —
— — n
— — —
* I, — r — Sr 2

Pn, +
— oY,

x 3 >>, re 4 *

* — 2 ISR Enos EEG AX
-— > : — 2 — 22
— —— N 3 ” 4 * 2

wer
„5
Fg
17%
il
if
3
+
3
"ty
4
1
70
nf
A»
171
a

— == = * .

EGYPT AND 6YEIA. 231

s E 0 7. | WW
07 the Brain Arabs.

oy third Fee people in Syria ere the | Bedouin

| Arabs, whom we have already found in Egypt. of
theſe l made but a flight mention in treating of that
province, becauſe, having only had a tranſient. view
of them, without knowing their language, their name
| fugo reſted but few ideas to my mind; but having been
better acquainted with them in Syria; having even
made a journey to one of their camps, near Gaza, and
lived ſeveral days among them, I am now able to treat
of them with more minutenefs and accuracy.
In general, when ſpeaking of the Arabs, we ſhould
diſtinguiſh whether they are cultivators, or paſtors;
for this difference in their mode of life occaſions ſo

great a one in their manners, and gentus, that they

become almoſt foreign nations, with reſpe& to each
In the former cafe, leading a ſedentary life,
attached to the ſame ſoil, and ſubje& to regular gov-
ernments, the ſocial ſtate in which they hve, very
Such are the inhabitants
of the Yemen; and ſuch, alſo, are the deſcendants
of thoſe ancient conquerors, who have either entirely,
or in part, given inhabitants to Syria, Egypt, and the
In the ſecond inſtance, having only a

other.

nearly reſembles our own.

Barbary ſtares.
tranſient intereſt in the ſoil, perpetually removing their

tents from one place to another, and under ſubjection

to no laws, their mode of exiſtence is neither that of

poliſhed nations, nor of ſavages; and, therefore, more
Such are the Be-

n merits our attention.

think 1 may venture to pronounce it not only erefticabley but |

eꝛſy. It is ſufficient to be well acquarnted with the elements of
eee to be able to claſs the vowels and conſonants of all the
alphabets.

of every nation ist the dictionary of its —

It is proper al ſo to oblerve here, that the fir ſt book

Z * 3 * £ e r r 2 eee eee
— * x \ wie. © Th f = TS * : : * N I 0 / /
rr yd e RES
121 LY 8 Y A n 2 5 * D AF = IR N 5 * «

A TRAVELS IN

douins, or inhabitants of the vaſt deſerts which ex. |
tend from the confines of Perſia, to Morocco. I hough
divided into independent communities, or tribes, not
unfrequently hoſtile to each other, they may ſtill be
conſidered as forming one nation. The reſemblance
of their language is a manifeſt token of this relation-
ſhip. The only difference that exiſts between them is,
that the African tribes are of a leſs ancient origin,
being poſterior to the conqueſt of theſe countries by
the Califs, or ſucceſſors of Mahomet ; while the tribes
of the deſert of Arabia, properly fo, called, have de-
ſeended by an uninterrupted ſucceſſion from the re-
moteſt ages; and it is of theſe I mean more eſpecially
to treat, as being more immediately connected with
my ſubject. To theſe the orientals are accuſtomed to
appropriate the name of Arabs, as being the moſt
ancient, and the pureſt race. The term Bedaoui is
added as a ſynonimous expreſſion, ſignifying, as.1
| have. obſerved, inhabitant, of the Deſert; aud this
term has the greater property, as the word; Arab, in
the ancient language of theſe ntries, 2 Bniſten a
wg ſolitude or delert. : |
Fl it is not without reaſon that the abi 5
7 the deſert boaſt of being the. pureſt and the beſt
þ preſerved. race of all the Arab tribes : for never

$a have they been conquered, nor have they mixed
1 with any other people, by making conqueſts; for t
= thoſe by which the general name of Arabs has been c
Wu rendered famous, really belong only. to the tribes i
14 of the Hedjaz, and the Vemen; 3 thoſe who dwelt t

in the interior of the country, never emigrated at
the time of the revolution effected by Mahomet;
or if they did take any part in it, it was confined to
a few individuals, detached by motives of ambi—
tion. Thus we find the prophet, in his Koran, con-
tinually ſtiling the Arabs of the deſert rebels, and
infidels; nor has ſo great a length of time produced
any very conſiderable chance. We may aſſert 1553

7

Nt ——— x
veg. .

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 233

have, in every reſpe&, retained their primitive in-
dependence and fimplicity. Every thing that anci-

ent hiſtory has related of their cuſtoms, manners,
language, and even their prejudices, is almoſt mi-

nutely true of them to this day; and if we conſider,

beſides, © that this unity of character, preſerved
through ſuch a number of ages, {till ſubfiſts, even

in the molt diſtant ſituations, that is, that the tribes

mot remote from each other preſer ve an exact re-
ſemblance, it mult be allowed, that the circumſtances
which accompany ſo peculiar a moral ſtate, are a

lubject of molt curious enquiry.

In Europe, and eſpecially in its more civilized”
and improved countries, where we have no examples

of wandering people, we can ſcarcely conceive what

can induce men to adopt a mode of lite fo repugnant
to our ideas. We even conceive with difficulty what
a deſert is, or how it is poflible for a country to have

inhabitants, if it be barren ; or why ir is not better
peopled, if it be ſuſceptible of cultivation. T have

been perplexed, myſelf, with theſe difficulties, as

well as others ; for which reaſon, I ſhall dwell more
circumſtantially on the facts which will furniſh us
with their explanation.
The wandering and paſtoral life led by ſeveral
Aſiatic nations, ariſes from two cauſes. The firſt is,
the nature of the foil, which, being improper for

cultivation, compels men to have recourſe to animals,
which content themſelves with the wild herbage of

the earth. Where this herbage is but thin, a fingle
animal will ſoon conſume the produce of a great

ertent of ground, and it will be neceſſary to run over

large tracts of land. Such is the cauſe of the Arabs

in the deſert of Arabia, N fo called, and in
that of Africa.

The ſecond cauſe muſt be attributed to hair,
ince the ſoil is cultivable, and even fertile, in man

| Rey ; ſuch as the frontiers of Syria, the Diarbekir,

1
I:
K

Ri
VE
„

;
18
R 3

52 I

1
7

9
; ,
i.
*
64
4
LS
1.1
IH
{ «
Se!
1
1
EL -

1
ad

* — 2

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 241

nothing but the greateſt heat can preſerve its fluidity.
This, however, does not prevent them from being

' MW lctsbly healthy, in other reſpects, for maladies are

: es frequent among them than among the inhabitants

a of the cultivated country, I

y From theſe facts, we are by no means juſtified in

W concluding, that the frugality of the Arabs, is a vir-
„ue purely of choice, or even of climate. The
W extreme heat in which they live, unqueſtionably

WH iiilitates their abſtinence, by deſtroying that activity
Wl which cold gives to the ſtomach. Their being habitu-
d allo to fo ſparing a diet, by hindering the dila-

ation of the ſtomach, becomes doubtleſs a means of

ne their ſuppor ting ſuch abſtemiouſneſs ; but the chief
Is and primary motive of this habit, is with them,
Wi vi the reſt of mankind, the neceſſity of the

eircumſtances in which they are placed, whether
from the nature of the ſoil, as I have before explained,
or that ſtate of ſociety in which they hve, and which
| ſhall now proceed to examine. EL

is | have already faid, that the Bedouin Arabs are
2 divided into tribes, which conſtitute ſo many diſtindt
0 nations. Each of theſe trides appropriates to itſelf
« 1 We vat of land forming its domain; in this they do
7 not differ from cultivating nations, except that their
ted Neritory requires a greater extent, in order to furniſh
if | abſiſtence for their herds throughout the year. Each
5 Jof theſe tribes is collected in one or more camps,

which are diſperſed through the country, and
vbich make a ſucceſſive progreſs over the whole, in

Fu Moportion as it is exhauſted by the cattle; hence,
be i, that within a great extent a few ſpots only are
| inhabited, which vary from one day to another;
but as the entire ſpace is neceſſary for the annual
1 ſubſiſtence of the tribe, whoever encroaches on it
be e deemed a violator of property; this is with them

be law of nations. If, therefore, à tribe, or any
t its ſubjects, enter upon a foreign territory, they

revenge: if his enemy periſhes from any other cause

242 _- TRAVELS IN

are treated as enemies, and robbers, and a war breaks

out. Now, as all the tribes have affinities with each
other by alliances of blood, or conventions, levgues
are formed, which render thefe wars more or le

general. The manner of proceeding, on ſuch oc.

caſions, is very ſimple. ' The offence made knoyn,

they mount their horſes, and ſeek the enemy; when

they meet, they enter into a parley, and the matter

is frequently made up; if not, they attack either in
mall bodies, or man to man. They encounter each
other at full ſpeed, with fixed lances, which they
ſometimes dart, notwithſtanding their length, at the
flying enemy; the victory is rarely conteſted ; it is

decided by the firſt ſhock, and the vanquiſhed take
to flight full gallop. over the naked plain of the de-
fert. Night generally [favours their eſcape from the
conqueror. The tribe which has loſt the battle
ſtrikes its tents, removes to a diſtance, by. forced

marches, and ſeeks an afylum among its allies. The

enemy, fatisfied with their ſucceſs, drive their herds
farther on, and the fugitives ſoon after return to

their former ſituation. But the flaughter made in

theſe engagements frequently ſows the ſeeds c

hatreds which perpetuate theſe diſſenſions. The}
intereſt of the common ſafety has, for ages, eſtabliſ-

ed a law among them, which decrees that the blood
of every man who is ſlain muſt be avenged by that

of his murderer. This vengeanee is called Tar, ot

retaliation; and the right of exacting it devolves
on the neareſt of kin to the deceaſed. So nice are
the Arabs on this point of honour, that if any one
neglects to ſeek his retaliation, he is diſgraced for
ever. He, therefore, watches every opportunity of

Fill be is not ſatisfied, and his vengeance 18 directed
againſt the neareſt relation. Theſe animoſities att
tranſmitted, as an inheritance, from father to chil
dren, and never ceaſe but by the extinction of ol

of the families, unleſs they agree to ſacrifice the
criminal, or purchaſe the blood for a ſtated price,
in money or in flocks. Without this ſatisfaction,
there 18 neither peace, nor truce, nor alliances be-
tween them, nor fometimes even between whole
tribes: There is blood between us, ſay they, on every
occaſion; and this expreſhon is an inſurmountable
barrier. Such accidents being neceflarily numerous
in a long courſe of time, the greater part of the tribes
have ancient quarrels, and live in an habitual ſtate.

of war; which, added to their way of life, renders

the Bedouins a military people, though they have
made no great progreſs in war as an art. 8

Their camps are formed in à kind of irregular
circle, compoſed of a ſingle row of tents, with greater
or leſs intervals. Theſe tents made of goat or cam-
els hair, are black or brown, in which they differ
from thoſe of the Turkmen, which are white. They
are ſtretched on three or four pickets, only five or
x feet high, which gives them a very flat appearance;
at a diſtance, one of theſe camps ſeems only like
2 number of black ſpots; but the piercing eye of
the Bedouin is not to be deceived. Each tent, in-
habited by a family, is divided, by a curtain, into
two apartments, one of which is appropriated to
the women. The empty ſpace within the large circle
ſerves to fold their cattle every evening. They never
have any intreachments ; their only advanced guards
and paſtorals are dogs; their horſes remain ſaddled,
and ready to mount on the firſt alarm; but, as there
neither order nor regularity, theſe camps, always
ealy to ſurpriſe, afford no defence in caſe of an
attack: accidents, therefore very frequently happen,
and cattle 4re carried of every day, a ſpecies of
marauding war in which the Arabs are very experi-
„% 5

The tribes which live in the vicinity of the Turks,
re [tilt more accuſtomed to attacks and alarms 3

1166
180%
; tilk

$ un
F
.

"Ix

rs BESS A
39 55":

Yo 4. 2%

*
a}
5 43
. ö
+ BF z
& i . | :
14 a .
* *
355 ..
11
4
1 1
oh : Pal
* 13
10 I?!
. + þ 2
Fþ - 1 6.
1 7
* * IF
va * * I
1 ;
* 1 * $0 18
* 79 1
* > | "4 \ 20: a
"of þ? bj 14
Rb
S470 7
„ 11 9
i i
5. $ 3.50 4
Is. 1 175
r
1
: rel +;
| 3
ay Fl. 5; 17
WW . 1 4
5 9
1 3
* "BZ
1
re bt 1 \
3
41

to wage ſecret or open war againſt them. The Pa.

===

9828 — —— — — S —
SE” ear 8
— ES - 3
2 — =

let them, and at others demand a tribute which

deſtruction of both. Frequently too they poiſon or

The peaſant calls them thieves, and with reaſon;
but the Bedouins claim the right of war, and per.
haps they alſo are not in the wrong. However this
may be, theſe depredations occadon a miſunder-
ſtanding e the Bedouins and the inhabitants

tual enemies.

ſubject to great viciſſitudes, according to the good ot

was powerful, tails into decay, or perhaps is entirely

244 TRAVEL IN

for theſe ſtrangers, arrogating to themſelves, i in tig he
of conqueſt, the property of the whole country, treat |
the Arabs as rebel vaſſals, or as turbulent and dan.
gerous enemies. On this principle, they never ceaſe |

chas tudy every occation to haraſs them. Sometimes
they conteſt with them a territory which they had

they never agreed to pay. Should a family of
Shaiks be divided by intereſt or ambition, they al.
ternately ſuccour each party, and conclude by the

— 88 _

aſſaſſinate thoſe chiefs whoſe courage or abilities
they dread, though they ſhould even be their allies.
The Arabs, on their fide, regarding the Turks as
uſurpers and treacherous Enemies, watch every op-
portunity to do them injury. Unfortunately, their
vengeance falls oftener on the innocent than the
quilty. The harmleſs peaſant generally ſuffers for
the offences of the ſoldier. On the lighteſt alarm,
their Arabs cut the harveſts, carry off their flocks,
and intercept their communication and commerce.

PS CIs +.

of the cultivated country, which renders them mu-
Such is the external ſituation of the Arabs. It is

bad conduct of their eh Sometimes a feeble tribe
raiſes and aggrandizes itſelf, whilſt another, which

annihilated ; not that all its members periſh, but the
incorporate theta with ſome other ; and this
the confequence of the internal conſtitution of tht
tribes. Each tribe 1 18 compoſed of 0 one or more prin

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 245
ht

t cipal families, the members of which bear the title of
eat Shaiks, i. e. chiefs or lords. Theſe families have a
5 great reſemblance to the Patricians of Rome, and the
aſe |

nobles of modern Europe. One of the Shaiks has

kr de ſupreme command over the others. He is the

. general of their little army, and ſometimes aſſumes
ry the title of Emir, which fignifies Commander and
7 prince. The more relations, children, and allies he

bas, the greater is his ſtrength and power. To theſe
he adds particular adherents, whom he ſtudiouſly
attaches to him, by ſupplying all their wants. But
beſides this, a number of ſmall families, who, not
being ſtrong enough to live independent, ſtand in

ö al.
the |
| Or
ities
lies.
85
op-
heit
the
for
rm,
CKS,
ICE,
on;
per.
this
ider.
tant

under the banners of this chief. Such an union is
called kabila, or tribe. Theſe tribes are diſtinguiſned
from each other by the name of their reſpective chiefs,
or by that of the ruling family; and when they ſpeak
of any of the individuals who compole them, they
call them the children of ſuch a chief, though they
may not be all really of his blood, and he himſelf
may have been long ſince dead. Thus they ſay, Beni
Temin, Oulad Tai, the children of Temin and of Tai.
this mode of expreſſion is even applied, by metaphor,
o the names of countries: the uſual phraſe for de-
toting its inhabitants, being to call them he children
if ſuch a place. Thus the Arabs ſay, Oulad Maſr,
be Egyptians ; Oulad Sham, the Syrians : they would
ao ſay, Oulad Franſa, the French; Oulad Moaſtou,
ne Ruſſians, a remark which is not unimportant to

It 1

| of . .

ae acient hiſtory. „ |

rhich The government of this ſociety is at once republi-
15 an, ariſtocratical, and even deſpotic, without exactly

wrreſponding with any of theſe forms. It is repub-
can, inaſmuch as the people have a great influence
In all affairs, and as nothing can be tranſacted with-
put the conſent of a majority. It is ariſtocratical,
cauſe the families of the Shaiks poſſeſs ſome of the

they
his b
F the
pri |

need of protection and alliances, range themſelves _

246 TRAVELS IN

prerogatives which every where accompany Power; |
and, laſtly, it is deſpotic, becauſe the principal Shaik |
has an indefinite and almoſt abſolute authority, which, |
when he happens to be a man of credit and influence |
he may even abuſe ; but the ſtate of theſe tribes con.
fines even this abuſe to very narrow limits; for, if a|
chief ſhould commit an act of injuſtice, if, for exam.
ple, he ſhould kill an Arab, it would be almoſt impoſ.
ſible for him to eſcape puniſhment ; che reſentment of
the offended party would pay no reſpect to his dig.
nity ; the law of retalialion would be put in force;
and, ſhould he not pay the blood, he would be infalli.
_ bly aſſaſſinated. which, from the ſimple and private
lite the Shaiks lead in their camps, would be no diff.
cult thing to effect. If he haraſſes his ſubjects by
ſeverity, they abandon him and go over to another
tribe. His own relations take advantage of his mil.
conduct to depoſe him, and advance themſelves to his]
ſtation. He can have no reſource in foreign troops;
His ſubjects communicate too eaſily with each other
to render it poſſible for him to divide their intereſts,
and form a faction in his favour. Beſides, how is he

FRY to pay them, ſince he receives no kind of taxes from
. the tribe; the wealth of the greater part of his ſubs
; „ jects being limited to abſolute neceſſaries, and his oui
10 confined to very moderate poſſeſſions, and thoſe too
if loaded with great expenſes ?
1 The principal Sbaik in every tribe, in fact, defraji
5 the charges of all who arrive at or leave the can
Fit lle receives the viſits of the allies, and of every per
bw ſon who has buſineſs with them. Adjoining to hi

f tent is a large pavillion for the reception of all {tral
gers and paſſengers. There are held frequent aſſem

117

It blies of the Shaiks and principal men, to determill
167 on encampments and removals, on peace and wal
10 on the differences with the Turkiſn governors 20
Wilt: the villages; and the litigations and quarrels 4

individuals. To this crowd, which enters ſucceſſnue

2
=

? 32%... —— — — a ra
. — = - Ae 2 8 re mag P — $41.40
wot ee , . e ß

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 247

ly, 1 muſt give coffee, bread baked on afhes, rice,
and ſometimes roaſted kid or camel; in a word, he
muſt keep open table; and it is the more important
o him to be generous, as this generoſity is cloſely
connected with matters of the greateſt conſequence.
On the exerciſe of this depend his credit and his
power. The famiſhed Arab ranks the liberality
which feeds him before every virtue, nor is this pre-
judice without foundation; for experience has pro-
ved that covetous chiefs never were men of enlarged
| | views: hence the proverb, as juſt as it is brief, 4
clofe fit, a narrow heart. To provide for theſe
expenſes, the Shaik has nothing but his herds, a few
ſpots of cultivated ground, the profits of his plun-
45. and the tribute he levies on the high roads,
the total of which is very inconſiderable. The Shaik,
with whom I reſided in the country of Gaza, about |
the end of 1784, paſſed for one of the molt powerful
of thoſe diſtricts ; yet it did not appear to me that
his expenditure was greater than that of an opulent
farmer. His perſonal effects, conſiſting in a few
peliſſes, carpets, arms, horſes, and camels, could not
be eſtimated at more than fifty thouſand livres (a
little above two thouſand pounds); and it muſt be
_ obſerved that in this calculation, four mares of the
breed of racers, are valued at fix thouſand livres (two
hundred and fifty pounds), and each camel at ten
pounds ſterling. We muſt not therefore, when we
ſpeak of the Bedouins, affix to the words Prince and
| Lord, the ideas they uſually convey; we ſhould come
nearer to the truth by comparing them to ſubſtantial
farmers, in mountainous countries, whoſe ſimplicity
they reſemble in their dreſs, as well as in their do-
meſtic life and manners. A Shaik, who has the
command of five hundred horſe, does not diſdain
to ſaddle and bridle his own, nor give him barley
and chopped ſtraw. In his tent, his wife makes the
coffee, kneads the dough, and ſuperintends the dreſ-

248 TRAVELS IN

ſing of the vieuals.” His daughters and kinſwomen

waſh the linen, and go with pitchers. on their head,

and veils over their taces, to draw water from the
fountain. Theſe manners agree preciſely with the

diſcriptions in Homer, and the hiſtory of Abraham,

in Geneſis. But it muſt be owned that it is diff.
cult to form a juſt idea of them without having

ourſelves been eye-witneſſes.

The ſimplicity, or, perhaps, more properly, the
poverty, of the lower claſs of the Bedouins, is pro-
portionate to that of their chiefs. All the wealth

of a family conſiſts of moveables, of which the follow.

ing is a pretty exact inventory. A few male and
female camels, ſome goats and poultry; a mare, and
her bridle and ſaddle; a tent, a lance ſixteen feet |

long, a crooked ſabre, a rufty alte with a flint,

or matchlock; a pipe, a portable mill, a pot for
cooking, a leathren bucket, a ſmall coffee roaſter,

a mat, ſome clothes, a minitle of black wool, a few

laſs or filver rings, which the women wear upon
their legs and arms. If none of theſe are wanting,
their furniture is complete. But what the poor man

ſtands moſt in need of, and what he takes moſt plea-

ſure in, is his mare; for this animal is his principal
ſupport. With his mare the Bedouin makes his ex-

curſions againſt hoſtile tribes, or ſeeks plunder in the
country, and on the high ways. The mare is pow

red to the horſe, becauſe ihe does not neigh,*
more docile, and yields milk, which on ooraions

ſatisfies the thirſt, and even the hunger of her maſter.

Thus confined to the moiſt abſolute neceſſities of
life, the Arabs have as little induſtry as their wants

are few; all their arts conſiſt i in weaving their elan

* This ſtrange aſſertion may be ſound in other authors. M.
Chenier, in his Recherches Hiſtoriques ſur les Maures, Vol. III.
page 139, affirms mares do not neigh. Mares in Europe, how-
ever, certainly neigh, as every body! Knows, or Way know, .

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 249

tents, and in making mats and butter. Their whole
commerce only extends to the exchanging camels,
kids, ſtallions, and milk; for arms, clothing, a lit-
tle rice or corn, and money, which they bury. They

are totally ignorant of all ſcience; and have not even
any idea of aſtronomy, geometry, or medicine. They _
have not a ſingle book; and nothing is ſo uncom-.

mon, among the Shaiks, as to know how to read.
All their literature conſiſts in reciting tales and hiſto-
ries, in the manner of the Arabian Nights Entertain-

ments. They have a peculiar paſſion for ſuch ſtories ;

and employ in them almoſt all their leiſure, of which
they have a great deal. In the evening, they ſeat
themſelves on the ground, at the threſhold- of their

tents, or under cover, if it be cold, and there, ranged
in a circle round a little fire of dung, their pipes in
meir mouths, and their legs croſſed, "they fit a while
in ſilent meditation, till, on a ſudden, one of them

breaks forth with, Once upon a time—and continues to
recite the adventures of ſome young Shaik, and fe-
male Bedouin : he relates in what manner the youth

firſt got a ſecret glimpſe of his miſtreſs; and how he

became deſperately enamoured of her; he minutely
deſcribes the lovely tair, boalts her black eyes, as
arge and ſoft as thoſe of the gazelle; her languid

and empaſſioned looks, her arched eye-brows, reſem-

ing two bows of ebony: her waiſt ſtreight, and

ſupple as a lance; he forgets not her ſteps, light as

tnole of the young filey, nor her eye-laſhes, blackened
with oh, nor her lips painted blue, nor her nails,
tinged with the golden coloured henna, nor her breaſts,

relembling two pomegranates, nor her words, ſweet

2s honey. He recounts the ſufferings of the young
lover, / waſted with defire and paſſion, that his body

10 longer yields any ſhadow. At length, after detail-

ing his various attempts to ſee his miſtreſs, the obſta-

cles of the parents, the invaſions of the enemy, the
captivity of the two lovers, &c. he terminates, to

|
|

250 | TRAVELS IN

the ſatisfaction of the audience, by roſtorkily them
united and happy, to the paternal tent, and by re. |
ceiving the tribute paid to his eloquence, in the Ma
cho all th he has merited.* The Bedouins have like.
wiſe their love ſongs, which have more ſentiment
and nature 1n them than thofe of the Turks, and
inhabitants of the towns; doubtleſs, becauſe the for-
mer, whoſe manners are chaſte, know what love is;
while the latter, abandoned to debauchery, are ac.
quainted only with enjoyment.
When we confider how much the condition of ih
Bedouins, eſpecially in the depths of the deſert, re-
ſembles, in many reſpects, that of the ſavages of
America, we ſhall be inclined to wonder why they
have not the fame ferocity; why, though they ſo
often experience the extremity of hunger, the prac- |
tice of devouring human fleth was never heard of
among them ; and why, in ſhort, their manners are
ſo much more ſociable and mild. The following
 Tealons appear to me the true ſolution of this cif:

48 culty.
bee. It ſeems, at firſt view, that America, being rich
* in paſturage, Jakes, and foreſts, is more adapted to
"#4 the paſtoral mode of life than to any other. But it
1 we obſerve, that theſe foreſts, by affording an ealy |

Tefuge to animals, protect them more ſurely from the
power of man, we may conclude, that the ſavage}
Has been ſduced to become a hunter, inſtead of 2
ſhepherd, by the nature of the country. In this ſtate,
all his habits have concurred to give him a ferocit)
of character. The great fatigues of the chace have
hardened his body; frequent and extreme hunger,
followed by a ſudden abundance of game, has Tet-
_ dered him voracious. The habit of ſhedding blood,
and tearing his prey, has familiarized him to the ſight
1 death and ſufferings. | Tormented by hunger, he

3

* 3 2 SOT YT 2 — Ir. r , 64
en ONES Rb VRP ITS I Toe ee Ie darn ES pete
— EE = CJ. 75 — - EPR. ES. Pn ns IIS r

he A exclamation of nit equivalent to admirably well“ |

EGYPT AND SYRIA. 25 I

has defirid. fleſh ; and finding it eaſy to obtain that
of his fellow creature, he could not long heſitate to
kill him to ſatisfy: the cravings of his appetite. The
firlt experiment made, this cruelty degenerates into
a habit; he becomes a cannibal, ſanguinary and
atrocious ; and his mind n all the inſenfibility
of his body.

The Geuation inf” the Arab! is very different, Amid
Na vaſt naked plains, without water, and without
foreſts, he has not been able, for want of game, or
fiſh, to become either a hunter or a fiſherman. The
camel has determined him to a paſtoral lite, the man-

ners of which have influenced his whole character.
Finding, at hand, a light, but conſtant and ſufficient

nouriſhment, he has acquired the habit of frugality.
Content with his milk and his dates, he has not de-
fired fleſf; he has ſhed no blood; his hands are not
accuſtomed to flaughter, nor his ears to the cries of
luffering creatures, ' he has preferved A humane and
ſenſible heart.

No ſooner did the b ſlepherd becditne ac-

quainted with the uſe of the horſe, than his manner
of life muſt conſiderably change. The facility of
paſſing rapidly over extenſive tracts of country, ren-
dered him a wanderer. He was greedy from want;
and became a robber from greedineſs; and ſuch is, in

fact, his preſent character. A plunderer rather than

2 warrior, the Arab poſſeſſes no ſanguinary courage;

be attacks only to deſpoil; and, if he meets with re-
ſiſtance, never thinks a ſmall booty is to be put in
competition with his life. To irritate him, you mult

ſhed his blood, in which cafe he is found to be as

obſtinate 1 in his pn: as he Was cautious in avoid.

ing danger. *

The Arabs have often been ll with this
ipirit of rapine; but, without wiſhing to defend it,
we may obſerve, that one circumſtance has not been
lufficiently attended to, which is, that it only takes

H h

—

|
1

D
4

1 - >”
>. . — —

. — jw os ron.

2 ; £20 2 * 3”

-—
*
=

2 3 3 * * 8 HL 4 8 =
K 2 - 7 , 2 g 2 +> 41 or r * — 2 98 > Oe Fo ha == i"

> p by; : . - 2 r ning ru 2 - £1 n SST wo 9 m ER *

2 - — — > « a — vos. 6 — — . — * 2 — — _ 2 n —— 7 — — 2 a — FX.
. ——————— r s . * 1 1 So . _ - n A +. 2 ASE — 5 "is ap a 8 — ada 24S 0 ˙—
e * wo 2 * S & 4 " P — — , 2 2 — with = o EE OS
22 - — _ ES OE —— . 3 r Peay: — — - — - — — — - ——
8 . . LM * 2 — — © —— be a
a * — — * - 0 — + * _
- 5 7 a SO fi a — 2 *

2 .
2 ITED . Tap” = *
— — — — —— r 12 * — —

I i > Banc
— ASL.
obo IL EM

—
— . ow

—

.
r
1
; + 9B

— - —— WCC, = ERR FF --——
D — - Wael — . Sos —— 8 — — — : S - > 2 —
EB - : EB — 2 A : - —— 2 —— Sz gon 4 =: 5
r — Cy ” it En”; LE Sy 83 2 — - = => — 3 > OS *
Ono AS EE ES 2 ec een” Dee, : c
r IE : a — —— en a :
. LES * 2 . ue Fo 6 5 ” ö
0

r
A ee Sas =>
4 —— — "wy — — &

> Pr — 5 <> bY
r

.. nt” Wc
S

en. GIS. IE
TX __ 7 82

1 WO * 8 - by
— ERS + bs + —— Ca.
— — 1 — x * 4 : * * - - — - - — — ” 2
4 ' | — * — —— -
- 8 ye * ———ä—ä— eve op x” — 4 ret ** rr ”; 2 * —— 1 — -
* * A by ” = * — 1 * — —
e — CD — TE IN Ine * po —— X he WT n — r . r * _ — 2
2 . D YE JR Wont or RC nar 8 = — — 2 — 2 © 2 — = X Tar Rs — * \
=: aſt. IE LEY Sr 2. r a? —— —— - - "he pa — + — 2 — — 7
. J CI PAYED 2 — 5 — cs : == ＋ ;
S nr ran I: 5 ; 2 "= - * 3 *
z * — * 1 i ” as ” _ — — y
* S 7 R _. . . ae TERS, .
8 3 2 - EDS FFC 8 r Ry ro TIES : » — D Nr er ®
— —— " 2 2 = 2 ; CO" q ' 6 8 —
E AAA TTT 9 — ———— : — —
** 2 6 20 7 — — — — 3 — —— enngid — Las . mrs f a -
a * — < wv — id of = payy = * * — *
* 4 * — 4 _—_ - *

— r 4 5
A
- £ 66 - - * * > * *
om - is P * * v
lots (rr e
— —

25/2 En TRAVELS IN

place tewards reputed enemies, and is s conſequently

founded on the acknowledged laws of almoſt all na.
tions. Among themſelves they are remarkable for a
good faith, a difintereſtedneſs, a generoſity which
Would do honour to the moſt civilized people. What
is there more noble than that right of aſylum ſo re.

ſpected among all the tribes? A ſtranger, nay, even

an enemy, touches the tent of-the Bedouin, and, from

that inſtant, bis perſon becomes inviolable. It would

be reckoned a diſgraceful meanneſs, an indelible ſhame,
to ſatisfy even a juſt vengeance at the expenſe of hoſ-
pitality. Has the Bedouin conſented to eat bread and
{alt with his gueſt, nothing in the world can induce
him to betray him. The power of the Sultan him-
{elf would not be able to force a refugee * from the
protection of a tribe, but by its total extermination.
'Uhe Bedouin, ſo rapacious without his camp, has no
ſooner ſet his foot within it, than he becomes liberal

and generous. What little he poſſeſſes he is ever

ready to divide. He has even the delicacy not to
wait till it is aſked: when he takes his repaſt, he

affects to ſeat himſelf at the door of his tent, in order

to invite the paſſengers ; his generoſity is ſo ſincere,
that he does not look upon it as a merit, but merely
as a duty: and he, therefore, readily takes the ſame
liberty with others. To obſerve the manner in which

the Arabs conduct themſelves towards each other,

one would imagine that they poſſeſſed all their goods

in common. Nevertheleſs, they are no ſtrangers to
property; but it has none of that ſelfiſhneſs which

the increaſe of the imaginary wants of luxury has
given it among poliſhed nations. It may be alledged,
that they owe this moderation to the impoſſibility of

| fon lo ing their en; but, if it de

The Aude diſcriminate al, ths "IP ack moftadiin, or
timploring protection and into gueſt matnoub, who ſets up luis tent
12 a lune 100 thears that is, Who becomes naturaligze |

EGYPT AND sYRIA.

acknowledged, that the virtues of the bulk of man-

kind are only to be aſcribed to the neceſſity of cir-
cumſtances, the Arabs, perhaps are not for this leſs

worthy our eſteem. They are fortunate, at _

that this neceſſity ſhould have eſtabliſhed among them
a ſtate of things, which has appeared to the wileſt

legiſlators as the perfection of human policy: I mean,
a kind of equality in the partition of property, and
the variety of conditions. Deprived of a multitude

of enjoyments, which nature has laviſhed upon other
countries, they are leſs expoſed to temptations which

might corrupt and debaſe them. Ir is more difficult

for their Shaiks to form a faction to enſlave and im-
poveriſn the body of the nation. Each individual,

capable of ſupplying all his wants, is better able to
preſerve his character and independence; and private
poverty becomes at once the foundation and bulwark
of public liberty... 55

This liberty extends even to matters of religion.

We obſerve a remarkable difference between the

Arabs of the towns and thoſe of the deſett; ſince,
while the former crouch under the double yoke of
political and religious deſpotiſm, the latter live in a
late of perfect freedom from both : it is true that
on the frontiers of the Turks, che Bedouins, from

policy, preſerve the appearance of Mahometaniſm; but

ſo relaxed is their obſervance of its ceremonies, and
0 little fervor has their deyotion, that they are ge-
nerally confidered as infidels, who have neither law nor
prophets. They even make no difficulty in ſaying
mat the religion of Mahomet was not made for them;

for,“ add they, how ſhall we make ablutions W

* have no water? How can we beſtow alms, who
are not rich? Why ſhould we faſt in the Rama-
* dan, ſince the whole year with us is one continual
"faſt? and what neceſlity is there for us to make
* the pilgrimage to Mecca, if God be preſent every
ere?” In ſhort, every man acts and thinks as he

253

„ TRAVERS IN.

pleaſes, and the moſt perfect toleration is eſlablicbech
among them. Nothing can better deſcribe, or be
a more ſatis factory proof of this than x dialogue which
one day paſſed between myſelf and one of their
Shaiks, named Ahmed, ſon of Bahir, chief of the
tribe of Wahidia. Leeres ”. ſaid this Shaik to me,
do you with to. return among the Franks? Since

6c you have no averſion to our manners; fince you
„ know how to uſe the lance, and manage a horſe
like a Bedouin, ſtay among us. We will give you
5 peliſſes, a tent, a virtuous and young Bedouin girl,
and a good blbod: mare. You fhall live in our
© houſe.” “ But do you not know,“ replied], |
that, n among the Franks, I havie been educa.
ted in their religion? In what light will the Arabs
view an infidel, or what will they think of an apol.
© tate?“ And do not you yourlelt perceive,”
Kid he, that the Arabs live without troubling them.

ſelves either about the Prophet, or the Bok (the
* Koran)? Every man with us follows the direction
of his conſcience. Mem. have a right to judge of
actions, but religion mult be left to God alone.”
— Another Shatk, converting with. me, one: day, ad-
dreſſed me, by mildake; in the cuſtomary formulary, |
< Liſten, and pray for the Prophet.“ Inſtead of the |
uſual anſwer I have prayed, I replied; with a, fmile, |
J liften. He recollected his error, and fmiled: in hs |
turn. A Turk of Jeruſalem, tie was preſent, took
the matter up more ſerioufy: O Shaik,“ ſaid he,
* how canſt thou addreſs. the words of the true a
< levers to an infidel?“ “„ The tongue is light,”
plied the Shaik, let but the heart be white Toure);
% but you, who know the cuſtoms of the Arabs, hos
can you offend a ſtranger with whom we have eat.
en bread and falt ?*—Then, turning to me, All
„ thoſe tribes of Frankeſtan, of whom you cold me
„ that they follow not the law of the Prophet, ate
they more numerous man the Muſſulmen; 8

sev AND II. 48

“ is s thought! ” anfwered I, « that they are ſive or fix
times more numerous, even meluding- the Arabs.”

God is juſt,” returned he, 6H e will weigh them

„ in his balance.“

it muſt be owned, that there are 95 bol, na-
tions whoſe. morality ! is, in general, ſo much to be

eſteemed as that of the Bedouin Arabs; and it 1s
worthy of remark that the fame virtues are equally to
be found in the Turkmen hordes, and the Curds.

ſt is ſingular alſo, that it ſhould be among theſe that

religion is the free & from exterior forms, inſomuch
that no man has ever ſeen, among the Bedouins,

the Turkmen or Curds, either prieſts, temples, or

TeguLar Woriiip. But it is time to continue the de-

= *

M. Nizbaks ls in his Defeription ae P Arabis tome II.
page 2 208, Paris edition, that, within the laſt thirty. years, a new

religion Has kprung up in the Najd, the principles of which are 5

analogous to the Giſpottion of mind 1 have been deicribing.

 Thele principles,” ſays that traveller, arethat God alone ſhould

be invoked and adored, as, the i of all things; that we
* ſhould make no mention of any prophet in praying, becauſe
that too nearly reſembles idolatry 3 that Moies, Jetus Chriſt,
Mahomet &c. were in truth great men, whole aCtions are
' edifying : but no book was ever inſpired by the angel Gabriel,

* or any other celeſtial ipirit, In ſhort, that vows made in the
time of imminent danger are neither meritorious nor obligatory,
do not well know, adds M. Niebuhr, * how far we may truft.
the veracity of the Bedouia who told me this, Perhaps it was

© his peculiar way of thinking ; for the Bedouins, though they

call themſelves Mahometans, in general, care very little about
either Mahomet or the Koran.“ |

The authors of this new {c& were two Arabs, wh having
travelled, in conſequence of lome commercial ain into Perſia |
2 Malabar, reaſoned on the diverſity of religions they had leen,

and thence deduce this general toleration, One of them, nam-

ec Abd-el-Waheb, in 1760, erected an independent ſtate in the

Najd ; the oiher, called; Mekrami, Shaik of Nadjeran, had adop:-

el the ſame opinions; and, by bis valour, raited himſelf to con-

ſiderable power in thoſe countries. Theſc two examples render

tl more probable a conjefture I have alteady mentioned, that

nothing 1s more ealy than 0 | effect 2 88 political and Jeb:-

bous re volution in Alia,

f
;
:
*
'
a
:
:
:
:
:
i
3

7 — "IS: _ : : ks. 2% y 2
<- apt — 2 34 — _— * is . — 7 I
> — — — — — ITY - — — . = — EN
— — R — — = s * _
„„ . 2 =
3 —-” - — * ”
> 8 . ;
2 » 1
2

"> BA 3
5 — en m UG ſg 1, 3

5 6

ria,
y dif.
ate of

habitants of 8

tion of the other tribes of the

2
©
wh

in

ct our attention to a ſocial ſtate, ver

ferent from that we are now quitting, to the ſt

and to dire
a cult

irating

and ſedentary people.

e fs = SID 2 ED
7 4 & ”

* o
=

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME,

- 5
5 <= > LY 8 8 4 2 - 5 - EG Is 5
eee eee I FLEE IEEE” 17 gh

cancers EN EE

— — — *. re

—— binds,

ER”

———— *
*

ropes 4

. - LEE, K

9 —

CONTENTS

br THE

FIRST VOLUME.

-n Spe pu popu · pups

city of Alexandria

CHAP. II. Of the Nile, and of the enlargament

l. Delta Es
Whether the Delta has gained upon the fea ja

much as M. Savary pretends ©
CHAP, III. Of the riſe of the Delta

CHAP. IV. Of the winds in Egypt and their

phenomena
Of the hot wht of the deſert
 MICHAP. V. Of the climate, and air of Egypt
HAP. VI. Of the various i: 1 bitants of Egypt;

the peaſant Arabs ; the Bedouin Arabs, or

ſhepherds ; the Copts, © urks and Mamlouks
ant VII. Summary of t' e hiſtory of the Mam-
vURs p

E —
HAP. I. 07 Ege in ; general and of the

7 |
17

26

«2:1;

| PAGE
CHAP. VIII. Summa: 'y of the hifery of Ali Bey 74
CHAP. IX. Summary of occurrences from the _

death of Ali Bey, to the year 1785 19

CHAP. X. Preſent /tate of LEeypt = 103

CHAP. XI. N C01 Yciruction of the Man-
louks 105
Of their dreſs _ A 107
Horſe accoutrements 109 i
Arms e ns 110
Education and exerciſes _ Es 111
Military frill _ 5
Diſcipline © WE 11;
Manners | 117

CHAP. XII. Government of the Mamlouks 118
Condition of the people in Egypt 1190
The miſery and famine of late i 121
State of the arts - 1294]

CHAP. XIII. State of Commerce 130 | |

CHAP. XIV. Of the iſtbmus of Suez, and the
function of the Red Sea with the Mediterra-
nean 1329
V. Of the Cuſtom-hau ifes and impoſts 139
/ the commerce of the Franks at Cairo 141 WW
CHAP, XVI. Of the cy of Cairo 8 145
Pipulation of Cairo and Feypt 145 iſ

. CHAP. XVII. Of zhe diſcaſes of Egypt | 5 "il

Of Blindneſs _ 150

Of the ſinall pox , | B
Of 1 eruptions 1355
Of the plague 157

CHAP. XVIII Deſcriptive Aetch of Eeype re-

ſumed © 161 |
Of the exaggerations 4 travellers 105

CHAT. XIX. Of the r 1, and the "or - 10

cu AP. II.

CHAP. III.
CHAP. IV. A the paſtoral, or ee

CONTENTS.

STATE or SYRIA.

nap. TL Geography and natural hiſtory of
Syria :
General appearance of the country
Of the mountains
Structure of the mountains
Volcanoes and FaTTOGUGRET. |
Locus
Rivers and lakes
Climate
Qualities of the air
Qualities of the waters
Of the winds _
rains, foes, and thunder

Of the inhabitants of Syria

tribes in Syria

Of the Turkmen

Of the Gust, -

_ Of the Bedouin Arabs

Obſervations on : the winds, clouds,

Pacr

177

178

*
185
2 16

188

190

192
198
199
200

202
218

226
226

228
231

_ of ba - 7 £
ns 7 *

Leg *
28 3 fe

b ea

8 8 = EY

-

ns RE

PE 3

3 2 *
*

—

——

ce I

. — 8 rt AS,

- 3
v «FT wa 2 *

my t 1 e es n

" — 3 — —
— — —_— Len —
. 8 2 7 *

3 5 ee I; — * .

32222

.

> ge IO . 7 —

—— 1 Me WY

FAG

Si — —

r

7

ws

— 1 5 * er a

