SOURCE: http://zadok.org/research/1927/nyt2.html



1927 Earthquake in Israel

New York Times

Wednesday, July 13, 1927 - page 1

1,000 DEAD IN QUAKE;

RUIN WIDESPREAD IN PALESTINE AREA

British Flier Saw Hills Crack Open and Buildings Topple in Transjordania

NABLUS HALF DESTROYED

300 Lives Lost at Maan, 80 at Ludd, 72 at Ramleh and 25 Around Jerusalem

AUTHORITIES CABLE FOR AID

In Response to Pleas, Cairo Sends Supplies by Planes -- Americans Will Repair University.

Copyright 1927 The New York Times Company

Special Cable to the New York Times.

CAIRO, July 12

Reports from Palestine indicate that 1,000 lives were lost in yesterday's earthquake, including 300 at Maan, eighty at Ludd, thirty-six at Amman, and seventy-two at Ramleh, while the town of Nablus was half destroyed and many were killed.

An officer of the British Royal Air Force, who had just arrived here by plane from Transjordania, says that the devastation is general and tells of seeing from the air the hills at Ramleh open out into fissures.

At Amman, he says, great damage was done. He saw the upper half of the minaret of the new mosque there crash down to the ground as if cut with a penknife. The new Royal Air Force magazine was razed. Many houses collapsed in various parts of the country, burying the occupants. He estimates the total death roll at about 1,000.

The hospitals are full and authorities have telegraphed to Cairo for medical supplies, which have been sent by airplanes, including a large quantity of chloride of lime, presumably for burying the dead.

The earthquake is said to be the severest experienced in Palestine in a hundred years.

Egypt Fears for Antiquities.

The earthquake produced considerable alarm in Egypt, but there was not much damage here and no loss of life. The antiquities authorities are becoming perturbed at the increasing frequency of earth tremors in this country in view of the instability of many monuments of antiquity which would be in danger from serious seismic disturbances.

Had yesterday's quake lasted a little longer there might have been irreparable damage to such monuments as Karnak Temple.

While the effects here were slight, the reports from Palestine, which was the centre of the earthquake, indicate grave consequences. Unlike previous earthquakes that hit that region the tremors occurred in an eastward direction from Transjordania, and not northwest. In Transjordania the loss of life and property was considerable.

Bedouins Terrified by Tremors.

Cairo, July 12 (AP)

An eye witness who arrived here today by airplane from Transjordania said that the movements of the earth in yesterday's earthquake lasted forty seconds and were quite visible in the surrounding lava beds, the effect being terrifying to the desert Bedouins.

Serious Damage in Jerusalem.

JERUSALEM, July 12 (Jewish Telegraphic Agency).

The Old City this morning had the appearance of having passed through a military siege as the result of yesterdays' earthquake.

The streets were filled with crowds of people hesitating to enter the houses in fear of a recurrence of the earthquake and possible collapse caused by a weakening of the foundations. As the hours passed, however, a calm atmosphere was returning to the "City of Peace."

A scientific record of the earthquake, made by seismographic apparatus in Tel Aviv, shows that the earthquake moved from north to south. A temporary survey made by Government officials has disclosed the approximate extent of the damage.

The Allenby Bridge was damaged at both ends. The Greek Catholic Church of the Holy Sepulchre has been declared unsafe because of the cracks in the walls. The roof of the chemical laboratory of the Hebrew University on the Mount of Olives collapsed.

The Government House, located on the Mount of Olives, was badly damaged. The private rooms of the High Commissioner, Lord Plumer, and Lady Plumer who are now on vacation in England, were wrecked. This building was also declared unsafe by the authorities.

One of the three Indian women who were killed in a hotel in Jericho has been identified as the wife of Sir Said Abdul Raouf. Her companion perished with her.

Semi-official figures made known this morning place the deaths in Jerusalem and vicinity at twenty-five. Reports received today from Tel Aviv, Haifa and Tiberias confirm the previous message that these cities were not affected by the shock.

In addition to the dead in the cities, there were a number of casualties in the villages. No definite information as to the number has been ascertained.

The Institute of Jewish Studies, established through the generosity of American Jews, and the Department of Chemistry, suffered most when the Hebrew University buildings on the Mount of Olives were shaken. The buildings of the two Institutes of the Hebrew University were badly cracked and experimental machinery in the Chemistry Department was destroyed. The damage in the Hebrew University was estimated at several thousand pounds.

Research work at the Hebrew University had to be discontinued due to the serious damage to the buildings and equipment. Dr. Judah L. Magnes, formerly of New York, who is Dean of the university, announced today that lectures would have to be continued until the end of the term in a hall in the city.

The Institute of Jewish Studies is conducted on the income of a $500,000 fund established by Felix M. Warburg and administered by the New York Community Trust. A fund of $250,000 was created by the late Sol Rosenbloom of Pittsburgh. Upon his death, Mrs. Rosenbloom donated the amount of $500,000 to erect a building to house the institute.

Casualties in Twenty Towns

JERUSALEM, July 12 (AP)

Eighty-five people were killed in yesterday's earthquake in Es-Salt, Palestine (a town with a population of about 12,000)

Four persons were killed at Hebron.

The towns of Gaza, Acre and Beersheba are intact, but Safad and Tiberias were slightly affected.

Casualties occurred in more than twenty towns and villages.

The Air Force was used extensively at Ramleh and Ludd and rendered splendid service, said the report.

ECONOMIC CRISIS PREDICTED

Earthquake Is Said to Aggravate Serious Palestine Situation.

Copyright 1927 by the New York Times Company.

Special Cable to the New York Times

LONDON, July 12

The disastrous earthquake which has occurred in Palestine, according to The Daily Express's special correspondent, will have a profound effect on the economic situation, already nearing a crisis.

The Zionist plans, he declares, are falling. Business enterprise is at a standstill, unemployment is widespread and, with the sole exception of the orange trade, all commerce is stagnating. Unemployment riots have occurred, he continues, and there is a move by the Zionist colonists toward returning to their original homes.

The correspondent asserts that all sorts of the Communist and Socialist schemes have been forced on the Zionist organization, draining the treasury of its funds and adding to the general distress.

Hadassah Has Situation "in Hand"

According to a cable received yesterday by the national headquarters of Hadassah, the Women's Zionist Organization in America at 114 Fifth Avenue, from Dr. E. M. Bluestone, director of the Hadassah Medical Organization in Palestine, the earthquake situation is "well in hand"

The Rothschild Hospital in Jerusalem, the cable states, suffered considerable damage and one nurse was injured. The hospital is one of four maintained by Hadassah, the others being in Jaffa, Tel Aviv and Safed. None of the others is reported damaged.

The Rothschild Hospital is located within two blocks of the office of the Palestine Zionist Executive, which was partly destroyed by the Earthquake. The Hadassah Medical Organization is the largest non-Government body maintaining medical and public health institutions in Palestine.

The damage done by the earthquake on Monday to the medical buildings of the Hebrew University at Jerusalem will be repaired by the American Jewish Physicians' Committee, it was announced last night by Dr. Nathan Ratnoff, Chairman at a dinner given at the Astor in honor of Dr. Emanuel Libman, who has just returned from a trip to the Holy Land.

Dr. Ratnoff said that a cable pledged a contribution sufficient to restore the various departments housed in the micro-biology building of the university would be sent today to the head of the institution.

Dr. Libman spent several months lecturing in Palestine on internal medicine. He reported that the hospital service in the Palestinian cities was good and that the X-ray department in Jerusalem was unsurpassed anywhere. "Malaria and typhus are slowly being eliminated," he said.

